2.) Suppose you are a fully rational individual living in a closed society like North Korea where all news is tightly monitored by the government. Explain in detail how you would go about forming rational beliefs under these conditions. What are the main conclusions you would draw?

As Wittman argues (pg. 1401), "biased sources of information need not lead to biases in belief." Individuals will discount information from sources that they know to be biased. This applies even in a totalitarian society. As Wittman puts it in a footnote, also on pg. 1401:

"Even when the ruling class has a virtual domestic monopoly on the instruments of information, as is the case in the Soviet Union, we observe people discounting the information contained in their papers and trusting foreign sources (e.g., when the Chernobyl nuclear accident occurred, citizens of the Soviet Union turned to foreign sources for their information)." 

In other words, to form rational beliefs in North Korea, I would heavily discount information and arguments presented in the media, doing very little to update my beliefs on the basis of the information North Korean media outlets produced. If possible and not too risky/personally costly, I would seek foreign sources of news. If not, I would take positions that I held on the basis of my expectation prior to seeing media accounts. Assuming I have rational expectations, my errors will be randomly distributed. State media, on the other hand, displays systematic bias, and therefore would tend to have its errors distributed in one direction. In a system with North Korean state media as my only information source, a rational individual would have low epistemic confidence in one's opinions and would expect to have high variance in one's opinion's distance from the truth. 

The main conclusions I would draw would be that: My mean opinion would still be correct, but my variance would be higher than that of an individual with access to reliable sources of information, and therefore any given opinion I hold would be more likely to be further from the truth. I would also conclude that I should not update my priors based on information I receive from the North Korean media, as updating based on that information would introduce systematic error. I would therefore retain the same opinions I started with, but would do so with low confidence. 


