An overview
This opening chapter sets out some basic concepts and philosophy for
the Test of the book. In particular, we address four questions: What are
the basic categories in microeconomic theory? What are the purposes of
microeconomic theory? How does ones purpose influence the levels of
scope, detail, and emphasis in one's model? How will the development
of the theory proceed in this book?
1.1. The basic categories: Actors, behaviot,
institutions, and equilibrium
| Microeconomic theory concerns the behavior of (individual economic
(actors and the(aggregation of their(actions in different institutional frame-
works. This one-sentence description introduces four categories: The in-
_, dividual(actor, traditionally either a consumer gp a firm; the(behavior of
_ the actor, traditionally (utility(maximization by consumers and (profit (max-
_, iimization by firms; an institutional framework, which describes what(options
the individual actors have and what(outcomes they(receive as a function
"of the actions of others, traditionally the (price (mechanism in an imper-
sonal marketplace; and the mode of f analysis for(modeling(how the various
- >| (actors (behaviors will (aggregate within a given framework, traditionally
(equilibrium analysis.
The actors
In the standard treatment of microeconomics, the two types of actors
are the individual consumer and the firm. We will follow the standard
approach by regarding the consumer as an actor. For the firm, we will
follow the standard approach for a while by treating the firm as an actor.
But firms can also be thought of as institutions within which the behavior
of various sorts of constituent consumers_(workers, managers, suppliers,
customers) are aggregated. From this alternative perspective, what a firm
does results from the varying desires and behavior of its constituent con-
sumers, the institutional framework the firm provides, and the equilibrium
4
&--
4 Chapter one: An overview
that is attained among the constituent consumers within that institutional
framework. Much recent work in microeconomics has been directed to-
wards treating the firm in this fashion, and we will take up this approach
in the final part of the book.
Behavior
In the standard approach, behavior always takes the form of con-
strained maximization. The actor chooses from some specified set of op-
- tions, selecting the option that(maximizes_ some(objective(function. In or-+
thodox theory, consumers have preferences that are represented by a utility
function, and they choose in a way that (maximizes their futility (subject to
a budget constraint. Firms, on the other hand, are modeled as maximizing
profits subject to the constraints imposed by their technological production
possibilities set. TT
These models of consumer and firm behavior typically strike people
as fairly obnoxious. We dont find consumers strolling down the aisles
of supermarkets consulting a utility function to maximize when making
their choices, nor do we typically think of business executives being guided
completely and solely (or even mainly) by the effect of their decisions on
business profits. Nonetheless, we will use the standard model of consumer
behavior throughout, and we will use the standard model of the firm for
most of the book. It behooves us, then, to say why we think such models
are useful. :
Three rationales are often given. First, our models dont presume that
consumers actively maximize some tangible utility function; the presump-
tion is that consumers act as if this is what they do. Hence an important
part of the theory of individual behavior concerns testable restrictions of
the'models we use: What behavior, if observed, would clearly falsify our
models? If the models are not falsified by our observations, then our mod-
els are good positive models perhaps not descriptive as to why things
happen, but good in describing what happens.
Unhappily, rather a lot of data has been collected, especially experi-
mentally, which falsifies the models we will employ. At this we fall back
to our second line of defense by saying that such violations may be minor
and not amount to much. That is, the standard models may be good ap-
proximations of individual behavior, and the conclusions of models built
from such approximations may thus be approximately valid. This requires
a leap of faith, but it is still a leap that has some intuitive appeal. In fact,
we can take this a step further: In many (but not all) of our models, the
behavior of the individual is unimportant; instead the aggregate behavior
of many individuals matters. If we believe that violations of our models
1.1. Actors, behavior, institutions, and equilibrium 5
tend to exhibit no particular biases and cancel out at the level of aggregate
behavior, then the models may work well. If all we care about are the im-
plications of our models for aggregate behavior, then we will be content
to look for testable implications (and falsifications) of our models at the
level of aggregate behavior.
The third line of defense is the most subtle. Even if we know that
there are systematic violations of our models by individuals, violations
that do not cancel out, we can still gain insight into questions of interest
by studying models where we assume away those violations. This line of
defense is delicate because it requires the theorist to have a deep under-
standing of which assumptions drive the conclusions that are generated
by the theory; we will return to this in the next two sections.
The institutional framework
The actions taken by any individual depend on the opportunities that
are presented to the individual. Those opportunities, in turn, often de-
pend upon the collective actions of others. And the consequences for an
individual of that individual's actions usually depend on what others have
chosen to do. The term institutional framework is used throughout to refer
to those parts of a model that describe (a) the general nature of options that
an individual has, and (b) the options available to and outcomes ensuing
for each individual, as a function of other individuals actions.
In the \raditional models of Microeconomics, (prices in an (impersonal
_ marketplace(constitute the institutional (framework; consumers can choose
any bundle they can afford, where what is affordable is determined by
prices. The market is impersonal in the sense that all consumers face the
same array of prices. And the precise choices available to one consumer
depend on the consumption choices of all consumers (and the production
choices of firms) through these prices. :
As we will discuss at length, the workings of the price mechanism
are quite fuzzy and ambiguous. Where do(prices come from? {How are
they(set, and (how do they (reflect the (actions of individual consumers?!
Note also the potential of(circularity in this; prices constrain the choices of
individual consumers, and those choices simultaneously determine prices.
tailed institutional frameworks that are more precise about the connec-
tion between the choices of some individuals and the options_available
to and outcomes resulting for other individuals. An example of a more
concrete mechanism, which in some sense leads to the establishment of a
price, is the institution of alsealed/bid (first(price(auction: Anyone who
wishes to may submit a bid for an object, with the high bidder winning the
6 Chapter one: An overview
object and. paying his or. her bid. A different institutional framework for
the same purpose is a 1 [progressive(oral(auction an auction where bids
are made openly, and each new bid must beat the previous high bid by
some minimal amount.
Predicting the outcome: Equilibrium analysis
Having modeled the behavior of individuals, the nature of the choices
they have, and the ways in which-their-actions affect each other, we are
left with the task of saying just what the product of these things will
be, that is, predicting what. actions will be selected and what results will
ensue. We will use various forms of equilibrium analysis to address this task.
Generally speaking, an equilibrium is situation in whicheach individual
agent is(doing as(well as it can for itself, given the (array of(actions taken
_ (by (others ang given the(institutional (framework that defines the options
of individuals and (inks their actions.
! Although it is not quite how we will conduct business, you might
~ think of this as a(feedback system; individuals make individual choices,
and the institutional framework aggregates those actions into an aggre-
gate outcome which then determines constraints that individuals face and
outcomes thy receive. If individuals take a trial shot at an action, after
the aggregation is accomplished and the feedback is fed back, they may
learn that their actions are incompatible or didnt have quite the conse-
quences they foresaw. This leads I individuals to change their individual
actions, which changes the feedback, and so on. An (equilibrium is ek 5 -
, | lection of (individual(choices whereby thelfeedback process wouldlea to |<
- + @(subsequent(change in(behavior.
You might suppose that instead of studying only the equilibria of
such a system, we will dive in and look at the dynamics of the feedback,
change in behavior, change in feedback, ..., cycle, that is, the disequilib-
rium dynamics for the institutions we pose. We will do something like this
in a few cases. But when we do, we will turn it into a study of equilib-
rium dynamics, where the institutional framework is expanded to include
the feedback loops that are entailed and where individuals behaviors are
dynamically in equilibrium each individual doing as well as possible
given the institutional framework and the dynamic behaviors of others.
Our use of equilibrium analysis raises the question: Why are equi-
libria germane? Put another way, why do we think that what happens
corresponds to an equilibrium? We make no such blanket assumption. As
we will make especially clear in chapter 12, we rely on intuition and
experience to say when this sort of analysis is germane, and while we
will sketch a variety of reasons that equilibria might be achieved and
ap mar
1.2. The purpose of microeconomic theory 7
equilibrium analysis might be relevant, we try never to presume in a par-
ticular application that this is so.
1.2. The purpose of microeconomic theory
Having set out the basic categories of microeconomic theory (at least
as practiced in this book), we come to the question: What do we intend
to get out of the theory? The simple answer is a better tinderstanding of
. _leconomig activity and (outcomes.
Why do we seek a better understanding? One reason that needs no
explanation is simple(itellectual(curiosity. But beyond that, a better un-
derstanding of economic activity can be useful in at least two ways. First,
. = a (participant in the(economic (system, (better (understanding can(lead)|
> |to(better (outcomes for oneself. That is why budding business executives
(are told to) study microeconomics; a better understanding of the ways
in which markets work will allow them to make markets work better for
themselves. And second, part of the study of microeconomics concerns
[thecffcency ese specificinefficiencies(in various(institutional frameworks|
\with a {view (towards(policy: One tries to see whether a particular insti-|
raion can, (by {inkering by(drastic change, be made to(yleld afsocially:
_ |lbetter(outcome; the vague presumption is that changes that improve the
{social weal might be made via social and political processes. In this book,
we will touch on the efficiency of various institutions, although this will
be relatively deemphasized.
What constitutes better understanding? Put differently, how does one
know when one has learned something from an exercise in microeconomic
theory? The standard acid test is that the theory should be (a) testable and
(b) tested empirically, either in the real world op in the lab.! But many of
the models and theories given in this book have not been subjected to a
rigorous empirical test, and some of them may never be. Je, L manta?
models untested rigorously may still lead to better understanding, through
a process that combines casual empiricism and(intuition.
By casual empiricism joined with intuition I mean that the reader
should look at any given model or idea and ask: Based (on (personal(ex-|
.. |perience and-fntuition about how things are, (does(this (make(sense? Does!
it help put into perspective things that have been observed? Does it help
, { organize(thoughts(about a number of (facts? When and if so, the exercise
of theory construction has been useful.
! Gee chapters 3, 6, and 15 if the concept of a laboratory test of an economic theory is new
to you.
~
8 Chapter one: An overview
Imagine that you are trying to explain a particular phenomenon with
one of two competing theories. Neither fits the data perfectly, but the first
does a somewhat better job according to standard statistical measures. At
the same time, the first theory is built on some hypotheses about behavior
by individuals that are entirely ad hoc, whereas the second is based on a
model of behavior that appeals to your intuition about how people act in
this sort of situation. I assert that trying to decide which model does a bet-
ter job of explaining is not simply a matter of looking at which fits better
statistically. The second model should gain credence because of its greater
face validity, which brings to bear, in an informal sense, other data.?
Needless to say, ones intuition is a personal thing. Judging models on
the basis of their level of intuitive credibility is a risky business. One can
be misled by models, especially when one is the creator of the model, and
one is more prone to be misled the more complex the model is. Empirical
verification should be more than an ideal to which one pays lip service;
one should try honestly to construct (and even test) testable models. But
lintuition (honestly (applied is aioY worthless and should not be completely
abandoned. Moreover, exercises can be performed to see what drives the
conclusions of a model; (examine (how fobust the(results are to(changes in
specification"and precise assumptions. :
There is something of a market test here: ones ability to convince
others of ones personal intuitive insights arising from specific models.
Microeconomic theorists have a tendency to overresearch fashionable
topics; insofar as they can be convinced by something because it is fash-
ionable and not because it rings true, they are less than ideal for this mar-
ket test. But less theoretically and more empirically inclined colleagues
(and, sometimes even better, practitioners) are typically good and scepti-
cal judges of the value of a particular model. Attempts to convince them,
while sometimes frustrating, are usually helpful both to understand and
improve upon a model.
The usefulness of falsified models
To push this even further, I would argue that sometimes a model
whose predictions are clearly falsified is still useful. This can happen in at
least three ways. First, insofar as one understands how the assumptions
led to the falsified conclusions, one understands which assumptions don't
2 Readers who know about Bayesian inference should think of this as a case in which the
likelihood of the first model is greater, but the second has higher prior probability. Which
has a greater posterior probability is then unclear and depends on the relative strengths of
the priors and likelihoods.
1,
1.2. The purpose of microeconomic theory 9
lead to the truth. Knowing what doesn't work is often a good place to
begin to figure out what does.
Second, theory building is a cumulative process. Under the presump-
tion that most economic contexts share some fundamental characteristics,
there is value in having models that conform to generally accepted prin-
ciples that have served well in other contexts. Compared with a model
that is radically different from standard models, a model that conforms to
standard assumptions and principles will be better understood, both by
the theory creator and by the audience. Moreover, unification of theory is
valuable for its own sake to gain a better understanding of the shared char-
acteristics. Of course, not all contexts are the same, and sometimes what
economists think of as generally acceptable and universally applicable
principles are pushed too far. Economists are well-known among social
scientists as imperialists in the sense that economists attempt to reduce
everything to economic notions and paradigms. But a real case still can
be made for tradition and conservatism in the development of economic
(and other) theory.
Granting this, when looking at'an economic phenomenon that is poor-
ly understood, economic theorists will attempt to build models that fit into
the general rules of the discipline. Such attempts are rarely successful on
the first trial. But insofar as first trials do lead to second and third trials,
each of which gets one closer, the first trial is of value, and learning about
anothers first trial may help you construct the second and third.?
Economists tell a parable about theory and theorists that relates to this.
An economic theorist lost his wallet in a field by a road and proceeded to
search futilely for the wallet in the road under the illumination of a street
light on the grounds that that is where the light is. So, the folktale goes,
it is with using theoretically correct but otherwise inappropriate theory.
But an amendment to this tale is suggested by Jos Scheinkman: Without
defending the actions of this particular theorist, perhaps one could try to
construct a string of lights that begins in the road and that will eventually
reach the field, on the grounds that the road is where electricity presently
is found.
Third, and perhaps most subtly, models that fail to predict because
they lack certain realistic features can still help clarify the analyst's think-
ing about the features they do encompass, as long as the analyst is able to
combine intuitively and informally what has been omitted from the model
3 That said, I cannot help but note that the journals contain many more papers that begin
This paper takes a first step in... than papers that take second or third steps. Not every
attempt at widening the scope of economic theory is successfull
10 Chapter one: An overview
with what has been learned from it. Of course, everything else held equal,
it is better to have a model that captures formally more of the salient
aspects of the situation than to have one that omits important features. But
all else is rarely equal, and one shouldnt preclude building intuition with
models that make somewhat falsified assumptions or give somewhat fal-
sified conclusions, as long as one can understand and integrate informally
what is missing formally.
1.3. Scope, detail, emphasis, and complexity
This leads to a third point about the theories and models that will
be encountered in this book: their levels of scope, detail, emphasis, and
complexity.
On scope, chapter 8 presents an excellent illustration. Chapter 8 con-
cerns the theory of perfect competition. It begms with the analysis of a
market for a single good the theory of perfect competition that will be
familiar to you from intermediate microeconomics. You may recall from
intermediate micro that the industry supply curve is the horizontal sum
of the individual supply curves of firms, and the supply curves of firms
are their marginal cost curves. (If you dont recall this or never heard of
it before, just read on for the flow of what Im about to-say.) This would
lead to inaccurate predictions 6f, say, how price will move with shifts in
demand, if one factor of production of the good in question comes froma -
market that itself has an upward sloping supply curve. To illustrate this,
we move in chapter 8 from the traditional model of a single market to con-
sideration of two linked markets, both of which are perfectly competitive.
But why stop with two markets? Why not consider all markets together?
At the end of chapter 8, under the assumption that all markets are per-
fectly competitive, we will see what can be said about such a (so-called)
general equilibrium.
So what is the appropriate scope for a given model? There is a natural
inclination to say that larger scope is better. But there are drawbacks to
larger scope. The larger the scope, the more intractable the model, and the
harder it is to draw out sharp and/or intuitively comprehensible results.
One might feel relatively comfortable making strong assumptions in a
model with a narrow scope about how the outside affects what is inside
the model, assumptions that are (or seem) likely to be true and hence
good modeling assumptions but that cannot easily be deduced generally
in a model with an expanded scope.
For level of detail, consider how one should treat the family unit in
a model of consumer demand. The standard model of consumer demand
1.3. Scope, detail, emphasis, and contplexity i
envisions a single individual who maximizes his or her utility subject to
a budget constraint. Almost anyone who has lived in a family will recog-
nize that family expenditure decisions are a bit more involved than this.
Individual members of the family, presumably, have their own tastes. But
they recognize a strong interdependence in their personal consumption
decisions. (Family members may like, or dislike, taking their vacations
in the same location, for example.) And they often pool resources, so
that their individual budget constraints get mixed together. Should we
treat the family unit as a single consumer or attempt to build a more de-
tailed model about interactions among family members? The answer will
depend on what phenomena we are trying to explain. In most models,
families are treated coarsely, as consuming units, each family conform-
ing to the standard model of the consumer. But for models of the labor
supply decisions of families, for example, the detailed modeling of fam-
ily interaction is sometimes crucial to what is being explained and so is
included within the formal model. In general, one pays a cost in tractabil-
ity and comprehension for increased detail. But in some contexts, greater
detail is essential to get at the point in question.
Emphasis is meant to connote something like scope and like detail
that isnt quite either. When looking at a particular phenomenon, the
analyst may wish to emphasize certain aspects. To do this, the model
may become unbalanced heavy on one aspect of detail, or wide in one
aspect of scope, but simple and narrow in all others. Especially when
building a model to develop intuition concerning one facet of a larger
problem, and where one will rely on less formal methods to integrate in
other facets, models that (over)emphasize the facet of immediate interest
are warranted.
This discussion is meant to alert the reader to a crucial aspect of mi-
croeconomic models and a crucial skill for microeconomists;_Building a_
model is a matter of selecting the appropriate scope, level of detail, and
matters to emphasize. There is no set formula to do this, because the ap-
propriate levels of each depend on what the model seeks to accomplish.
When proving the efficiency of the market system (see chapters 6 and
8), a wide scope is appropriate because overall efficiency is an economy-
wide phenomenon. To demonstrate the possibility of a particular form of
inefficiency in a particular form of market, narrower scope and greater
emphasis on a few crucial details are called for. In this book you will see
a wide variety of models that vary in their levels of scope, detail, and
emphasis, and it is hoped that you will both get a taste for the variety
of types of models that are used by microeconomic theorists and get a
sense of the strengths and weaknesses of those types.
12 Chapter one: An overview
Let me add two further considerations, using the general notion of
the level of complexity of ones models. Complexity combines scope and
detail, but has other aspects as well, such as the level of mathematics re-
quired. Insofar as the model is meant to generate insights and to build
intuition, too great a level of complexity in any form is usually bad. In-
sights and intuition are built from understanding - recognizing {in the
model) which assumptions are crucial and what leads to what. The more
complex a model is, the harder it is to achieve that sort of understanding.
At the same time, simple models too often lead to flawed insights, because
the conclusions depend too heavily on the simple setting that is assumed.
Lessons that seem obvious from models of single markets in isolation are
too easily overturned when one examines the interaction between markets.
Balancing these considerations is not easy.
By the same token, building models to explain ones own insights to
others requires a balance between complexity and simplicity. Recall that
the proposed market test was whether you could convince an economist
or practitioner who is perhaps not up-to-date with the latest fashion in
economic theory but who instead has a well-developed intuitive under-
standing of how things are. Very complex models that require either a lot
of knowldge about the latest techniques or incredible patience to work
through mathematical detail will not pass this test. But, at the same time,
a lot of the more complex techniques in microeconomic theory are there to
check the consistency of models; however appealing the conclusions are, a
model that is predicated on assumptions that are logically inconsistent or
inconsistent with most standard theory is unsatisfactory. The best theories
and models are those that pass (possibly complex) tests of consistency or
validity and, at the same time, provide insights that are clear and intuitive
and dont depend on some mathematical sleight-of-hand. Not all the the-
ories and models that are presented here will pass this dual test. All will
pass the consistency test (I hope), so you can anticipate that those that fail
will fail on grounds of being too complex to be intuitive.* And those that
do fail on grounds of complexity are, by virtue of that failure, somewhat
of second (or lower) quality.
1.4. A prcis of the plot
This book may be thought of as a collection of somewhat intercon-
nected models that are interesting in their own right. But, at the same
* Put an X in the margin by this sentence. When we get to analysis of the centipede game
in chapter 14, I will remind you that I gave fair warning.
v
1.4. A prcis of the plot 13
time, the book has been written to convey the strengths and weaknesses
of the tools that microeconomic theory has at its disposal. You should have
little problem seeing the individual pieces from the table of contents, but
it may be helpful to discuss the more global development that I intend.
First, insofar as one can split the subject of microeconomic theory
into (1) actors and their behavior and (2) institutions and equilibrium,
this is a book that stresses institutions and equilibrium. I dont mean to
disparage the theories of individual behavior that are a cornerstone of
microeconomic theory. I've even written a different book on one aspect of
that subject. But I believe that detailed study of this topic can wait until
one studies institutions and equilibrium, and the latter subject is of greater
immediate interest and appeal. Still, it is necessary to understand the
basics of the standard models of consumer (and firm) behavior before you
can understand. models of equilibrium, and part I and chapter 7 in part II
provide the necessary background. Some readers of this book will have
already taken a course that stressed the standard theories of the consumer
and the firm. Such readers will probably find a light skim of chapters 2
and 7 adequate, but chapters 3, 4, and 5 present important background for
the rest of the book that is treated here in greater depth than is typical in
the traditional first course in microeconomics.
Part II takes up the (classic mechanism (by which(individuals diverse' +
> desires are meant to belbrought(into{equilibrium: the(price mechanism. We -~ -
progress from situations of(perfect(competition in which, except for am-,
biguity about how prices are set, the price mechanism works both clealy
!and well, /(toimonopoly and(oligopoly, where it is less(clear that prices alone -
-, are doing the(equilibrating. By the time we reach the end of oligopoly, we -
see rather(large( holes in our understanding of how prices work, and we
tentatively attribute those holes to a lack of specification of what precisely
is the price mechanism.
In part IIT we look at techniques that are meant to help us fill in those
. holes, techniques from(noncooperative/game theory. Game theoretic anal-
yses have been extremely fashionable in microeconomic theory since the
mid-1970s because such analyses are quite precise concerning(institutional |
framework and because they help us see how institutions matter. Indeed,
we will see cases in which, according to the theory, the institutional frame-
work seems to matter too much. But we develop at the same time {two
i@iot (determinative tmany (equilibria are (possible, and (which(equilib- -<
i | Gortacemm in such analyses. One, in many important cases, the theory Sl
 riumgif(any arises (depends onfconjectures that are not provided for by the
theory. Two, insofar as institutions matter, one has tofwondexwhere exist- |<
', ing(institutions(come from. Game theoretic analyses take the institutions :
14 - Chapter one: An overview
as exogenously given. Until we understand where institutions come from
and how they evolve, an important part of the puzzle is left unsolved.
Part IV exhibits some of the most important achievements of micro-
economic theory in the 1970s and 1980s, developments in the so-called
 {economics of (information. You are meant to come away from part IV im-
pressed by the insights that can be gleaned by the close analysis of mar-
ket institutions, both with and without the techniques of noncooperative
game theory. To be sure, the problems with our techniques that are dis-
cussed throughout part III are not resolved here, and many important
questions are left unanswered. But insofar as microeconomic theory has
part 1
an area of progress.
In part V we take up the theory of the firm. In standard microeco-
nomic theory firms are actors very much like consumers. We will criticize I ndividual and
this classical view and consider instead a view of the(firm as. something | + : [ h :
 lin the(category of a(market an institution within which(diverse/ ting SOCid C oice
|
made progress on substantial questions over the past twenty years, this is
|
t
| of consumers of various sorts are(equilibrated. We are able to shed some
light on what role firms and other nonmarket institutions play, but we will
see that matters crucially important to this subject do not seem amenable
to study with the tools at our disposal. In a sense we will come back full
circle to individual behavior. The argument will be that we cannot do an
adequate job studying firms and other institutions, and especially the ori-
gins and evolution of these institutions, unless and until we reformulate,
and refine the models we have of individual behavior.
All this is, presumably, a bit hard to fathom without a lot of fleshing
out. But that's the point of the next eight hundred-odd pages.
chapter two
The theory of consumer
choice and demand
Prologue to part I
The central figure in microeconomic theory is the'consumer, and the first
step is almost always to provide a model of the consumers behavior. This
model may be substantially implied (see the discussion in 8.1 on demand
curves), but it is there at some level. We usually think of the consumer as
an entity who chooses from some given set of feasible options, and so our
first order of business, which takes up most of part I, is to provide models
of consumer choice.
You will recall from intermediate micro (and even most principles
courses) the representation of consumer choice, given in figure 2.1. We
imagine a consumer who consumes two goods, say wine, denominated in
numbers of bottles, and beer, denominated in numbers of cans. Imagine
that this consumer has $1,000 to spend, the price of beer is $1 per can, and
the price of wine is $10 per bottle. Then our consumer can purchase any
combination of beer and wine in the shaded area in figure 2.1.
The consumer has preferences over combinations of beer and wine
represented by indifference curves; these are the curves in figure 2.1. All
+
Bottle of
wine The budget set
/ x Direction of
< increasing
preference
100 p>
~~ Indifference
<" curves
1000 Cans of beer
Figure 2.1. The usual picture for consumer demand.
18 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
points along a given curve are bundles of beer and wine that the consumer
rates as being equally good (so she is indifferent among them), and the
consumer'prefers to be further out, in the direction of the heavy arrow.
Hence this consumer selects the point marked 2, the point on the highest
indifference curve that still is affordable given prices and the consumers
level of income:
~~ With this picture, you and your teacher probably went on to consider
how the consumer reacts as his level of income changes, the price of wine
decreases, an excise tax is imposed on one good or the other, and so on.
This picture encapsulates a simple model of consumer choice, viz., the
consumer chooses from the feasible set some point that is on the highest
available indifference curve. In this chapter, we explore the foundations
for this picture (and more complex generalizations of it) by considering
choice and preference in the abstract and we consider the fundamental
application of this theory in microeconomics/ Marshallian demand; In chap-
ter 3, we consider choice where the objects from which choice is made
have uncertain prizes. In chapter 4, we look at how to model choices that
are made through time instead of all at once.
In most situations, when there is more than one consumer the choices
the various Consumers wish to make are somewhat in conflict. The rest
of the book (chapter 7 excepted) concerns the resolution of such conflicts.
We will, by and large, imagine that the conflicts are resolved by particular
institutional arrangements (such as the price mechanism); we will go on to
model specific institutions and study how the conflicts are resolved. But
to close part I, we will look briefly at the problem of social choice in the
abstract, studying principles that might be used to characterize particular
resolutions and even to dictate a specific resolution.
To begin then, keep figure 2.1 firmly in mind as we ask, Where do
these indifference curves come from and what do they represent?
2.1. Preferences and choices
The objects of choice
We are interested here in the behavior of an individual, called the
consumer, who is faced with the problem of'choosing from among a set
of objects, To begin, we formalize the set from which. the choice is to
be made. Let X represent some set of objects. It is quite typical in eco-
nomic applications to think of "X as a space of consumption bundles,
modeled as a subset of R*, where R is the real line and K is the number
of commodities. In an economy with three commodities, say beer, wine
and whisky, K = 3, anda typical consumption bundle is a three-vector,
ce en ee OE BO GS
2.1. Preferences and choices 19
a = (x1, 22,23), Tepresenting x, cans of beer, x2, bottles of wine, and sz,
shots of whisky. The units cans, bottles, shots are arbitrary; we
choose any convenient units. , a
A favorite game of economists is to make simple, basic constructions
work in ever wider and wilder circumstances; while you think of com-
modities such as cans of beer, also think of commodities such as } cans of
beer next week, as distinct from cans of beer today or in two weeks time;
the Services of a bottle opener next week; the services of a bartender to
draw a beer next week, if the temperature tomorrow gets over seventy
degrees and then falls to sixty-five sometime in the next four days. These,
and things even stranger, are shoehorned into the basic framework. For
now, think of beer, wine, whisky (or, when we draw two-dimensional pic-
tures as in figure 2.1, drop the whisky). But bear in mind that economic
theory is often a shell game that seeks to convince you with simple, con-
crete examples and then gets you to extrapolate without thinking too much
about more problematic settings.
The basic preference relation
The standard way to model the consumer is with a preference relation.
Imagine that we present the consumer with pairs of alternatives, =. and y,
and ask how they compare. Our question is, Is either z or y better than
the other in your eyes? If the consumer says that x is in fact better than
y, we writelz > y and we say that x is strictly preferred to y.|
For each pair x and y, we can imagine four possible responses to our
question: (1) The consumer may say that 2 is better than y, but not the
reverse. (2) She may say that y is better than x, but not the reverse. 8)
- She may say that neither seems better to her; she is unwilling to commit
to a judgment. (4) She may say that a is better than y and y is better than
az. Right away we wish to preclude the fourth possibility. It is logically
possible for a consumer to state that each alternative is better than the
other, but this stretches the meaning of the language too far and, more
to the point, it would be very inconvenient for later purposes. Hence we
assume
Assumption 1. Preferences are asymmetric: There is no pair x and y from X
oni tit A
such that x > y and y> =. 7
tt At ttt
But before you conclude that this is obvious, consider two problems with
our entire story that bear on this assumption. First, we have said nothing
about when our consumer is making these judgments. Our story sounds
as if these judgments are made at some single point mm time, in which
20 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
case assumption 1 seems reasonable. But when we apply models that
are based on assumption 1, we will sometimes assume that the judgments
expressed by our consumer at one point in time remain valid at subsequent
times. You might not find so reasonable an assumption that, if a consumer
decides she will prefer z to y a week from now, four days hence she
will necessarily continue to prefer = to y after three further days. But in
some contexts, when consumers are making choices at a number of distinct
dates, by making assumption 1 and applying the standard model as usual,
we will be assuming that this is so. (For more on this see chapter 4.)
A second reason to wonder about assumption 1 concerns the framing
of a particular choice. It is easiest to illustrate this with an example taken
from Kahneman and Tversky (1979):
As a doctor in a position of authority in the national government,
you've been informed that a new flu epidemic will hit your coun-
try next winter and that this epidemic will result in the deaths
of 600 people. (Either death or complete recovery is the outcome
in each case.) There are two possible vaccination programs that
you can undertake, and doing one precludes doing the other. The
first will save 400 people with certainty. The second will save no
one with probability 1/3 and 600 with probability 2/3. Which do
you prefer? To.
Formulate an answer to this question, and then ry:
As a doctor in a position of authority in the national govenment,
you've been informed that a new flu epidemic will hit your coun-
try next winter. To fight this epidemic, one of two possible vac-
cination programs is to be chosen, and undertaking one program
precludes attempting the other. In the first program, 200 people
will die with certainty. In the second, there is a 2/3 chance that
no one will die, and a 1/3 chance that 600 will die. Which do
you prefer?
These questions are complicated by the fact that they involve some uncer-
tainty, the topic of chapter 3. But they 7 make the point very well. Asked of
medical professionals, the modal responses to this pair of questions were
preferences for the first program in the first question and for the second
program in the second question. The point is that the questions are iden-
tical in terms of outcomes the only difference is in the way that the
questions have been framed or phrased. In the first question, those 600
are dead, and most people choose to bring some of them back to life with
2.1. Preferences and choices 21
certainty. In the second question, no one is dead yet, and it seems rather
callous to consign 200 people to certain death. Framing can affect com-
parative judgments like the ones we are asking our consumer, especially
when the items under consideration are complex. When items are com-
plex, the cognitive process that underpins an eventual rank ordering can
involve focusing on certain aspects, and the way in which the alternatives
are framed can affect what is focused upon and, therefore, what is chosen.
Given a particular framing of alternatives, we might not hear Try and
y > z in the same breath, but the pause between breaths in which these
two contradictory judgments are made may be short indeed.
Despite these objections, assumption 1 is made in virtually every
model of consumer choice in economics. Joined to it is a second assump-
tion, which says that if a consumer makes the judgment z > vy, she is able
to place any other option z somewhere on the ordinal scale set by these
two: better than y, or worse than z (or both). Formally:
Assumption 2. Preferences are negatively transitive: If xy, then for any
third element z, either > z, or z > y, or both.
(The term negative transitivity will remain mysterious if you dont do prob-
lem 1.) The content of this assumption can best be fllustrated by an exam-
ple that is intended to cast doubt on it. Suppose that objects like x and y
are bundles of cans of beer and bottles of wine: vectors (zy, 2), where the
first component is the number of cans of beer and the second is the num-
ber of bottles of wine. Qur consumer might have no problem comparing
the two bundles (20,8) and (21,9). Presumably (assuming a lack of tem-
perance), (21,9) > (20,8). But let z=(21,9), y= 20, 8), and z2=(40,2) in
assumption 2. Since z > y, the assumption maintains that either =z > z, x
z > y, or both; that is, either (21,9) > (40,2), or (40,2) > 0, 8), or bo
Our consumer, however, may claim that she can rank the two bundles
(21,9) and (20,8), but comparing either with (40,2) is too hard, and our
consumer refuses to commit to either ranking. It is this that assumption 2
t. }
 peyond assumptions 1 and 2, other properties seem natural for strict
preference. Three natural properties are:
(1) Irreflexivity: For no = is z > x.
(2) Transitivity: If z > y and y > z, then z= > =.
1 If you care to see how even one word makes a difference, reread the first question with
the word all inserted just before the 600 in the next-to-last sentence.
22 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
(3) Acyclicity: If, for a given finite integer n, #1 > %2,%2 > %35.-+, Bn1 >
T,, then z, # z;.
All three of these properties are implied by assumptions 1 and 2. We state
this as a proposition:
Proposition 2.1. If is asymmetric and negatively transitive, then > if ir-
reflexive, transitive and acyclic.)
We leave almost all the proofs of propositions in this section to you, but
this one is so easy that we will give it. First, irreflexivity is directly implied
by asymmetry: If z > x, then > would not be asymmetric. (Note that
in the definition of asymmetry, we did not say that x # y.) For transi-
tivity, suppose that z>y and y > 2. By negative transitivity and z >y,
we know that either zz or z>y. But since yz, asymmetry forbids
zy. Hence zz. And, for acydlicity, if =; >%2, T2>T3, -+-, Tn1 > Tn,
then transitivity implies that z; > z,. And then asymmetry implies that
Ty # Tp -
That is all there is to the basic standard model of preference in mi-
croeconomics: The consumer makes rank order judgments between pairs
of alternatives that satisfy assumptions 1 and 2. From this point there are
four paths to follow: First, from expressed strict preference >, economists
create associated weak preference and indifference relations. Second, this
model of rank ordering pairs of alternatives is related to choices made by
the consumer, when she has more than two alternatives at her disposal.
Third, for reasons of analytical convenience, we seek a numerical represen-
tation for preferences. And fourth, we seek additional assumptions that
will make the model of individual preference (and resulting choice) more
amenable to analysis, so, for example, we get pictures like that shown in
figure 2.1, with nicely shaped indifference curves, where nice remains
to be defined. We consider each of these in turn.
Weak preference and indifference
Suppose our consumers preferences are given by the relation >.
From this we can define two further relations among pairs of alternatives
in X:
Definitions. For x and y in X, write = y, which is read x is weakly
preferred to y, if it is not the case that y > . And write x ~y, read as z is
indifferent to y, if it is not the case that either > y or y > x.
Note carefully what has been done here: Weak preference is defined as the
absence of strict preference the other way, and indifference is defined as
Nr RE TT ee TTT yy Te
wm ee er
~~
rr ag gy gy gy eg TTT gg ge TTT Ty TT
2.1. Preferences and choices 23
the absence of strict preference in either direction. Does this accord with
ones intuitive sense of what weak preference and indifference mean? Not
entirely, insofar as there are judgments that are hard for the individual to
make. Our consumer who is choosing cans of beer and bottles of wine
may feel unable to say either (40,2) > (20,8) or (20,8) > (40,2), but this
doesnt make her positively indifferent between these two. Or if it did,
indifference would be a strange animal: If this implies (20,8) ~ (40,2),
and if a similar inability to rank (21,9) and (40,2) implies (21,9) ~ (40,2),
then two bundles ((20, 8) and (21,9)), one of which is strictly preferred to
another, would both be indifferent to a third.
(As promised in the preface, certain esoteric matters in this book will be relegated
to paragraphs such as this one: tighter spacing, smaller type, and slight indentation.
This material isn't required for most of what follows, and the reader may find it less
confusing to skip these paragraphs on a first reading and then return to them later.)
In view of such concerns, we might be happier to define weak preference
and indifference as follows: In addition to expressing strict preference >, the
consumer expresses positive indifference ~, and weak preference is defined
as the conjunction of the two: = = if either = > y or ~ y. We would
probably want to insist that = ~ y is incompatible with either z > y or y > x,
so by assumption 1, at most one of these three possibilities would be true for
any pair z and y. But we do not preclude a fourth possibility, namely that z
and y are simply incomparable. This is an interesting but nonstandard way
to proceed, and we will not pursue it in depth here; see Fishburn (1970).
Despite such concerns, weak preference and indifference are usually
defined from strict preference in the fashion of the definition given above.
And if one has assumptions 1 and 2 in hand, the associated weak prefer-
ence and indifference relationships are well behaved.
Proposition 2.2. If strict preference > is asymmetric and negatively transitive,
and weak preference and indifference are defined from strict preference according
to the definitions given above, then: ;
(a) Weak preference = is complete: For every pair = and y, either x = y or
y = x or both.
(b) Weak preference = is transitive: If z = y and y = z, then x z.
(c) Indifference ~ is reflexive, ~ = for all z, symmetric, ~ y implies
y ~ x, and transitive, x ~y and y~ z implies ~ z.
@ (And sometimes mathematical esoerica is found in footnotes. Footnotes that are labeled with
letters are more technical. Footnotes labeled with numbers should be read by all.) A binary relation
that is reflexive, symmetric and transitive is called an equivalence relation in mathematical
jargon. So we can paraphrase part {c) as: given our two assumptions concerning >, indif-
ference is an equivalence relation. See problem 2 for more on this.
24 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
If w~g,z-y, and y~ z, then wy and > z.
There is one thing left to say about strict and weak preference. We
have taken strict preference as primitive (what the consumer expresses)
and defined weak preference from it. Most books begin with weak prefer-
ence and induce strict preference. I prefer beginning with strict preference
because it makes it easier to discuss noncomparability possibilities. Most
authors prefer weak preference, I suspect, because negative transitivity is
hard to wrap ones head around. But in the standard treatment, these two
approaches are completely equivalent. Suppose you started with weak
preference > and then defined strict preference by z > y if it is not
the case that y > and defined indifference by z ~ y if both z sy
and y = z. Then there would be no difference between beginning with
> or with =. Moreover, if you began with >, which is complete and
transitive, the relation > obtained would be asymmetric and negatively
transitive. So for the standard treatment, it makes no difference whether
you begin with asymmetric and negatively transitive strict preference 
or with complete and transitive weak preference 3, as long as you define
the other as above.?
When we discussed negative transitivity of -, we illustrated what could
go wrong with an example suggested by an inability to compare bundles.
If we had begun our discussion of preferences with =, it would have been
natural to use a similar example to show what goes wrong with an assumption
that - is complete. You may conclude from this that negative transitivity of -
> corresponds in some way to completeness of >. Yet if you do problem
1, you will see that this is wrong; negative transitivity of > corresponds to
transitivity of >, while asymmetry of corresponds to completeness of 3.
The reason for this apparent conundrum is that we define z ry if it is not the
case that y > = (and vice versa). In this definition, when we start with >, we
include in > any cases of noncomparability. Put differently, if we admitted the
possibility of incomparable pairs and so defined separately from + a relation
~ that expresses positive indifference, and we then defined > notby z > y
i not y =, but instead by = yifzryorza~y, the relationship
between negative transitivity of and completeness of > would be more
in line with our intuition. (You will probably make sense of all this only if
you take the time to hunt down a treatment of preference in which there is a
formal difference between positive indifference and noncomparability.)
From preference to choice
So far our consumer has given her rank ordering between pairs of
alternatives out of X. In typical situations, she will be choosing out of a
 When authors begin with >, they sometimes add a third assumption, namely that > is
reflexive, or = > for all =. This is implied by completeness and so is redundant.
2.1. Preferences and choices 25
set with more than two members. So how do we relate her preferences
and her choice behavior? It is typical to assume that(choice is induced from
preference according to the following formal definition.
Definition. Given a preference relation > on a set of objects X and a nonempty
subset A of X, the set of acceptable alternatives from A according to is
defined to be
c(4; +) = {x A: there is no y A such that y > z}.
The content of this definition is that the consumer is happy to choose
anything that isnt bettered by something else that is available. Note sev-
eral things concerning this:
(1) The set (4;>) is, by definition, a subset of A. Anything else wouldn't
make sense given our interpretation.
(2) The set c(4;>) may contain more than one element. When c(4; >)
contains more than one element, the interpretation is that the consumer is
willing to take any one of those elements; she isn't particular about which
one she gets.?
(3) In some cases, the set c(A4;>) may contain no elements at all. For
example, suppose that X = [0,00) with z X representing z dollars.
And suppose A is the subset {1,2,3,...}. If you always prefer more
money to less, or x > y whenever z > y, c(4;>) will be empty. No
matter how much money you might take, some amount of money in A
is greater, hence better. Or suppose, in the same context, that A= [0, 10).
For those of you unused to this notation, this means that A consists of all
dollar amounts up to but not including 10. Then if money is divisible into
arbitrarily fine units, there is no element of A that isn't bettered by some
other.
2 Students will sometimes get a bit confused at this point, so let me be very pedantic. In
most applications, an alternative = is a bundle of goods a vector representing so many
bottles of wine, so many cans of tuna fish, etc. If (4;%>) has two elements, say @ and ,
we do not interpret this as saying that the individual chooses to take both = and z together.
If having both these bundles together was a possibility, then the vector sum & + would be
an element of A. Instead, c(4;%) = {z,2'} means that the individual is happy with either
z ora.
 You may object that (a) there isn't an infinite amount of money to be had and (b) money
isnt divisible past the penny or the mill, so that both examples are unrealistic. In this case,
let me pose one further example. I will flip a coin IV times, where N is a positive integer.
On the first occurrence of heads, I will give you $10. If there are IV tails in a row, you get
nothing. You must choose N from the set {1,2,...}. Now you might claim that you are
indifferent between N = 10' and anything larger. But if you always prefer N to be larger,
then you will have no best choice.
26 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
(4) In the examples just given, c(4;>) is empty because A is too large or
not nice. In the next section, we will see how to avoid this problem (by
restricting the range of sets A to which c(; >) is applied). But we could
also get empty choice sets if > is badly behaved; suppose X = {z,y, 2, w},
and z > vy, y > 2, and z = z. Then c({z,y,2};>) =0.
(5) On an entirely different plane of objections to this approach, you might
expect that what our consumer chooses out of a set of alternatives A
depends on such things as the time of day, the way the choices are framed,
or even the range of choices offered; she chooses apple pie over cherry,
unless she can alternatively have banana, in which case cherry is chosen.
All these sorts of choice behaviors are observed in real life, and they are
not modelable given our preference-based definition of choice. We will
return to this.
We haven't yet said anything about the consequences for choice of
assuming that > conforms to the standard assumptions. We can add that
to the stew at this point:
Proposition 2.3. Suppose that > is asymmetric and negatively transitive. Then
(a) For every finite set A, c(A; >) is nonempty.
(b) Suppose that both x and y- are in both A and B, and z c(A;>) and
y c(B;>). Then z c(B; >) and y c(4; >).
You are asked to provide a proof in problem 3. This proposition leaves
open the question about choice from infinite sets A. We will deal with
this to some extent below.
From choice to preference
A quick review of the plot so far is: We started with strict preferences
and saw connections with weak preference and indifference. Then we
discussed how choice behavior might be induced from preferences. But
from the viewpoint of descriptive theory (where one tries to build a model
that matches what is observed), one would naturally proceed the other
way around. Unless we provide our consumer with a questionnaire or
otherwise directly enquire as to her preferences, the only signs we will see
of her preferences are the choices she makes. Put another way, saying that
the consumer has preferences that explain choice according to the formula
given in the previous subsection is our model of her behavior, and it would
make more sense to take her behavior as primitive and ask, When are her
choices consistent with our preference-based model of choice?
2.1. Preferences and choices 27
In an abstract and not entirely satisfactory sense, we take up this
question next. The approach is not entirely satisfactory because of the
primitive we use; we assume that we have our hands on the consumer's
entire choice function. Consider the following formal definition.
Definition. A choice function on X is a function c whose domain is the set of
all nonempty subsets of X , whose range is the set of all subsets of X , and that
satisfies c(A) C A forall AC X.
To repeat, the interpretation is that the consumer, given her choice out of
A, is content to take any one element of (A). Compare this definition with
the definition of c(-, >) that was given for a preference relation >. Viewed
as a mathematical object, (-,>) is a choice function for fixed >. That is,
in the previous subsection we constructed a choice function (according
to the definition just given) from a primitive preference relation. In this
subsection, the choice function is the primitive object.
We can raise objections to this approach similar to those raised con-
cerning >; taking choice as a primitive in this fashion doesnt pay heed to
the possibility that choice will change with changes in the timing of choice
or the framing of alternatives. As before, economists for the most part ig-
nore these possibilities. And they go on, usually, to make the following
two assumptions about (which you should be comparing with the two
parts of proposition 2.3).
Assumption 3. The choice function c is nonempty valued: c(A)# 0 for all A.
Assumption 4. The choice function satisfies Houthakkers axiom of revealed
preference: If and y are both contained in both A and B and if x (4)
and y c(B), then = c(B) and y c(4).
Assumption 3 has already been discussed in the context of c(:,>) for a
given >, but let us say a bit more about it. The problems encountered
when a set A is infinite remain, and so we restrict attention for the time
being to the case of finite X. Even granting this assumption, when choice
is primitive, we can once again wonder about our consumers actions
when faced with a difficult decision. Consider our consumer choosing
cans of beer and bottles of wine, and suppose she is given her choice out
of {(40,2),(20,9}. If she has difficulty comparing these two bundles, she
might freeze up and be unable to choose. This is precluded by assump-
tion 3. We dont rule out the possibility that she chooses both; that
is, ({(40,2),(20,9}) = {(40, 2),(20,9)}, which means that she would be
happy with either of the two bundles. But we would interpret this as a
definite expression of indifference between the two bundles.
28 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
Next examine assumption 4. It bears the following interpretation.
Under the conditions that z and y are both in 4 and z c(4), our
consumer reveals by this that = is (weakly) preferred to y. Now if y o(B)
and z B, since x is no worse than y, = should also be among the most
preferred things in B. (And by a symmetric argument, y c(4) must
hold as well.) Once again, the easiest way to grasp what this is saying
is to consider a case in which it would fail. Suppose that z represents
a wonderful meal at a classical French restaurant, while y represents an
equally wonderful meal at a classical Japanese restaurant. The choice is a
difficult one, but our consumer, given the choice out of A = {x,y}, decides
that she prefers &. That is, c({z,y}) = {z}. Now imagine that z is a meal
at a somewhat lesser French restaurant, one at which our consumer had
the misfortune recently to dine and which caused her an upset stomach
from all the rich food. Suppose that B = {z,y,2}. Now if we give our
consumer her choice out of B, the presence of z among the alternatives
may remind her of all the butter and cream that goes into classical French
cooking and that didnt agree with her when she dined at z. This, in turn,
colors her evaluation of z; perhaps she prefers Japanese cuisine after all.
This might lead to behavior given by c(B) = {y}, which together with
c(4) = {z} constitutes a violation of assumption 4. This is something like
a framing, effect; the presence of other alternatives may change how one
regards a given alternative and thus change ones choices. It is this that
assumption 4 rules out.
An interesting interplay existing between properties of nonemptiness
and revealed preference is worth mentioning. By assuming nonemptiness,
we rule out the possibility that the consumer, faced with a set A, is unable to
choose. We could reduce this to a tautology by saying that choosing not to
choose is a choice; that is, append to the set 4 one more element, make no
choice, and then whenever choice is too hard to make, interpret it as a choice
of this make no choice element. If we did proceed by allowing make no
choice to be a possible item, we would run into two problems. First, is
supposed to be defined on all subsets of X, and we've just assumed that it
is defined only on subsets that contain this make no choice option. But
we can deal with defined only on some subsets of X ; cf. problem 4(c).
Second, and more substantively, if nonemptiness is really a problem, we are
probably going to run afoul of the axiom of revealed preference by this dodge.
Suppose that z and y are so hard to rank that the consumer freezes when
given a choice out of {z,y}. We would, in our tautologizing, interpret this
. as saying that c({z,y, make no choice}) = {make no choice}. But one
assumes that c({z, make no choice}) = {z}; if = is the only thing really
on offer, it is taken, at least if it is not noxious. This, then, would constitute
a violation of the axiom of revealed preference.
2.1. Preferences and choices 29
On the same point, imagine an indecisive consumer who wishes to obey
assumption 3. This consumer, when faced with a difficult choice, gets past her
indecision by volunteering to take any option that she can't disqualify. Our
wine-and-beer-drinking friend will illustrate the point. She has a hard time
comparing the two bundles (40,2) and (20,8), so her choice function specifies
c({(40,2), (20,8)}) = {(40,2), (20,8)}. And she has a hard time comparing
the two bundles (40,2) and (21,9), so her choice function specifies c({(40, 2),
21,9} = {(40,2), (21,9)}. But then imagine giving her a choice out of the
threesome {(40,2), (21,9), (20,8)}. Presumably she chooses either of the first
two of these three the bundle (20, 8) is excluded because (21,9) is surely
better. But if this is her choice function evaluated on the threesome, she has
run afoul of Houthakkers axiom. (Prove this!) Salvation for an indecisive
consumer is not possible according to the standard model.
We have already seen in proposition 2.3 that if our consumer has strict
preferences given by an asymmetric and negatively transitive relation >,
and if we define a choice function (-;>) from > (on a finite set X), then
this choice function satisfies assumptions 3 and 4. The converse is also
true, in the following sense: Given a choice function c, define an induced
strict preference relation >=. by z >. y if for any A C X with z,y X,
z (4) and y (4). In words, z >. y if in any instance when both x
and y are available, x is chosen and y isn't. Or, put succinctly, z > y if
choice ever reveals an instance where z seems to be strictly preferred to y.
Proposition 2.4. Given a choice function c that satisfies assumptions 3 and 4,
the relation >. defined from c as above is asymmetric and negatively transitive.
Moreover, if you begin with c satisfying assumptions 3 and 4, induce >, and
then define c(-; >), you will be back where you started: c(;>c) = c. And 9
you begin with , induce c(-; >), and then induce from this >-c.,.y, you will
again be back where you started.
That is, taking as primitive > that is asymmetric and negatively transitive
is equivalent to taking as primitive a choice function c that is nonempty
valued and satisfies Houthakkers axiom of revealed preference. The proof
is left as an exercise.
There are two remarks to make here. First, proposition 2.4 is true
under the maintained hypothesis that X is finite. Extensions to infinite X
can be developed, but then one has to be careful about nonemptiness o:
the choice function. Except for brief remarks in the next section, we won
take up this subject here, leaving it for the interested reader to explore ir
more advanced treatments of the subject. (Look for references to abstrac
revealed preference theory) Second, proposition 2.3 can be viewed as
providing the testable restriction of the standard model of choice arising
30 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
from preference; one needs to look either for a violation of nonemptiness
or of Houthakkers axiom of revealed preference. As long as the data
are consistent with a choice function that satisfies these two assumptions,
they are consistent with the standard preference-based theory of consumer
behavior. (But see problem 4 for more on this point.)
We will return to revealed preference interpreted as the testable re-
striction of the standard model of consumer behavior in the next section,
when we get to the specific application of consumer demand.
Utility representations
Our third excursion from the starting point of consumer preferences
concerns numerical representations. We need a definition.
Definition. Given preferences > on a set X, a numerical representation for
those preferences is any function U with domain X and range the real line such
that
zy ifand only if Uz) > Uy).
That is, U measures all the objects of choice on a numerical scale, and a
higher measure on the scale means the consumer likes the object more. It
is typical to refer to such a function U as a utility function for the consumer
(or for her preferences). 
Why would we want to know whether > has a numerical represen-
tation? Essentially, it is convenient in applications to work with utility
functions. As we will see in later sections of this chapter and in the prob-
lems, it is relatively easy to specify a consumer's preferences by writing
down a utility function. And then we can turn a choice problem into a
numerical maximization problem. That is, if > has numerical represen-
tation U, then the best alternatives out of a set A.C X according to
> are precisely those elements of A that have maximum utility. If we
are lucky enough to know that the utility function U and the set A from
which choice is made are nicely behaved (e.g., U is differentiable and
A is a convex, compact set), then we can think of applying the techniques
of optimization theory to solve this choice problem.
. All sorts of nice things might flow from a numerical representation of
preference. So we want to know: For a given set of preferences >, when
do these preferences admit a numerical representation?
Proposition 2.5. For > to admit a numerical representation, it is necessary that
> is asymmetric and negatively transitive.
2.1. Preferences and choices 31
But these two properties are not quite sufficient; you need as well that
either the set X is small or that preferences are well behaved. We
will give the two simplest and most useful converses to proposition 2.5,
although the second requires that you know a bit of mathematics and so
is treated as optional reading. You should have no problem proving both
propositions 2.5 and 2.6. Consulta good book on choice and utility theory
for a proof of 2.7 and for variants on 27.
Proposition 2.6. If the set X on which > is defined is finite, then > admits a
numerical representation if and only if it is asymmetric and negatively transitive.
As for the second converse to proposition 2.5, we will specialize to the
case where the objects being chosen are consumption bundles: elements of
RX, for some K. We assume that negative consumption levels are not possi-
ble, so X is the positive orthant in R.> In this setting, we say that prefer-
ences given by > are continuous
(a) if {=} is a sequence of consumption bundles with limit <, and if = > y,
then, for all n sufficiently large, =" > y
(b) and if {=} is a sequence of consumption bundles with limit z, and if
y + z, then, for all n sufficiently large, y > z"
Proposition 2.7. In this setting, if is asymmetric, negatively transitive, and
continuous, then can be represented by a continuous function U . Moreover, if
is represented by a continuous function U, then = must be continuous as well as
asymmetric and negatively transitive.
The restriction to X being the positive orthant in RX for some K isn't really
important to this result. We do need some of the topological properties that
this setting provides, but the result generalizes substantially. See Fishburn
(1970). Or if you prefer reading original sources, see Debreu (1954).
Suppose that > has a numerical representation U. What can we say
about other possible numerical representations? Suppose that f:RR
is a strictly increasing function (some examples: f(r)=7>+3r"; f(r) =";
f(r) = e"). Then defining a function V : X R by Viz) = FU@)
gives another numerical representation for >. This is easy to see: Viz) >
V(y) if and only if U(z) > Uly). Since V and U induce the same order
on X, whatever U represents (ordinally) is represented just as well by V.
4 Gee problem 5 for an example of what can go wrong.
 In fact, this is true as long as X is countably infinite.
3We will try to be careful and distinguish between numbers that are strictly positive and
those that are nonnegative. But much of conventional language blurs these distinctions; in
particular, the positive orthant of RE is used when referring to vectors that can have zeros as
components. We will signal the other cases in which following conventional language leads
to this sort of ambiguity.
32 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
The converse to this isn't true: That is, if V and U both represent >,
there is not necessarily a strictly increasing function f : R R with
V(z) = f(U(z)) for all z. But almost this is true. There is always a
function f : R R that is nondecreasing and strictly increasing on the
set {r R:r = U(g) for some z X} such that V()) = f(U()).f A rough
paraphrase of the situation is
Numerical representations for - are unique only up to strictly increasing rescal-
ings.
The point is that the units in a utility scale, or even the size of relative
differences, have no particular meaning. We cant, in looking at a change
from z to y, say that the consumer is better off by the amount Uy) 
Uz) or'by anything like this. At this point (it will be different when
we get to uncertainty in chapter 3), the utility function is introduced as
an analytical convenience. It has no particular cardinal significance. In
particular, the level of utility is unobservable, and anything that requires
us to know the level of utility will be untestable. This is important as
we go through demand theory; we'll want to be careful to note which of
the many constructions we make are based on observables, and which are
things that exist (if at all) only in the mind of the economist.
Properties of preferences for consumption bundles
When (momentarily) we go off into the subject of consumer demand,
we will be making all manner of assumptions about the utility function
that represents our consumer's preferences. We might ask, for example,
exactly what it takes to get pictures as nice as in figure 2.1.
Since our interest attaches specifically to the problem of consumer
demand, we will specialize throughout this subsection to the case that
X is the positive orthant of RX for some integer K. That is, there are
K cominodities, and preferences are defined over bundles of those com-
modities where the amount of each commodity in any bundle is required
to be nonnegative. We assume throughout that preferences > for some
consumer are given, and these preferences are asymmetric and negatively
transitive.
We can, with this alone, begin to offer some interpretation of fig-
ure 2.1. For each xz X, we define the indifference class of x, denoted
fi you are good at mathematics, proving this should be easy.
9 For those readers who know some real analysis, extensions to linear spaces for X should
not prove difficult.
2.1. Preferences and choices 33
Indiff(z), by Indiff(z) = {y X : y ~ x}. Since ~ is reflexive, symmetric,
and transitive, we can show that the family of indifference classes, or the
various Indiff(z) ranging over x, partition X. That is, every y X is
in one and only one Indiff(z). You are asked to prove this in problem 2.
The indifference curves of figure 2.1 are then indifference classes for some
implicit preference ordering of the consumer under investigation.
The questions we wish to address in this context are: What further
properties might we think reasonable to suppose of >? And how do those
properties translate into properties of numerical representations for > and
into pictures such as figure 2.17
Monotonicity and local insatiability. In many cases, it is reason-
able to assume that consumers prefer more to less. Or at least they do
not strictly prefer less to more. We have the following definitions and
results:
Definitions. Preferences > are monotone if for any two bundles = and y such
that > y, = y. (By = > y, we mean that each component of z is at least
as large as the corresponding component of y.) And preferences - are strictly
monotone if for any two bundles and y such that x > y and zy, x >1y.'
A function U : X R is nondecreasing if for any two bundles x and y such
that >y, Uz) > Uly). And U is strictly increasing if for any two bundles
z and y such that x > y and z#y, Uz) > Uy).
Proposition 2.8. If U represents preferences >, these preferences are monotone
if and only if U is nondecreasing, and these preferences are strictly monotone if
and only if U is strictly increasing.
The proof of this proposition is virtually a matter of comparing definitions.
One might wish somewhat less of some goods; week-old fish and
contaminated water come to mind. For others some of the good is desir-
able, but past a certain point any additional amounts are undesirable; any
extremely rich or sweet food would be a natural example. One doesnt
value more of many goods; while I would not mind having around more
hydrochloric acid or rolled steel, I do not strictly prefer more of these
goods to less. The first two sorts of examples cast doubt on an assump-
tion that preferences are monotone, while the last example questions strict
monotonicity. Neither assumption is necessary for much of what we do
subsequently. But for later purposes we need the assumption that arbi-
trarily close to any bundle z is another that is strictly preferred to z. This
property is called local insatiability.
34 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
Definition. Preferences > are locally insatiable if for every z = (%1,...,%K) 
X and for every number > 0 there is another bundle y = (,..., yx) X
such that (a) |x; y;| < for every j=1,...,K, and (b) y > zk
The interested reader can translate this property into the corresponding
statement about a numerical representation of >.
Convexity. The next property that we consider is convexity of prefer-
ences.
Definitions. (a) Preferences are convex if for every pair and y from X
with > y and for every number a [0,1], the bundle az + 1-a)y>=y.
(b) Preferences - are strictly convex if for every such x and y, #y, and for
every a (0,1), az + (1 a)y > y.
(c) Preferences are semi-strictly convex if for every pair x and y with z > y
and for every a (0,1), az + (1 a)y > y.
By az + (I" a)y, we mean the component-by-component convex combi-
nation of the two bundles. :
Why would one ever think that preferences are or should be convex?
The story, such as it is, is related to the notion of diminishing marginal
utility or the classic ideal of moderation in all things. Under the as-
sumption z = y, we know that in moving along the line segment from
y to we will reach a point (z) at least as good as the point (y) from
which we started. The various forms of convexity are variations on the
general notion that at each step along this path, we are never worse off
than where we began. That, precisely, is convexity. Semi-strict convexity
maintains that if = > y, so we will be better off at the end of the journey,
then we are strictly better off at each step. And strict convexity holds that
even if x ~ y, if we are strictly between the two we are better off than at
the extremes.
You will sometimes see convexity of preferences defined a bit differ-
ently. For each point z X, define the set AsGood(z) = {yeX:yraz}.
Recall that a set Z C R* is convex if for every z and y from Z and every
number a [0,1], az + (1 a)y Z. (If you have never seen or heard of
k Note that becoming satiated in one commodity, say baklava, does not necessarily pose
problems for local insatiability; all that is needed is that, from any consumption bundle, the
consumer would prefer a small increase (or decrease) in some of the commodities.
2.1. Preferences and choices 35
the definition of a convex set before, get someone who has seen it to draw
a few pictures for you.) Then:
Proposition 2.9. Preferences > are convex if and only if for every point x, the
set AsGood(x) is convex.
The proof of this proposition is left as an exercise.
As for the consequences of convexity of preferences for numerical
representations, we must give some definitions from mathematics. These
definitions are used throughout this book, so pay attention if they are new
to you:
Definitions. Let Z be a convex subset of RX for some integer K and let f be
a function with domain Z and range R.
The function f is concave if for all x,y Z and a 0,11, flaz +1 a)y) >
af(z) + (1 a) f(y). This function is strictly concave if for all such x and y,
z#y,and forall a (0,1), flaz + (1~a)y) >aflz) +1 a)f.
The function f is convex if for all z,y Z and a 10,11, flaz+ (1 a)y) <
af(x) + (1 a)f(y). This function is strictly convex if for all such = and y,
zy, and forall a (0,1), flaz +1 ayy) < afl) +1 a)f@).
The function f is quasi-concave if for all z,y Z such that f(z) > f(y) and
for all a 10,11, flaz + (1 a)y = Ff). This function is strictly quasi-
concave if for such and y, x+y, and for a ,1), fleaz+1a)y) > Ff).
And is semi-strictly quasi-concave if for all and y with f(x) > f(y) and
forall a (0,1), flaz +1 ~a)y) > fy):
The function f is quasi-convex if for all z,y Z such that f(z) > fy) and for
al a 0,11, flax + (1 ay) < F(x). This function is strictly quasi-convex
if for such x and y, x+y, and for a 0,1), flaz +1 ayy) < flx).}
Proposition 2.10. (a) If preferences > are represented by a concave function U,
then preferences are convex. If they are represented by a strictly concave function
U, then they are strictly convex.
(b) Suppose that U is a numerical representation of preferences >. Then Uis
quasi-concave if and only if preferences are convex; U is strictly quasi-
i We have no need of semi-strictly quasi-convex functions. We also didn't define semi-
strict concavity for functions. Try to draw a concave function that isn't semi-strictly quasi-
concave and you'll see why.
36 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
concave if and only if preferences > are strictly convex; and U is semi-strictly
guasi-concave if and only if preferences > are semi-strictly convex.
Once again, the proofs are left to you. Note that part (a) runs in one
direction only; if preferences have a concave representation, they are con-
vex. But convex preferences can have numerical representations that are
not concave. We can demonstrate this quite simply: Suppose that U is
a concave function that represents >. We know from the discussion fol-
lowing propositions 2.5 and 2.6 that if f: R R is a strictly increasing
function, then the function V defined by V(x) = f(U(z)) is another nu-
merical representation of >. But it is quite easy to construct, for a given
concave function U, a strictly increasing function f such that FU) is
not concave. Create such an example if this isnt obvious to you. The idea
is to make f more convex than U is concave.
In contrast, part (b) says that every representation of convex prefer-
ences > is quasi-concave. Hence we conclude that if U is a quasi-concave
function and f is strictly increasing, f(U(-)) is also quasi-concave. (It is
equally clear that similar statements hold for strict and semi-strict quasi-
concavity) You may find it helpful to prove this directly, although you
should be sure that you understand the indirect path of logic that got us
to this conclusion. .
This leaves open one question. We know (or, rather, you know if you
constructed an example two paragraphs ago) that convex preferences can have
numerical representations that are not concave functions. But this doesn't
mean that we cant show: If preferences > are convex, they admit at least one
concave numerical representation. But, in fact, we cant show this; it is quite
false. On this point, see problem 7.7
Continuity. We have already mentioned the property of continuous pref-
erences. It was used previously as a way to guarantee that preferences have a
numerical representation when the set X is not finite, and in fact we daimed
that it guaranteed the existence of a continuous numerical representation. We
dont need continuity of preferences to guarantee the existence of a numer-
ical representation. But, at the same time, continuity has intuitive appeal
in its own right. N.B., continuous preferences always admit a continuous
* You are entitled to a bit of displeasure concerning the fact that convex preferences go
together with (quasi-)concave utility functions. This would all be easier to remember if we
called the property of preferences concavity. But, as you will see in chapter 6, convexity of
the AsGood sets plays the crucial mathematical role, and for this reason preferences with
convex AsGood sets are said to be convex, even though they have (quasi-)concave represen-
tations.
im chapter 3, we will be able to give an intuitive property about the consumer's prefer-
ences that ensures these preferences admit a concave numerical representation.
2.2. Marshallian demand without derivatives 37
numerical representation. But not every numerical representation of continu-
ous preferences is continuous.
About figure 2.1. The preferences that are implicitly identified by
the very standard picture in. figure 2.1 are strictly monotone and strictly
convex. You can see the strict convexity from the fact that the indifference
curves are strictly convex to the origin; if we take any two points and the
line segment between them, this segment will be everywhere above the
indifference curve of the lower of the two points. Strict monotonicity
is implicit from the fact that the curves run down and to the right, never
flattening out to be completely horizontal or vertical, so that from any
point, any second point above and/or to the right is on a strictly higher
indifference curve.
And the preferences represented in figure 2.1 are continuous. We see
this because the weakly better than and weakly worse than sets for each
point = are all closed; you can check that this is equivalent to the definition
of continuity of preferences that we gave.
The technically astute reader may wish to investigate the extent to which
figure 2.1 is the picture for preferences that are continuous, strictly convex and
strictly monotone. The reader may also wish to investigate how the picture
might change if we drop strict convexity or even convexity altogether, or if
we drop (strict) monotonicity. On this general question, see the alternative
pictures appearing later in this chapter.
2.2. Marshallian demand without derivatives
The prototypical application of the general model of choice that we
have developed is Marshallian demand. The theory of Marshallian (con-
sumer) demand has played a central role in the development of micro-
economic theory; it is traditionally viewed as among the most important
subjects to study in microeconomics, and the results obtained are useful
in many applied contexts.
A complete and precise treatment of Marshallian demand takes many
pages and much time. Because Marshallian demand Plays a very limited
role in the remainder of this book and the literature provides many very
good textbook treatments (see the bibliographic notes at the end of this
chapter), we will give this subject relatively short shrift here. The discus-
sion will be more than adequate to acquaint you with some of the basic
categories of questions addressed and answers given. But it does not Ppro-
vide the depth of treatment or precision that you will find elsewhere, and
students not already acquainted with this subject will do well someday to
study it more intensively and extensively.
38 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
We divide our treatment of the subject between two sections. In this
section we take no derivatives. In the following section, we take deriva-
tives without end.
The consumer's problem
The theory of Marshallian demand concerns a consumer with prefer-
ences as described in section 2.1, who seeks to buy a bundle of goods for
consumption. We assume that the space of consumption bundles, X, is
the positive orthant of RX for some positive integer K, with the usual in-
terpretation that K is the number of commodities. Stated in words, then,
the consumer's problem is
Choose the consumption bundle x that is best according fo preferences, subject
to the constraint that total cost of x is no greater than the consumer's income.
We can express the constraint part of this fairly easily. We use p from
RK to denote the price vector; that is, p = (py,...,px), where p; is the
price of one unit of good j. We assume that the consumer has a fixed
amount of money to spend on his consumption bundle: Let denote
the consumer's income. Then we write the constraint as > pz; LY,
or, for short, pz <Y, where - is the dot or scalar product.
It is implicit in this formulation that the consumers choice of amounts
to consume does not change unit prices of the goods; the consumer faces
a linear price schedule (no quantity discounts, no increases in price as he
tries to buy more, etc.). This is a standard assumption in IMNiCroeconomics.
Quantity discounts are ruled out because, if they were significant, a con-
sumer could buy a lot of the good at a discount and then resell it to other
consumers. (But what if resale were impossible? We'll discuss this sort
of thing in chapter 9.) And the rationale for the assumption that prices
do not increase with increased demand by the single consumer is that the
consumer's demand is only a small part of all the demand for the good.
This assumption of linear prices is not necessary for a lot of the theory,
but it is convenient, and we'll hold to it throughout this chapter.
5 Generic consumers in this book will change gender occasionally not so much, I hope,
that confusion is created, but often enough so that I am somewhat evenhanded. In particular,
later in the book when we have numbered individuals, all odd numbered individuals will
be women and all even numbered individuals will be men.
6 The use of the term income is traditional, although wealth or resources might, for
some applications, give more appropriate connotations. The use of an uppercase Y is meant
to prevent confusion with consumption bundles; we will sometimes use y as an alternative
to =.
2.2. Marshallian demand without derivatives 39
That takes care of representing the budget constraint. We can rewrite
the consumers problem as
- Choose that consumption bundle = that is best according to preferences, subject
top-z<Y.
Not bad, but still not great. We still have the objective (best according to
preferences) with which to contend. But reaching back to the previous
section, we assume that our consumer has preferences that are asymmetric,
negatively transitive, and continuous. This implies that there is a continu-
ous numerical representation U for the consumer's preferences, and we
can write the consumers problem as
Choose x to maximize Ux) subject fo p-x <Y and z > 0. CP)
(The z > 0 part comes from our assumption that the set of feasible con-
sumption bundles, or X, is the positive orthant in RK) If we assume that
U is well behaved, concave, say, and differentiable, we can even begin
creating Lagrangians, differentiating, and so on.
Before making any further assumptions, however, we will see what we
can get out of the assumptions that the consumer's preferences are asyin-
metric, negatively transitive and continuous or, equivalently, that there is
a continuous function U that represents preferences.
Right away, we have to wonder whether (CP) has a solution at all.
Proposition 2.11. If preferences are asymmetric, negatively transitive, and con-
tinuous, or equivalently if they are represented by a continuous function U , then:
(3) The problem (CP) has at least one solution for all strictly positive prices and
nonnegative levels of income.
(b) If = is a solution of (CP) for given p and Y, then x is also a solution for
(Ap, AY), for any positive scalar A.
(c) If in addition to our basic three assumptions on preferences, we assume as well
that preferences are convex, then the set of solutions to (CP) for given p and Y is
a convex set. If preferences are strictly convex, then (CP) has a unique solution.
(d) If in addition (to the original three assumptions) preferences are locally insa-
tiable and if is a solution to (CP) at (p,Y), then p-z=Y.
Let us comment on these four assertions in turn. Before doing so, we give
one very useful piece of terminology: For prices p and income Y, the
7 For those readers who skip the smaller type, take my word for it.
40 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
Good 2 Good 2
Good 1 Good 1
(a) 
Figure 2.2. Two examples of multiple solutions of (CP).
set of points {z RX :p-z <Y,z > 0} is called the budget set for the
consumer.
First, the proof of (a) requires a bit of mathematics: You need to
know that a continuous function on a compact set achieves a maximum.
And then you must show that if prices are strictly positive and income is
nonnegative, the budget set is compact. If you know about compact sets,
this will be.obvious; otherwise, you will have to take (a) on faith.*
Part (a) says that (CP).has at least one solution for every pand Y,
but there is no reason to suppose that (CP) doesnt have many solutions.
In figure 2.2 we show a shaded budget set and preferences by means of
the usual indifference curve diagram. In figure 2.2(a) we have nonconvex
preferences and two solutions to (CP) marked with stars. In figure 2.2(b)
we have convex preferences that are not strictly convex, and we see an
entire line segment of solutions.
Part (b) should be immediately obvious because the budget set is un-
changed if prices and wealth are scaled up or down proportionately. If
(CP) has a unique solution, and we wrote this solution as z(p,Y), then
part (b) could be written: z(p,Y) = z(\p, AY), for A > 0. That is, Marshal-
lian demand (the function z(p,Y)) is homogeneous of degree zero.
ky you know about compact sets, you may also know that it would be enough for U to
be upper semi-continuous. In fact, one can define upper semi-continuous preferences and
use this assumption in place of our assumption of continuous preferences in most of the
development to come. Also, we will not worry here about what happens when prices of
individual goods can be zero, but see the attention we pay this issue in chapter 6.
! The preferences represented in 2.2(b) are semi-strictly convex, so that property won't
help with multiple solutions. Note also that in figure 2.2 we show only monotone prefer-
ences. Draw pictures with preferences that aren't monotone and, especially for part (d) of
the proposition, with preferences that aren't locally insatiable.
2.2. Marshallian demand without derivatives 41
Part (c) of the proposition is easy to prove: Budget sets are convex: If
z and z are two solutions of (CP) for given p and Y, then az+(1a)z for
a [0,1] is in the budget set. And if preferences are convex, az + (1 o)x
is at least as good as the worser of = and 2. Since these are (presumed to
be) both solutions of (CP), they are equally good and as good as anything
in the budget set. But then az + (1 a)z is a solution of (CP) as well.
And if preferences are strictly convex and there are two distinct solutions
z and z, .5z+.5z' would be both strictly better than z and 2 and would
still be in the budget set, a contradiction.
Turning to (d), we begin by noting that if z is any solution to (CP),
then p-z < Y. The content of (d) lies in the assertion that this weak
inequality is in fact an equality. The inequality p-z < Y is known as
Walras law, whereas the equation p-z = Y is called Walras' low with
equality: Hence we can paraphrase (d) as: If the consumer is locally insatiable,
Walras law holds with equality. The proof runs as follows. If some z that
solved (CP) for given p and Y satisfied p-z < Y, then the consumer can
afford any bundle z' that is in some small neighborhood of z, where the -
size of the neighborhood has to do with how much slack is in the budget
constraint and how large the largest price is. But by local insatiability, in
every neighborhood of any point z something is strictly preferred to z.
Hence z could not solve (CP).
GARP
The set of solutions of (CP) plays, in the specific context of consumer
demand, the role that the choice function plays in abstract choice theory:
It is the observable element of choice. Just as we asked before whether a
choice function was consistent with choice according to some underly-
ing preferences, we ask now: Is observed demand consistent with preference
maximization for some set of preferences? Note two changes from before: The
sets A out of which choice is being made are now budget sets and so are
infinite. And even if we know all the solutions of (CP) for all prices p and
incomes Y, we don't know choice out of all subsets of X ; we only know
 The term Walras law is sometimes used only for aggregate demand. So you may en-
counter treatments of the theory of demand where (d) would be paraphased: The consumer's
budget constraint is satisfied with equality.
m Mathematically inclined readers should supply the formal details. Readers sometimes
worry about the possibility of getting stuck along an axis in this proof; while the budget
constraint may be slack, perhaps it is one of the nonnegativity constraints that binds and
keeps the consumer from attaining higher utility. But note carefully that local insatiability is
defined relative to the nonnegativity constraints. It says that within X and near to every z
is something that is strictly better than =. So we cant get stuck along one of the axes.
42 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
choice out of budget sets. Since we dont know c for all subsets, it may
be harder to answer the question posed above.
But, since much of economics is built on the assumption that con-
sumers act as in the problem (CP), it is natural to look at the observed
demand and devise and run tests that could lead us to reject this model.
That is, it is natural to try to answer the question above. This has been the
object of much attention in the theory of the consumer, and two different
sorts of answers come out. We give the first here; the second, which is
very different in style, will be given at the end of the next section (2.3).
For the balance of this subsection, the assumption is that we observe
a finite set of demand data. That is, for a finite collection of prices and
income levels (p!, YD), ?,Y?),...,(@",Y), we observe corresponding de-
mands z',...,z" by our consumer. We do not preclude the possibility
that at pries p* and income Vi there are solutions to (CP) other than zt.
And we set out to answer the question: Given this finite set of data, are
the choices we observe consistent with the standard model of some locally
insatiable consumer solving (CP)?
The answer is somewhat like the revealed preference axiom we dis-
cussed in section 2.1. First, if z is chosen at (p, Y) and p-3' <Y, then we
would have to conclude that z > z because z is chosen when z' is avail-
able. Assuming local insatiability, if the same were true with p-2' <7,
then we would know that z >'2', because otherwise something close to z
would be strictly better than / and still feasible at prices p with income .
Y, and 3 was chosen over this. We can draw pictures of this. In figure 2.3,
we show the budget set defined by p-z <Y and x > 0. Suppose the
point marked z is chosen. Since everything in the budget set (the shaded
Good 2
Good 1
Figure 2.3. Revealed preference from demand data.
If the point z is demanded from the shaded budget set, then = is re-
vealed to be at least as good as points such as z' and, assuming the
consumer is locally insatiable, strictly better than points such as z'.
2.2. Marshallian demand without derivatives 43
region) was feasible, z must be at least as good as those. In particular, =
must be at least as good as 2. And if the consumer is locally insatiable,
& must be strictly better than the point marked z".
Now suppose that this sort of consideration revealed that zt =z? =
2 > z* >= 5 for some chain of bundles z',2%, 7, and zt. We would clearly
be unable to rationalize this with preferences that had the properties we've
been assuming; a numerical representation would be impossible since we
would need to have Uz!) > Uz?) > U(z) > U(z*) > U(x"). This leads to
the so-called Generalized Axiom of Revealed Preference or GARD, as follows:
Definitions. Take any finite set of demand data: x! chosen at (p',Y"), z* chosen
at @?,Y?), ..., and z chosen at (@,Y). If p gt < YY, the data are said to
reveal that z7 is weakly preferred to z*, written 7 = *. And the data reveal
that of is strictly preferred to z*, written of > o*, if p? -o* <Y7. The data
are said to satisfy GARP if, for preferences (weak or strong) that the data reveal,
you cannot construct a cycle g = z =... = z, where one or more of the
rsisa >.
Proposition 2.12. A finite set of demand data satisfies GARP if and only if these
data are consistent with maximization of locally insatiable preferences.
The argument just sketched shows that satisfaction of GARY is necessary
for there to be underlying well-behaved preferences. Sufficiency of GARP
is harder to show and is perhaps surprising, but nonetheless, for a finite
collection of demand data, if GARP is satisfied, you cannot reject the model
of the consumer we have posed.
This is all quite abstract, so let's have an example. Suppose our con-
sumer lives in a three-commodity world.
3
When prices are (10,10,10) and income is 300, the consumer chooses the
consumption bundle (10,10, 10).
When prices are (10,1,2) and income is 130, the consumer chooses the
consumption bundle (9,25,7.5).
When prices are (1,1,10) and income is 110, the consumer chooses the
consumption bundle (15,5,9).
 If you are so minded, try a proof. Can you show that these preferences can be assumed
to be continuous? Can you show that these preferences can be assumed to be convex? That
is, are more testable restrictions generated from the assumptions that preferences are contin-
uous and/or convex? What about strict convexity? If you try this, compare whatever you
get with problem 4.
44 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
Bundles
(10,10,100 (9,257.5) (1559)
 (10,10,10 300 415 290
S$ 12 | 130 130 173
= (1,1,10) 120 109 110
Table 2.1. Cost of three bundles at three sets of prices.
From these data, we calculate the cost of each bundle that is selected
at each of the three sets of prices. This is done for you in table 2.1. In
each case, the bundle selected exhausts the income of the consumer; this
is as it should be, given local insatiability. The important things to note
are:
When (10,10,10) was chosen (at prices (10,10,10) and income 300), the
bundle (15,5,9) could have been purchased with some money left over.
Apparently, this consumer strictly prefers (10, 10,10) to (15,5,9).
At the second set of prices (10, 1,2), since (10,10, 10) and (9,25,7.5) both
cost 130 and (9,25,7.5) was selected, the latter must be at least as good as
(10,10,10).
And at the third set of prices (1,1,10), the bundle (9,25,7.5) costs 109, 
while (15,5,9) costs 110. And we are told that with income 110, the con-
sumer chose (15,5,9). Hence (15,5,9) (9,25,7.5).
Oops! The data tell us that (10,10,10) >= (15,5,9) > (9,25,7.5) =
(10,10,10). Hence these data are inconsistent with consumer behavior
based on the standard preference-maximization model. On the other hand,
suppose the third piece of data that we have wasn't as above, but was
instead:
At prices (1,2,10) and income 115, the bundle selected is (15,5, 9).
Then we would come to no negative conclusions. At the first set of prices
and income, the bundles (10,10,10) and (15,5,9) are affordable, and as
the first bundle is selected, it is revealed (strictly) preferred to the second.
At the second set of prices and income level, (10,10,10) and (9,25,7.5)
are affordable and the second is selected, so it is revealed to be (weakly)
preferred to the first. This is just as before. But now, at the third set of
prices and income level, only (15, 5,9) (of the three bundles) is affordable.
Knowing that it is selected tells us nothing about how it ranks compared
2.2. Marshallian demand without derivatives 45
to the other two; it could well come at the bottom of the heap. And we
know from the result claimed above, because we observe no violations of
GARP in these data, the data can indeed be reconciled with a preference
ranking of the usual sort on all bundles.
The indirect utility function
We write v(p,Y) for the value of the problem (CP). That is,
v(p,Y) = max{U(z) ip z <Y and z > 0}.
In words, the function v, which is called the indirect utility function, says
how much utility the consumer receives at his optimal choice(s) at prices
p and income Y. Of course the definition of does not depend on (CP)
having a unique solution. Note also that the units of v depend on the
specific numerical representation U that is used. If we rescale U, say
by replacing U with V() = f(U()), then we transform v by the same
rescaling function f. Put another way, we can never observe v, since its
range is something entirely arbitrary and intangible.
Proposition 2.13. Assume that U is a continuous function that represents
locally insatiable preferences. The indirect utility function v is
(a) homogeneous of degree zero in p and Y';
(b) continuous in p and Y (for p>0 and Y > 0);
(c) strictly increasing in Y and nonincreasing in p; and
(d) quasi-convex in (p,Y).
Parts of the proof. Part (a) should be obvious. The technique of proof used
for part (b) reappears frequently in microeconomic theory; so if you know
enough of the required mathematics, pay close attention. We take two steps:
Step 1. Suppose that (p,Y) is a sequence with (bounded) limit (p,Y) such
that p > 0. Let z be a solution of (CP) at (,Y) so that v(p, Y) = U(z),
and let n be a subsequence along which lim, U(z") = limsup, v(p",Y).
Since p > 0, one can show that (for large enough =') the union of the budget
sets defined by the ed ,Y) and (p,Y) is bounded. Thus the sequence
lives in a compact space and has some limit point call it =. Since
oe cg < yr , by continuity we know that p-z < Y. Thus v(p,Y) > U(z) =
lim, U@) = =limsup_v(p",Y).
Step 2. Now let z represent a solution of (CP) for (p,Y), so that vip, Y) =
Uz). We know from local insatiability that p-z = Y. Let a be the scalar
46 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
Y/(z" - ). By continuity, lim, a = Y/(p- 2) = 1. Thus by continuity of
U, lim, Uaz) = U(z). At the same time, p az = Y", so that ac is
feasible for the problem defined by (",Y"). Hence v(E*, Y) > Ula"),
and liminf, v(p",Y) > lima Ulaz) = Ulz) = v(p,Y).
Now combining steps 1 and 2 we see that liminf, v(@,Y > v(p,Y) 2
lmsup, v(@", Y), which establishes that lim, v(p",) exists and is equal
to v(p,Y).
Part () is left for you to do. For the first half of part (c), remember that
our consumer is assumed to be locally insatiable. (What would it take to get
the conclusion that v is strictly decreasing in p?)
For part (d), fix some (@',Y?) for i = 1,2 and some a [0,1]. Let =
be a solution of (CP) at (ap + (1 a)p,a" + (1 a)Y?). We claim that = is
feasible for either (p',Y?) or for (p*,Y?) (or both); nonnegativity constraints
can't be a problem, and if pez >Y and pro > Y?, then (ap' + (1 
ap?) zx > a +1 a)Y?, which contradicts the assumption that = isa
solution at (ap' + (1 a)p,a" + (1 a)?). If z is feasible at (p',Y"), then
ap + (1 a)p*,aY + (1 A)? = Uz) < vip',Y?"), while if z is feasible at
(2%, Y?), we would conclude that ap +(1a)p?,aY + (1- a)Y?) < vip, Y?).
One or the other must be true, so that
viap' +1 ap, a + (1 YH < max{v(p", Y"),v(@", )},
-
which is quasi-convexity.
You may be asking: So what? But we will get something out of.
the definition of v and all this work in the next section and in the next
chapter.
The dual consumer problem and the expenditure function
To continue preparations for the next section (while continuing to
refrain from taking derivatives), we examine the following optimization
problem for given utility function U(.), prices p and real number wu:
minimize p-z subject to Uz) > u,z2>0. (DCP)
In words, we seek the minimum amount the consumer must spend at
prices p to get for himself utility level u. The appropriate picture is in
figure 2.4. The shaded area is the set of bundles x satisfying U(z) > u;
this is the set of points along and above the U(x) = v indifference curve.
Iso-expense lines are drawn in; these are lines of the form p-z = constant,
for various constants. Note that the closer these lines are to the origin, the
2.2. Marshallian demand without derivatives 47
LU) =u
indifference
curve
Good 1
Figure 2.4. The picture for the problem (DCP).
less the constant expense they represent. And the point marked z in the
figure is the solution of the problem (DCP). }
The problem (DCP) is parametrized by prices p and the utility level u
that is to be achieved. (It is also parametrized by the utility function U(@),
but we will hold that fixed throughout all our discussions.) As we vary p
and u, we get other solutions. We will write e(p,u) for the value of the
problem as a function of (p,u); that is, :
elp,w) =min{p-z:U) 2 v,z 2 0},
and we will call the function e the expenditure function.
In parallel with propositions 2.11 and 2.13, we have
Proposition 2.14. Suppose that p is strictly positive and u is a level of utility
that is achievable and greater or equal the utility of consuming the zero vector;
that is, uw = U(x) for some > 0, and uw > U0). Then,
(a) The problem (DCP) has a solution at (p,w). If = solves (DCP) for (p, wy), then
Uz) =u. If U represents convex preferences, the set of solutions to (DCP) is
convex. If U represents strictly convex preferences, (DCP) has a single solution
for each (p,u). If = solves (DCP) for (pu), then x is a solution of (DCP) for
(\p, uw), where \ is any strictly positive scalar.
(b) The expenditure function e(p,w) is homogeneous of degree one in p, or
 For reasons we will not explain in this book, this problem is called the dual consumer
problem (giving the mnemonic [DCPD, because it is dual to the problem (CP) in a precise
mathematical sense.
48 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
(Ap, w) = Xe(p, uw) for X > 0. The expenditure function is strictly increasing in
u and nonincreasing in p.
(c) The expenditure function is concave in p.
Proofs of parts (a) and (b) are left to you with a few remarks and hints.
Recall that we needed local insatiability to prove that Walras law held with
equality at any solution of (CP). But here we don't need local insatiability
to show that U(z) = at a solution =. (In fact, we dont need to assume
local insatiability in this proposition at all! But we do assume that U is
a continuous function.) So how does the argument go? Suppose that z
solves (DCP) for (p,u) with Uz) > u. If uw > U(0), our consumer is
spending something at x to achieve u. But then consider bundles of the
form oz for a bit less than one. These bundles cost proportionately less
than z and, by continuity of U, for a close enough to one they give more
utility than u (since U(z) > u). This would contradict the assumption that
z solves (DCP). And if u = U(0), the solution to (DCP) at (p,w) is clearly
z=0.7
Part (c) of the proposition is crucial to later events, so we give the proof
here. Let z solve (DCP) for (ap + (1 a)p/,), so that e(ap + (1 a)p, uw) =
(ap+(1-a)p)-=z. Since U(x) = u, the bundle z is always a feasible way to
achieve utility level u, although it may not be the cheapest way at prices
other than ap + (1 a)p. Accordingly,
elp,w) <p-z and ep, uw) <p'-z.
Combining these two inequalities gives
ae(p,w) + (1 a)e@,u) <ap-z+ (1 a)p' - x
=(ap+(1- a)p) z=elap+ (1 ap, u).
That does it.
Comparative statics
We are almost ready to start taking derivatives, but before doing so,
we take one further excursion into definitions and basic concepts.
A standard exercise in the theory of consumer demand is to ask how
demand responds to changes in various parameters such as prices and
P What would happen if u < U(0)?
2.2. Marshallian demand without derivatives 49
income. When (CP) has more than one solution this exercise is a bit hard
to interpret, so we assume for the balance of this subsection that (CP)
has a unique solution. We write z(p,Y) = (z:(p,Y),...,zx(,Y)) for
the solution; that is, z;(p,Y) is the amount of good j purchased by our
consumer when he faces prices p and has income Y" to spend.
We are interested in how z(p,Y) (and its constituent components)
change with changes in the various p; and in Y'.
(a) For example, how does z;(p,Y) change with changes in p;? If good
J becomes more expensive, we expect that less j will be demanded; in
fact, we expect this so much that a good for which this is true is called
a normal good. When the demand for good j rises with increases in the
price of good j, we say that good j is a Giffen good. We will return briefly
to normal and Giffen goods and this general subject of own price effects in
the next section (2.3).
(b) How does z;(p,Y) change with changes in p; for # j, holding fixed
the prices of other goods and income? This depends in the first place on
the relationship between goods and j. If good i, say, is popcorn and j
is popcorn poppers, a rise in the price of will probably cause the demand
for good j to fall. If good 4 is popcorn and j is peanuts, demand for j
will probably rise with a rise in the price of i. We will have a little to say
about this subject of cross-price effects in section 2.3, as well.
(c) How does z;(p,Y) change with changes in income Y? If we think of
two goods, 1 and 2, we get pictures like those in figure 2.5; the heavy curve
in each case shows how demand shifts with shifts in Y. These curves are
called income expansion paths or Engel curves. In most cases, we expect that
z; will rise with increasing income, but it is possible that demand for j
falls with increases in Y'; goods j such that z; falls as Y increases are
called inferior goods. An example might be potatoes, insofar as an increase
in income means the consumer can afford to substitute more expensive,
higher quality food such as meat for potatoes. Good 1 in figure 2.5(a)
is an example of an inferior good, at least for a range of . In case z;
increases with increasing Y', we become interested in whether T; increases
 A sufficient condition for this is that preferences are strictly convex; see proposition 2.11.
But strict convexity is unpalatable in some cases. For example, I have no use whatsoever for
hydrochloric acid. My preferences are completely unaffected by the amount of hydrochloric
acid in my consumption bundle. Hence my preferences are not strictly convex along the
dimension of hydrochloric acid. On the other hand, this doesnt affect the uniqueness of a
solution to (CP) for me, since at positive prices for hydrochloric acid I will buy no hydrochlo-
ric acid at all. On this point, see problem 10.
50 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
Good 2 Good 2 Good 2
Good 1 Good 1 Good 1
(a) (2) (c)
Figure 2.5. Various income expansion paths or Engel curves.
In (a), good 1 is an inferior good over a range of . In (b), good 1
is a luxury good and good 2 is a necessary good. In (c), demand is
homothetic.
more or less proportionately with Y. When z;(p,Y)/Y increases (a higher
fraction of income is spent on j with increases in Y), is called a lux-
ury good; when z;(p,Y)/Y decreases with increases in Y, j is called
a necessary good. In figure 2.5(b), good 1 is a luxury good and good 2
is a necessary good. When z;(p,Y)/Y doesnt change with changes in
Y for all j, the consumers preferences are said to be homothetic, as in
figure 2.5(c). .
These are examples of comparative statics exercises of the simplest kind
 asking how consumer behavior changes with changes in underlying
parameters. The term statics is used because it is assumed that the con-
sumer fully adjusts to the changes in the parameters. Indeed, we might
better phrase the question: What differences would be observed if we ob-
served two different but identical consumers placed in two different cir-
cumstances? More difficult comparative statics exercises, built from these
simple exercises, ask how consumer behavior shifts with shifts in other
parameters of the model. How does demand for cigarettes change if
we impose an excise tax on cigarettes? How does demand for cigarettes
change if we impose an income tax on consumers?
We should stress that each of the exercises involves shifts in demand
as one parameter changes, the others being held fixed. If we assumed
that the demand function z(p,Y) were differentiable, we would be asking
questions about the partial derivatives of z. In a moment we will assume
that z(p,Y) is differentiable, and so when we return to these questions,
they will be phrased in terms of partial derivatives. You may find it helpful
to recast the terms just given in the language of partial derivatives before
reading ahead.
9.3. Marshallian demand with derivatives 51
2.3. Marshallian demand with derivatives
The first-order conditions for (CP)
How do we solve the problem (CP)? The standard approach is to
assume that the utility function U is differentiable; form a Lagrangian; and
look at the combined first-order conditions and complementary slackness
conditions. (Consult appendix 1 immediately if you have no idea what
this means, or if you need a quick review.) Letting X be the multiplier on
the budget constraint p-z <Y and pj (for j =1,..., K) the multiplier on
the constraint z; > 0, the Lagrangian is
K K
Uz)+A{Y > pz; + > HiT
=1 3=1
and the first-order conditions read
The multipliers are all constrained to be nonnegative and, of course, the
solution must obey the original constraints p-% < Y and z > 0. The
complementary slackness conditions must also hold:
AY p-2)=0 and pz;=0forj=1...,K
We can rewrite this as follows: Since the yu; are nonnegative, these
multipliers can be eliminated and the first-order condition for z; and the
complementary slackness condition for g; can be combined succinctly as
= < Ap;, with equality if z; > 0.
7
(Be absolutely certain that you see why this is equivalent to the combined
first-order condition with the p; included and the complementary slack-
ness condition on pj.) Assuming prices are all strictly positive (which we
do throughout this chapter), we can rewrite again as
190 < ), with equality if z; > 0.
pj Oz;
52 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
Or in words, for goods that are consumed in positive levels, the ratios of
the marginal utility of the goods to their respective prices must be equal,
and these ratios are greater than the corresponding ratios for goods that
are not consumed.
If we know that A > 0, we can rewrite in yet another form that you
may recall from intermediate micro or even from principles courses. For
two goods 7 and j that are consumed in positive amounts at the optimum,
jou _
Ox; 0x; =P Ps.
Or, in words, the ratio of marginal utilities equals the ratio of prices. You
may recall this stated as the marginal rate of substitution of good 4 for good j
(along an indifference curve) equals the ratio of their prices. In fact, even if A = 0
we have this relationship, as long as we recognize that when X = 0, the
first-order conditions read that dU /8z; = 0 for goods that are consumed
in positive amounts, and we interpret 0/0 as being any number we wish.
Butis A > 07 Because we will assume that it is throughout the remainder
of this section, some justification should be given. Recall that the indirect
utility function v(p,) gives the value of the problem (CP) as a function of
the parameters p and Y. If you have a good background in constrained
optimization, you will note immediately that X is 9v/8Y. (Assume that
v is differentiable for the time being; we'll discuss this later) Proposition .
2.13 shows that is strictly increasing in ', assuming local insatiability, so
things look good. But there are strictly increasing, differentiable functions
whose derivatives are zero at isolated points. And so it is with gv /8Y and
A; depending on the representation U of preferences that we use, we can
produce examples where the multiplier is sometimes zero. This is true even
if U represents convex preferences, as long as we only insist on U being
quasi-concave; there are strictly increasing and quasi-concave functions whose
derivatives go to zero at points. Now if U is a concave function, we are
certainly in business. Then we can show that v(p,Y) is concave in Y, and
a strictly increasing, concave function can never have zero derivative. But
assuming concavity of U is hard to do on first principles (until next chapter).
Conclusions: In any application where you specify a concave function U,
you can freely assume and will always find that the multiplier A is strictly
positive. But if you assume that U is quasi-concave based on an assumption
of even strictly increasing and strictly convex preferences, it takes a little more
to be sure that the multiplier is strictly positive.
We have all this from writing down the first-order and complementary
slackness conditions. But what is their standing in relation to the problem
(CP)? If you find a solution to (CP), must these conditions hold (for some
multipliers)? If you find a solution to the first-order conditions and the
2.3. Marshallian demand with derivatives 53
complementary slackness conditions (that satisfies the sign constraints on
the multipliers and the various feasibility constraints on the variables z;),
will it be a solution to (CP)? Those readers who have studied constrained
optimization will know that for this problem, if U is concave, these conditions
are necessary and sufficient for a solution. Those readers who have not studied
constrained optimization now have a bit more incentive to do so.
But what is the status of an assumption that U is concave? And all this
is predicated on the assumption that U is differentiable; can that assumption
be grounded in some assumption on preferences >? I do not know of any
natural conditions on > that would guarantee that > admits a differentiable
representation. Note well the way this was put. We have no hope whatso-
ever that every representation of a given > will be differentiable, since we
already saw that some representations of > will not be continuous. It is the
same, as we've noted, for concavity. Concavity of U will not necessarily be
preserved by monotonic transformations, so we can't say anything that will
make every representation of > concave. As we saw at the end of section
2.1, the natural notion of convexity of will only guarantee that > has
a quasi-concave representation. And if you are able to do problem 7, you
will discover that otherwise well-behaved convex preferences may admit no
concave representations at all. So, granting differentiability, we can still ask
for the status of the first-order and complementary slackness conditions for a
quasi-concave U. These are necessary, but not quite sufficient for optimality;
those of you who have studied constrained optimization now have an incen-
tive to go back and review those chapters at the end of your old textbook
about quasi-concavity (or -convexity).
Assumptions galore
Now we make some serious assumptions. We henceforth assume that
both (CP) and (DCP) have unique solutions for every (p,Y) and (pw).
As noted, strict convexity of preferences suffices for this but is not an
innocuous assumption. We write z(p,Y) for the solution of (CP) as a
function of (p,Y) and A(p,u) for the solution of (DCP) as a function of
(p, uw). The function z(p,Y) is called the Marshallian demand function, and
h(p,w) is called the Hicksian demand function.
We further assume that Marshallian demand, Hicksian demand, the
indirect utility function and the expenditure function are all continuously
differentiable functions of all their arguments.
What justification can there be for these assumptions? If you followed
the proof of proposition 2.13(b) (continuity of the indirect utility function),
you should be able to use that technique with the assumptions that (CP)
and (DCP) have unique solutions to show that the four functions are all
continuous. But differentiability is quite a bit more. We do not provide
justification here. In more advanced treatments of the subject, you will find
54 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
that, in essence, one requires that U is twice-continuously differentiable
(and well behaved along axes.) And as we had no reason to suppose
from first principles concerning > that U is differentiable, we have even
Jess reason to assume that it is twice differentiable. You can also ask how
much of what follows can be extended to cases where our assumptions of
differentiability are not met. All these matters we simply sweep under the
rug, and they constitute one of the principal reasons that the treatment of
demand theory here is just a sketch.
' Hicksian demand and the expenditure function
Proposition 2.15. The expenditure function and the Hicksian demand function
are related as follows:
Delp, uw)
opi
hi(p, u) =
Proof. We give a very slick graphical proof of this result first. Fix the
utility argument * and all the prices pj except for pi, and graph the
function
Di e((p7,. *7y 1 Dis Phas see \ Pic) ub).
We are assuming that this function is differentiable.? Now at the value
p; =p}, what is its derivative? Since we know that we can get utility *
from the bundle h(p*,v*), we know that
eB}, +r Pls Pir Phas DRO, 0%) < Piha, uw) +) 03h").
i
The function on the right-hand side, therefore, is everywhere above the
function e(p,u*), and it touches at p*, so it must be tangent as shown in
figure 2.6. Butitisa linear function of p;, and its slope (in the p; direction)
is h;(p*,u"). Done.
2 In fact, we know from proposition 2.14 that this is a concave function, which almost,
but not quite, gives differentiability; see the fn. following.
7 (1) What if we didnt assume that e(p,u) is differentiable? It is still concave in p;, 50 we
would get a similar picture, except that we might find that e has a kink at p} . We would then
get a statement about how h;(p*,u*) lies between the right- and left-hand partial derivatives
of e, where their existence is guaranteed by concavity. (2) Suppose that we assume that e
is differentiable, but we dont assume directly that (DCP) has a unique solution. What does
the proposition tell us?
2.3. Marshallian demand with derivatives 55
ply (p*, u*) + Zpihy (pt, u*)
eps ws Phys Py Plats = PROT)
Expenditure
7 Price of good i
Figure 2.6. Connecting Hicksian demand and the expenditure function.
This proof is so slick that you may be unable to replicate it in other
situations. So we will give a more dreary algebraic proof, which illustrates
a technique that is much used in this branch of microeconomics. As a first
step, differentiate both sides of the accounting identity e(p, uw) = p-h(p, u) with
respect to pi. This gives
k
Oe _ Oh;
op: = hi(p,u) +) pj Dp
=
In words, if we raise the price of good , then the resulting change in ex-
penditure needed to reach utility level comes from two terms. First, the
amount k; of good i that we were buying before is more expensive; expen-
diture rises at precisely the rate hi(p,u). And, second, we'll probably buy
less i and more or less of other things; the sum term above gives the cost
of changes in the optimal bundle to buy. The result we are supposed to be
heading for says that the summation term is identically zero.
To see why this is, recall that h(p,v) is the solution of (DCP), or
3
minp-z subjectto Ulz) > wu.
If we make 7 the Lagrange multiplier on the constraint, the first-order con-
dition (for z;) reads
=p
pi=Ng
evaluated, of course, at the optimum, which is h(p,u). (We ignore nonneg-
ativity constraints on z here; the diligent reader may wish to replicate our
argument with that additional complication.) This has a partial of U with
respect to z;, whereas we are interested in getting rid of a sum involving
56 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
partials of h with respect to p;; so we aren't quite there yet. But now a little
sleight of hand comes into play. First write the accounting identity
Uh(p, uw) = u.
Implicitly partially differentiate both sides with respect to p;, and you get
$20
o Oz; 8p;
We can push our first-order conditions into this, and get
5 on
am) pig? =.
j=
This is just what we want, as long as the Lagrange multiplier 7 isn't zero or
infinite. There are ways to ensure this. See the discussion above concerning
the multiplier on the budget constraint in (CP).
Roughly put, our technique here is to substitute into one equation a
first-order condition for something that is optimal in a constrained optimiza-
tion problem. .This technique is closely connected to the picture we drew: .
In essence, we are trading on the fact that, at the optimum, when the price
of p; changes, we have the same marginal Impact on expenditure by ab-
sorbing all the change into good i as we would by fully reoptimizing. If
we fully reoptimized our consumption bundle, we would do better than by
absorbing the change into good + alone; this is why the expenditure function
lies everywhere below the [ine in figure 2.6. But because, at a solution of
(DCP), the ratios of marginal utilities to prices of the goods are equal, the
difference on the margin between fully reoptimizing and using good 7 alone
Is of second order (assuming differentiability of the expenditure function and
ignoring nonnegativity constraints, which are left for you to handle). This
technique is formalized in general in the envelope theorem, so-called because
the expenditure function is the lower envelope of linear functions like the
one we have drawn. If you have not already studied the envelope theorem
in general, you may wish to do so (elsewhere).
Roys identity
Taking the partial derivative of the expenditure function with respect
to the ith price gave us Hicksian demand for the ith good. Can we get
anything nice by taking partial derivatives of the indirect utility function?
An affirmative answer is given by Roy's identity.
ree ing + eg +
greene tees
+ gi re gn gn + oom
.-
2.3. Marshallian demand with derivatives 57
Proposition 2.16. Marshallian demand and the indirect utility function are
related as follows:
Voip, Y) = 5 &.
Proof. Suppose that z* = z{p,Y). Let u* = U(z*). Then we claim that
z* = h(p,u*), and Y = e(p,u*). (This step is left to you. Remember
that we are assuming that [CP] and. [DCP] have unique solutions.) Thus
u* = v(p, ep, u*)) for fixed v* and all p. Differentiate this with respect to
p; and you get
Ov Ov Oe
0= op tov amr
Use proposition 2.15 to replace de/dp; with hip, u*) = =z} = z;(p,Y) and
rearrange terms. )
Roys identity may seem a bit mysterious, but it has a fairly intuitive
explanation which requires that you know that 9v/8Y is the multiplier Ain
(CP). Assuming z;(p,Y) > 0, the first-order condition for z; in (CP) can be
written
19U
 = A.
pi Oy
Roys identity can be written
ov Bu
rp ER m= Td,
dp; OY
so substituting A for 6v/8Y and combining, we get
Wp TOU
ap: = pi Boi
(&)
(What happens if z; = 0?) What does this mean? Imagine that the price
of good decreases by a penny. How much extra utility can our consumer
obtain? The consumer with income Y to spend, if he buys the bundle he
was buying before, has x; pennies left over because good i is cheaper. He
can use this extra income naively, spending all of it on good i. If he does
this, he can buy (approximately) one permy times x;/p; more of good i,
which raises his utility by one penny times (z;/p:)(0U/8z;). Now this is
a naive response to a decrease in the price of good i; our consumer will
probably do some further substituting among the various goods. But, what
or
58 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
Roys identity shows, these substitutions will not have a first-order effect on
the-corgiimer's utility; the main effect is captured by naively spending his
windfall entirely..on-goodi(You should complement this discussion by
obtaiing (#) in two related ways: drawing a picture like figure 2.6 and by
constructing an argument where some first-order condition is used as in the
previous subsection.)
The Slutsky equation: Connecting Marshallian
and Hicksian demand
What happens to Marshallian demand for commodity j starting at
prices p and income Y" if the price of commodity 7 rises? Two things: First,
in real terms the consumer is a bit poorer; the general price index has
risen. Roughly, since the consumer was buying z:(p,Y) of good 4, his real
income falls at approximately the rate z;(p,Y) (a penny rise in the price
of i means x;(p,Y) pennies less to spend). This will cause our consumer
to change his demand for j, at a rate (roughly) (8z;/8Y)z:(p,Y). That
is, we multiply the rate of change in consumption of j per unit change in
income times the rate of change in real income that we just computed.
Second, good i no longer looks so attractive its relative price has
risen. So the consumer will (probably) consume less of i. And, depending
on the relationship between i and j, this may cause the consumer to take
more of j or less. In any event, there is a cross-substitution effect on
the consumption of j. We want to isolate this substitution effect from the
change in consumption of j due to the change in real income, so we look
for some sort of compensated demand function change the price of
good 4, compensate the consumer so that his real income stays the same,
and see how the change in p; affects the compensated demand for j.
There are two obvious ways to compensate our consumer. We could
raise Y enough so that the consumer could afford the bundle that he
was previously buying Slutsky compensation. Or we could give the
consumer sufficient income so that, after he optimizes, he is as well off
in terms of his preferences us before Hicks compensation. If you took
Ss
intermediate micro, or even a good principles Course, you probably will
remember something like this.
Our friend the Hicksian demand function is based on Hicksian com-
pensation. Actually making Hicksian compensation is not going to be pos-
sible because it depends on the unobservable utility function; it is meant
solely as a theoretical construct. Despite this, since we have this demand
function defined, let's adopt Hicksian compensation. The Hicks compen-
sated substitution term is simply 8h;/8p;. (Slutsky compensation makes
a nice homework problem.)
2.3. Marshallian demand with derivatives 59
So we expect that the change in Marshallian demand of j as p:
changes is the sum of the income effect and the compensated substitu-
tion effect. Let us record our expectations in the form of a proposition.
Proposition 2.17. Marshallian demand and Hicksian demand are related as
follows:
dz; Oh; Oz; .
op Op OY 
where we evaluate, for given prices p and income level Y, the Marshallian
demand at those prices and that income, and, for the Hicksian demand function,
the utility level achieved at that Marshallian demand point.
Expecting that this equation holds and proving it are two different
things. Our verbal argument above is loose in two places: We dont know
that Hicksian compensation is correct, and our income adjustment z; is
not quite correct because of the substitution out of z;. But a formal proof
is relatively painless. Write the identity =; (p, elp, w) = hp, uw) and differ-
entiate both sides with respect to p;. We get
Ow; , Ou; Be _ OM;
Op: THY op Opi
Since 9e/8p; is hilp,u) = z:(p, ep, w)), this reads
ox ] ox 5
5p: | OY
_ hy
z;(p, e(p, i) = op; 3
which, once we make right substitutions for dummy variables, is equation
(x). Equation (x) is known as the Slutsky equation.
About differentiable concave functions
(You may be wondering where all this is headed. We are certainly
taking lots of derivatives, and it isnt at all clear to what end we are doing
so. Some results are coming, but we need a bit more setting-up to get
them. Please be patient.)
To motivate what comes next, think of a twice-continuously differ-
entiable concave function of one variable. A concave function (of one
variable) is a function whose derivative is nonincreasing; hence it is a
function whose second derivative is nonpositive.
60 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
For concave functions of several variables this generalizes as follows:
For a given twice-continuously differentiable function f : RX R and
any point z RX, let H(z) be K x K matrix whose (3, j)th element is the
term
8%f
02,02; 5
That is, H(z) is the matrix of mixed second partials of f, evaluated at 2.
This matrix is called the Hessian matrix of f. Note that a Hessian matrix
is automatically symmetric; the mixed second partial of f with respect to
#; and z; is the same as the second partial of f with respect to z; and z;.
Definition. A k x k matrix H is negative semi-definite if for all RX,
(H(<0.
(By (H(, we mean (TH(, where the superscript T' denotes transpose,
and we think of as a K x 1 column vector.)
Corollary of the definition. If H is a negative semi-definite K x K matrix,
then Hy; <0 fori=1,...,K.
The corollary follows immediately from the definition, if we take for {a
vector with 1 in the 4th position and 0 in all others.
Mathematical fact. A twice-continuously differentiable function f: RX R
is concave if and only if its Hessian matrix (evaluated at each point in the domain
of f) is negative semi-definite.
The main result, with applications to comparative statics
We can now connect all the pieces and obtain some results. We state
the conclusion first, and then give the chain of logic that yields it.
Proposition 2.18. If z(p,Y) is a Marshallian demand function, then the K x K
matrix whose ij th term is
O0z:(p,Y) 8z:(p,Y)
rss od emt 7]? +
9p ay BY,
which is called the matrix of substitution terms, is symmetric and negative
semi-definite.
 This is true as well if f is defined on an open domain within RX, which in fact is how
we will use it.
2.3. Marshallign demand with derivatives 61
This conclusion is reached as follows. By the Slutsky equation, the 4, jth
term of our matrix is dh;(p, u)/dp;, evaluated at (p, U(z(p,Y))). This, ac-
cording to proposition 2.15, is 8%e/(0p;:0p;). So the matrix of substitution
terms is the Hessian matrix of the expenditure function. The expenditure
function is concave in p by proposition 2.14(c). So the result follows from
properties of Hessian matrices of concave functions.
Of what use is this? We return to the comparative statics exercises
sketched at the end of the last section. Good j is inferior if 8z;/8Y < 0;
it is a necessary good if 0 < 8z;/8Y < z;/Y; and it is a luxury good if
z;/Y < 0x;/0Y. It is a normal good if 8x;/8p; < 0, and it is a Giffen
good if dz; /0p; > 0.
Consider the possibility of a Giffen good. By the Slutsky equation,
0x; _ oh; bz;
_ er ge
Op; - Op; oY
We know by the corollary from the previous subsection and proposition
2.18 that 0h;/0p; < 0; that is, the own-price substitution term is always
nonpositive. So the only way that a good could be a Giffen good is if it
is an inferior good. It has to be sufficiently inferior so that the income
effect term (0z;/8Y)z; overcomes the substitution term 8h;/dp;. And,
roughly speaking, an inferior good stands a better chance of being a Giffen
good if it looms larger in the consumers consumption bundle; note that
0x;/8Y is multiplied by z;. So if one is ever to find a Giffen good (and it
isn't clear that one has ever been identified) the place to look is at inferior
goods that make up a large part of the consumers consumption bundle.
Or consider cross-price effects, that is, things like 8z;/8p;. In informal
economics, the term substitutes is used to describe pairs of goods where an
increase in the price of one good causes an increase in the demand of the
second, and complements is used when an increase in the price of one good
causes a decrease in the demand of the other. If we attempt to formalize
this in terms of the signs of 0z;/8p;, we run into the unhappy possibility
that dz;/0p; < 0 and, at the same time, 8z;/dp; > 0. The symmetry of
the substitution terms precludes this unhappy possibility when, instead,
we define substitute and complement pairs of goods in terms of the sign
of 0h;/0p;. And so it has become common to use this definition, thereby
admitting the possibility that, say, 9z;/0p; < 0 even when i and j are
formally substitutes, because the income effect term might outweigh the
substitution term.
In general, the Slutsky equation allows us to view comparative statics
in prices as the sum of an income effect and a substitution effect, where the
62 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
latter is given by the partial derivatives (in prices) of Hicksian demand.
And our proposition gives us some information about the nature of these
substitution effects.
Integrability
The big payoff to all our labors comes when we ask the question:
Given a function z(p,Y) that is claimed to be a Marshallian demand func-
tion, is some locally insatiable, preference-maximizing consumer behind it?
Why would anyone ever ask such a question? In applied (economet-
ric) work, it is sometimes useful to have parametric functional specifica-
tions for a consumer's demand function. Now we could write down nice
closed form parametrizations for the utility function U, and then solve
(CP) to derive Marshallian demand. But for most analytically tractable
specifications of U, the Marshallian demand function that results is a mess.
Tt is often more convenient to specify a parametric form for Marshallian de-
mand directly, being sure that this parametrization is analytically tractable.
But then, to be sure that ones parametrization plays by the rules of mi-
croeconomic theory, one would want to know that the question asked in
the previous paragraph is answered affirmatively.
We assume that we have a functional specification of an entire Mar-
shallian demand function which is differentiable. From easy first princi-
ples, we know that Marshallian demand should be homogeneous of degree
zero and should obey Walras law with equality. And we now also know
that the matrix of substitution terms (which are functions of Marshallian
demand) must be symmetric and negative semi-definite. Subject to some
technical caveats, these things are sufficient as well: Assuming that Mar-
shallian demand obeys Walras law with equality and that it is homoge-
neous of degree zero, if the matrix of substitution terms is symmetric and
negative semi-definite, then it can be integrated up to get the indirect
utility function, from which a representative of the direct utility function
can be constructed. We won't even attempt to sketch the proof here; se-
rious students will wish to consult a standard text on demand theory to
see how its done.
2.4. Aggregate demand
One further subject will come into play in later developments in this
book and should be mentioned aggregate consumer demand.
Until now, we have been considering demand by a single consumer.
But in much of this book, we will be interested instead in demand by a
host of consumers, which, at prices p, will be the sum of their individual
ge
2.5. Bibliographic notes 63
demands given their individual incomes. Our interest will be strong es-
pecially because it is hard (not impossible) to obtain data on the demand
by a single consumer.
Of course, total demand will shift about as a function of how individ-
ual incomes are distributed, even holding total (societal) income fixed. 50
it makes no sense to speak of aggregate demand as a function of prices
and social income.
Even with this caveat, results analogous to the Slutsky restrictions
(proposition 2.18) or GARP do not necessarily hold for aggregate demand.
Think of GARP for a moment. Imagine a two-person, two-commodity
economy in which we fix each persons income at 1,000. At prices (10,10),
we might have one person choose (25,75) and the second choose (75,25).
Hence aggregate demand is (100, 100). Suppose that at prices (15, 5), the
first chooses (40,80) and the second (64, 8). Neither individual violates
GARP; the first can't afford (40,80) at prices (10, 10), so we imagine that
he has to settle for (25,75) at those prices. And the second cant purchase
(75,25) at the prices (15,5), so we imagine that she must settle for the
worse bundle (64,8) at the second set of prices.
But aggregate demand is (100,100) in the first case, which is affordable
at both sets of prices, and (104,88) in the second case, which is both
affordable at both sets of prices and inside the social budget set at the
prices where it isnt chosen. Society doesnt obey GARE, even though both
individuals do.
So what can we say about aggregate demand, based on the hypoth-
esis that individuals are preference/utility maximizers? Unless we are
willing to make strong assumptions about the distribution of preferences
or income throughout the economy (everyone has the same homothetic
preferences, for example), there is little we can say. Aggregate demand
will be homogeneous of degree zero in prices and (everyone's) income.
And if all consumers are locally insatiable, Walras law will hold with
equality for the entire economy. But beyond that, almost anything is pos-
sible for aggregate demand. In the advanced literature of demand theory,
this result is stated and proved formally.
2.5. Bibliographic notes
The material in section 2.1, on preferences, choice, and numerical rep-
resentations, belongs to the subject of abstract choice theory. For a fairly
complete treatment of this subject, see Fishburn (1970). Less complete (and,
in particular, lacking the proof that a continuous preference relation admits
64 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
a continuous numerical representation) but perhaps a bit more readable is
Kreps (1988).
We mentioned in section 2.1 problems with the standard models of
choice concerning framing. If you are interested, a good place to begin
is the brief introductory article by Kahneman and Tversky (1984). For
a broader treatment and some applications, see the Journal of Business
symposium issue of 1987. We also mentioned time of day problems;
this will be further discussed in chapter 4, and references will be given
there.
As for standard references in demand theory, Deaton and Muellbauer
(1980) and Varian (1984) are good sources for many of the details and
topics omitted here. In particular, both cover functional separability of
preferences, which is very important to econometric applications. Katzner
(1970) is a good source for seeing how to think about differentiability and
other mathematical niceties.
References
Deaton, A., and J. Muellbauer. 1980. Economics and Consumer Behavior.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Debreu, G. 1954. Representation of a Preference Ordering by a Numerical
Function. In Decision Processes, R. Thrall, C. Coombs, and R. Davis,
eds. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Fishburn, P. [1970] 1979. Utility Theory for Decision Making. New York:
John Wiley and Sons. Reprint. Huntington, N.Y.: R. E. Krieger Pub-
lishing.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky. 1979. Prospect Theory: An Analysis of
Decision Under Risk. Econometrica 47:263-91.
1984. Choices, Values, and Frames. American Psychologist
39:341-50.
Kannai, Y. 1977. Concavifiability and Constructions of Concave Utility
Functions. Journal of Mathematical Economics 4:1-56.
Katzner, D. 1970. Static Demand Theory. New York: Macmillan.
Kreps, D. 1988. Notes on the Theory of Choice. Boulder, Colo.: Westview
Press.
Varian, H. 1984. Microeconomic Analysis. 2d edition. New York: W. W.
Norton.
TT
PTT
2.6. Problems 65
2.6. Problems
81. Let > be a binary relation on a set X, and define > as in section
2.1; x = y if it is not the case that y > =. Show that >= is asymmetric
if and only if = is complete. Show that > is negatively transitive if and
only if > is transitive. (Hint: For the second part, it may help to know
that the statements A implies B and not B implies not A are logical
equivalents. The latter is called the contrapositive of the former. We gave
negative transitivity in the form if z > y, then for any z, either = > z or
z > y. What is the contrapositive of this if-then? Now do you see why it
is called negative transitivity?)
a2. Show that if > is asymmetric and negatively transitive, then ~ defined
as in the text is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive. Then for each z X ,
recall that Indiff(z) = {y X : y ~ z}. Show that the sets Indiff(z),
ranging over x X, partition the set X. That is, show that each z X is
in at least one Indiff(y) and that for any pair and y, either Indiff(z) =
Indiff(y) or Indiff(z) Nn Indiff(y) = 0.
= 3. Prove proposition 2.3. (Hint: Use proposition 2.1.)
u 4. (a) Prove proposition 2.4.
A problem with proposition 2.4 is that it assumes that we have the entire
function c. If we are trying to test the basic preference-based choice model
on observed data, we will have less data than all of in two respects. First,
for sets A C X where (4) contains more than one element, we are apt to
observe only one of the elements. And we will not see c(4) for all subsets
AC X, but only for some of the subsets of X.
(b) Show that the first of these problems is virtually unresolvable. Assume
that when we see A chosen from A, this doesnt preclude the pos-
sibility that one or more y A with y # z is just as good as z. Prove
that in this case, no data that we see ever contradict the preference-based
choice model of section 2.1. (Hint: This is a trick question. If you see the
trick, it takes about two lines.)
By virtue of (b), we either will need to assume that we see all of c(4) for
those subsets A where we observe choice, or we otherwise need something
like local insatiability to tell us when something not chosen is revealed
strictly worse than what is chosen.
() Suppose that, for some (but not all) subsets A C X, we observe c(4).
Show that these partial data about the function may satisfy Houthakkers
axiom and still be inconsistent with the standard preference-based choice
66 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
model. Formulate a condition on these data such that if the data satisfy
this condition, the data are not inconsistent with the standard model. If it
helps, you may assume that X is a finite set. (Hint: Proposition 2.12 may
help give you the right idea.)
a 5. Consider the following preferences: X =10,11 x [0,1], and (z1,22) >
(zx) if either z; > 2; or if 7, = =, and x, > z;. These are called lexico-
graphic preferences, because they work something like alphabetical order;
to rank any two objects, the first component (letter) of each is compared,
and if those first components agree, the second components are considered.
Show that this preference relation is asymmetric and negatively transitive
but does not have a numerical representation. (Flint: You should have no
problem with the first part of the statement, but the second is more dif-
ficult and requires that you know about countable and uncountable sets.
This example will appear in almost every book on choice theory, so if you
get badly stuck, you can look it up.)
u 6. Prove proposition 2.9.
a7. Part (a) is not too hard if you know the required mathematics. Part (b) is
extremely difficult; see Kannai 1977) if you can't do it and are insatiably curious.
(a) Consider the following twe utility functions defined on the positive
orthant in R?:
T1T2 if T1T2 < 4,
Uz, 3) =4 4 if4 < zm, <8, and
x5, if 8 < mim.
TT if mz, <4,
4 if ox =4 and Ty >
0 _ 152 1&5
{&1, z;) 5 if 3.2, = 4 and 1 < Ta, and
T1T7 +1 if T1T2 > 4,
Show that the corresponding two preferences are both convex. Show that
neither could be represented by a concave utility function. Are either or
both of the corresponding preferences semi-strictly convex? Are either or
both of the corresponding preferences continuous?
ep reer pn gre
ng egg Tg Te gy TT my TT TT
2.6. Problems 67
(b) There are preferences that are both semi-strictly convex and continuous
but that dont admit any concave numerical representations. One such
utility function is
2042) 3
Ula, 22) = { Cy 1 fz +z <1 and
1+ Z2 fr, +z, > 1
Prove that preferences given by this utility function cannot be represented
by any concave function. : 
 8. We assumed local insatiability throughout our discussion of Marshal
lian demand. One way to obtain this property indirectly is to assume
that (a) preferences are semi-strictly convex, (b) preferences are globally
insatiable for all z X there exists some y X with y ~ 3, and ()
the consumption set X is convex. Prove that (a), (b), and (c) imply that
preferences are locally insatiable.
a 9. Marshallian demand must be homogeneous of degree zero in prices
and income and, as long as preferences are locally insatiable, must satisfy
Walras law with equality. Proposition 2.12 maintains that a finite set of
demand data is consistent with maximization of locally insatiable prefer-
ences if and only if the data satisfy GARP. Hence satisfaction of GARP must
preclude demand that is not homogeneous of degree zero or that fails fo
satisfy Walras law with equality. If you like mathematical puzzles, work
out why this is. How is it that satisfaction of GARP rules these things out?
(Hint: In the definition of revealed preference preceding proposition 2.12,
what relation is presumed about the superscripts and j7)
m 10. Suppose that in a world with K goods, a locally insatiable con-
sumers preferences > have the following property. Her preferences are
strictly convex in the first j goods. That is, if #* and z? are two distinct
bundles of goods with o> 7? and gz} = of for all 4 =j+1L,i+2,...,K,
and if a (0,1), then az + az? > 72. And she has no use whatsoever for
the goods with index above j. If z* and &? are two bundles of goods with
zi =a? for i =1,2,...,7, then z' ~ 22. Show that if prices are strictly
positive, this consumer's solution to (CP) is unique.
m11. A particular consumer has Marshallian demand for two commodities
given as follows
2Y
pt 2p
Z1(p1, D2, Y) and zp, 02, Y) =
D1 + 2p
68 Chapter two: The theory of consumer choice and demand
This is valid for all price and income levels that are strictly positive. This
consumer assures me, by the way, that at prices (p;,p;) and income Y, his
Marshallian demand is strictly better for him than anything else he can
afford.
Does this consumer conform to the model of the consumer used in this
chapter? That is, is there some set of preferences, given by a utility func-
tion, such that maximization of that utility subject to the budget constraint
gives rise lo this demand function?
If the answer to the first part of the question is yes, how much about the
consumers utility function and/or preferences can you tell me? Can you
nail down the consumers utility function precisely? (If you answer this
yes, and if you've ever played the board game Monopoly, go directly
to jail) Can you nail down precisely the consumer's preferences over
consumption bundles? If not, how much can you say about the consumers
preferences?
m 12. The purpose of compensated demand functions is to try to isolate the
substitution and income effects on demand arising from a change in price.
Hicksian compensation holds the consumer to a given level of utility, so
that we have the Hicksian demand function, h(p,u), as a function of the
level of prices p and the level of utility to which we wish to hold the -
consumer. An alternative is Slutsky compensation, where we hold the
consumer to the income needed to purchase a given bundle of goods.
Formally, define s(p,z) as the demand of the consumer at prices p if the
consumer is given just enough income to purchase the bundle z at the
prices p.
We learned that the matrix of Hicksian substitution terms, whose (7, /)th
element is 9h;/8p;, is symmetric and negative semi-definite. Suppose we
looked at the matrix of Slutsky substitution terms, whose (Z, )th entry is
0s;/0p;. This matrix is also symmetric and negative semi-definite. Prove
this. (Hint: Express s(p,z) in terms of the Marshallian demand func-
tion. Then see what this tells you about the matrix of Slutsky substitution
terms.)
= 13. In a three-good world, a consumer has the Marshallian demands
given in table 2.2. Are these choices consistent with the usual model of a
locally insatiable, utility-maximizing consumer?
rene
os.
Gren Gn
ep re ee re Gm PS
-
Nt
2.6. Problems 69
prices income demand
Pi bz Ps y 1 Ts 3
1 1 1 20 10 5 5
3 1 1 20 3 5 6
1 2 2 25 13 3 3
1 1 2 20 15 3 1
Table 2.2 Four values of Marshallian demand.
= 14. Let X' denote the substitution matrix of some given Marshallian
demand system. That is,
Oz; (p, Y) oz i(p Y)
Dips = LL ITN
dp; + ay Tj (m, Y).
Prove that pX' = 0, where p is to be thought of as a 1 x K vctor, I as
a K X K matrix, and 0 as a 1x K vector. (Hint: Try showing first that
2p = 0, where p' is the transpose of p. Also, see Euler's law on Page 254.)
5 15. Construct a Marshallian demand function in which one good is a
Giffen good. Construct a demand function in which two goods i and j
are substitutes but 8z;/8p; < 0. Be sure that you have given a Marshallian
demand function!
[EE -
chapter three
Choice under uncertainty
Up to this point, we've been thinking of the bundles or objects among
which our consumer has been choosing as sure things so many bot-
tles of wine, so many cans of beer, so many shots of whisky. Many impor-
tant consumption decisions concern choices the consequences of which are
uncertain at the time the choice is made. For example, when you choose
to buy a car (new or used), you aren't sure what the quality is. When you
choose an education, you aren't sure about your abilities, later opportuni-
ties, the skills of your instructors, etc. Both in financial and real markets,
commodities of risky or uncertain character are traded all the time.
Nothing in the theory up to this point precludes such commodities. A
can of Olympia beer is a definite thing a share of GM is another and
we could simply proceed by taking as given the consumer's preferences
for bundles that contain so many cans of beer, so many shares of GM, and
so on. But because there is special structure to the commodity a share of GM
(or, rather, because we can model it as having a special structure), we are
able to (a) make further assumptions about the nature of our consumers
preferences for such things and, thereby, (b) get out something more con-
crete about the consumers demand for these kinds of commodities. This
is the basic plot of this chapter.
We begin in section 3.1 with the theory of von Neumann-Morgenstern
expected utility. In this theory, uncertain prospects are modeled as proba-
bility distributions over a given set of prizes. That is, the probabilities of
various prizes are given as part of the description of the object proba-
bilities are objective. Section 3.2 takes up the special case where the prizes
in section 3.1 are amounts of money; then one is able to say a bit more
about the nature of the utility function that represents preferences. In sec-
tion 3.3, we briefly discuss a few applications of this theory to the topic of
market demand. In section 3.4, we turn to a richer theory, where uncer-
tain prospects are functions from states of nature to prizes, and where
probabilities arise (if at all) subjectively, as part of the representation of
a consumers preferences. In section 3.5 we will explore theoretical and
empirical problems with these models. Finally, we will turn briefly fo a
72 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
normative (reinterpretation of this development. While our emphasis is
on the use of these models as descriptive models of choice, they are also
used as normative guides to aid consumers who must make choices. This
is sketched in section 3.6.
31. Von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility
Setup
To begin, think of a basic set of prizes X these are just like
our commodity bundles from before and then a larger set of prob-
ability distributions over the prizes. Let P denote the set of probabil-
ity distributions with prizes in X. For the time being, we will assume
that P consists only of probability distributions that have a finite number
of possible outcomes - such probability distributions are called simple.
Formally,
Definition. A simple probability distibution p on X is specified by
(a) a finite subset of X, called the support of p and denoted by supp(p), and
(b) for each = supp(p) a number p(@) > 0, with 3 coupon P@) = 1.
The set of simple probability distributions on X will be denoted by P.
To take an example, suppose that X-is the positive orthant in R?,
where x = (z;,x,) represents z; cans of beer and x, bottles of wine. A
typical simple probability distribution is one with support {ao, 2),4, 9},
p((10,2)) = 1/3, and p((4,4)) = 2/3. This represents a one-third chance of
receiving 10 cans of beer and 2 bottles of wine and a two-thirds chance of
getting 4 cans and 4 bottles. We will depict simple probability distributions
by chance nodes; the example just given is depicted in figure 3.1. Note that
the numbers on branches are the probabilities, with the prizes written out
at the end of the branches.
Some terminology goes along with this; members z of X will be
called prizes or outcomes. Members p of P will be called lotteries, gambles,
1/3 (102)
@/3) (44
Figure 3.1. A simple probability distribution.
3.1. Von NeumannMorgenstern expected utility 73
and probability distributions, all interchangeably.
And some notation follows: The lottery that gives the prize z with
probability one will be written ,.
How does this do as a model of the commodity space that we imagine
is out there? We can say three things here: First, if you thought of com-
modity bundles as so many cans of beer, so many shares of GM, etc., then
you might have thought in terms of a vector of probability distributions
instead of a probability distribution on vectors. That is, in terms of our
example, we would write a typical commodity bundle as a vector (py, p,)
where p; is a probability distribution over the number of cans of beer and
P; is a probability distribution over the number of bottles of wine. But
the way we are doing things is superior. You will learn why this is in
section 3.3, but for now (if it makes sense) note that if you have a vector
of probability distributions, you won't know about any correlations in the
prizes they give. A probability distribution over vector prizes tells you not
only the marginal distribution on each component but also all conditional
and joint probabilities.
Second, the assumption that every distribution has finite support may
seem rather limiting. For one thing, we can't in this framework represent
a gamble constructed as follows: I flip a coin until the first time it is tails
and give you as many dollars as times I flipped the coin, which would
give you $1 with probability 1/2, $2 with probability 1/4, and so on. Or
if the prize space X was R, representing an amount of money, and it
was analytically convenient to have Normal probability distributions, our
formalism wouldn't be adequate. We will address this shortcoming at the
end of this section.
Third, the probabilities all come as part of the description of the object
 probabilities are objective instead of subjective. But in real world
applications, there may be no objective probability for a random event.
For example, suppose an entrepreneur is considering a venture that will
earn her a given amount of money if a certain technique for gene splic-
ing works. To use our model in describing her choice problem, we need
to know the probability that this technique will work, something about
which well-informed individuals might disagree. We'll deal with subjec-
tive probabilities in section 3.4.
To complete the setup, we need one more concept. Suppose we have
two simple probability distributions p and and a number that les
@ For readers who know the terminology of probability theory, we tend to use loteries and
gambles when the term random variable is appropriate, while probability distribution is used
when that is appropriate.
74 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
between zero and one, inclusive. Then we can form a new probability
distribution, written ap + (1 ag, in two steps:
(2) The support of this new probability distribution is the union of the
supports of p and 
(b) If is some member of this union, then the probability given by ap +
(1a)g to z is ap(z) + (1 a)q(x), where p(x) is understood to be zero if
& is not in the support of p, and similarly for 
An example may help. Suppose p gives probabilities .3,.1, and .6
to prizes z, y, and z, respectively, and q gives probabilities .6 and .4 to
prizes = and w, respectively. We form, say, (1/3)p+(2/3)q as follows: The
support of (1/3)p + (2/3)q is {z,y,2,w}, and the probabilities it gives to
its four possible prizes are, respectively,
for =, (1/3)(3) + (2/3)(.6)=.5
for y, (1/3)(.1) + (2/3)(0) = 0333...
for z, (1/3)(.6) + (2/3)(0) = .2
for w, (1/3)(0) + (2/3)(4) = 26666...
When we depict probability distributions such as (1/3)p + 2/3)g in
the example just given, we sometimes will draw a compound lottery. For
example, in figure 3.2(a), we show (1/3)p + (2/3)q as a compound lottery:
a lottery whose outcomes are the lotteries p and In figure 3.2(b), we
depict the one-stage lottery to which this compound lottery reduces. In
our setup, if not our pictures, 3.2(a) and (b) depict precisely the same thing. In
a minute, we will assume that we are given some individual's preferences
over all simple lotteries, and it is implicit that if the individual doesnt
regard 3.2(a) and (b) as precisely the same object, then at least she is indif-
ferent between them. As we will discuss in section 3.5, this is somewhat
counterfactual. Individuals, faced with choices that involve the sorts of
pictures in figure 3.2, sometimes do make different choices depending on
whether the picture is 3.2(a) or (b). The standard theory that we are
about to develop does not permit this.
Axioms for preference
Now assume that our consumer has preferences over the set P of all
simple probability distributions on X, given, as before, by a relation >
that expresses strict preference. We insist on two properties immediately.
Assumption 1. > must be asymmetric and negatively transitive.
3.1. Von NeumannMorgenstern expected utility 75
(.3)
(5)
(a) (b)
Figure 3.2. Compound and reduced lotteries.
The compound lottery (a) reduces to the single-stage lottery (b) by the
laws of probability theory. In our theory, the consumer either identifies
these two as being the same object or, at least, is indifferent between
them.
This is just as before. Also as before, we construct from > a weak preference
relation > and an indifference relation ~.
We add to these two properties some properties that exploit the fact
that our objects of choice are probability distributions. Consider first
Assumption 2. Suppose p and q are two probability distributions such that
p = q. Suppose a is a number from the open interval (0,1), and r is some other
probability distribution. Then ap + (1 ar = ag+ (1 ar.
This is called the substitution axiom. The idea is that in both of the two final
probability distributions, the consumer is getting r with probability 1,
hence this same part won't affect the consumer's preferences. Overall
preference depends on how the consumer feels about the differences be-
tween the two, that is, on p vs. g. Since we suppose that the consumer
prefers p to , and since a > 0 implies that there is some chance that this
difference matters, we conclude that the consumer prefers ap +(1a)r to
aq+ (1 a).
Assumption 3. Suppose that p, q, and r are three probability distributions
such that p= q > r. Then numbers c and J exist, both from the open interval
(0,1), such that ap+ (1 a)r = gq > p+ (1 = Pr.
This is called (for obscure reasons) the Archimedean axiom. Think of it this
way: Since p is strictly better than g, then no matter how bad r is, we
can find some mixture of p and r, which we'll write ap + a - or,
with weight on p close enough to one so this mixture is better than gq.
76 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
And, similarly, no matter how much better p is than , we can find a 8
sufficiently close to zero so fp + (1 f)r is worse than . To help you
understand this, consider an example in which you might think it is false.
Suppose p gives you $100 for sure, gives you $10 for sure, and r consists
of your death. You might then say that r is so much worse than that
no probability however close to one makes ap + (1 a)r better than gq.
But if you think so, think again. Imagine that you are told that you can
have $10 right now or, if you choose to drive to some nearby location, a
check for $100 is waiting for you. If you are like most people, you will
probably get into your car to get the $100. But this, to a minute degree,
increases the chances of your death.
The representation
Does, consumer choice conform to these axioms? A lot of experimen-
tal evidence suggests that the answer to this is no; see section 3.5 below.
Despite this, vast quantities of economic theory are based on the assump-
tion that consumer choice does conform to these axioms, which leads to
the following representation of preferences:
Proposition 3.1. A preference relation > on the set P of simple probability
distributions on a space X satisfies assumptions 1, 2, and 3 above if and only if
there is a function w: X R such that
D0 u@p@) > DY ul@)g).
zEsupp(p) zEsupplq)
p> q if and only if
Moreover, if u provides a representation of > in this sense, then v does as well
if and only if constants a > 0 and b exist such that v(-) = aul) + b.
In words, > has an expected utility representation. Each possible prize has
a corresponding utility level, and the value of a probability distribution is
measured by the expected level of utility that it provides. Moreover, this
utility function is unique up to a positive affine transformation (which is
a fancy way of putting the last statement).
This is sometimes called a von Neumann-Morgenstern expected util-
ity representation, since one of the original modern developments of this
theory appears in von Neumann and Morgensterns Theory of Games and
Economic Behavior. But the form goes back a good deal further, to the
eighteenth century and Daniel Bernoulli.
Note that the proposition establishes the existence of a numerical rep-
resentation for preferences on p. That is, there is a function U: P R
re
err es
3.1. Von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility 77
such that p > if and only if U(p) > U(g). The proposition estab-
lishes a good deal more than this. It also establishes that we can as-
sume that this function U takes the form of expected utility of prizes:
UD) = Xz esuppip WEP), for some u: X R.
Numerical representations, you will recall, are unique up to strictly in-
creasing rescalings. That is, if U : X R gives a numerical representa-
tion of >, then so will V(:) = f(U(-)) for any strictly increasing 7. But
if U has the form of expected utility, so that U(p) = 2s esuppi ulz)p(x),
for some u : X R, and if f is an arbitrary increasing function, then
the function V that results from composing U with f may not have the
form of expected utility. You can be sure that V' will be another expected
utility representation if and only if f is an increasing affine function, or
fr) = ar +b for a > 0, in which case the v : X R that goes with V
will be v() = aul) +5.
Continuing on this general point, recall that we said in the previous
chapter that there is no cardinal significance in utility differences. That is,
if Ug) U(x") = 2AU(z") Uz") > 0 (where U is defined on X), this
doesnt mean anything like is twice better than 2 than is # It just means
that = > @' > 2. But in the context of expected utility, if u(z) u(z) =
2(u(z) ul") > 0 where u gives an expected utility representation on P,
this has cardinal significance. It means that a lottery that gives either z or
", each with probability 1/2, is indifferent to = for sure.
How is proposition 3.1 proven? We will sketch the proof here; if you
are ambitious and know a bit of real analysis, problem 1 will give you
a few hints on how to fill in the details. (It isnt very hard.) First, we'll
add one assumption (to be taken away in problem 1): In X are a best
prize b and a worst prize w; the consumer in question at least weakly
prefers b for sure to any other probability distribution over X, and any
other probability distribution over X is a least as good as w for sure. If
the consumer is indifferent between b for sure and w for sure, then the
representation is trivial, so we'll assume as well that > ,. Now we
can use assumptions 1, 2, and 3 to obtain three lemmas.
Lemma 1. For any numbers a and 3, both from the interval [0,1], aby +(1
@)by = Bp + (1 B)&y if and only if a > f.
Or, in words, if we look at lotteries involving only the two prizes b and
w, the consumer always (strictly) prefers a higher probability of winning
the better prize.
Lemma 2. For any lottery p P, there is a number [0,1] such that
pal + (1 a)by.
78 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
This result, which is sometimes simply assumed, is called the calibration
property. It says that we can calibrate the consumers preference for any
lottery in terms of a lottery that involves only the best and worst prizes.
Note that by virtue of lemma 1, we know that there is exactly one value
o that will do in lemma 2; if p were indifferent to two different mixtures
of the best and worst prizes, it would be indifferent to two things, one of
which is strictly preferred to the other.
Lemma 3. If p ~ q, 7 is any third lottery, and o is any number from the closed
interval 10,1], then ap + (1 ar ~ag+ (1 ar.
This is just like the substitution axiom, except that > is replaced by ~ here.
This is sometimes assumed as an axiom, and it itself is then sometimes
called the substitution axiom.
The rest is very easy. For every prize z, define u(z) as that number
between zero and one (inclusive) such that
8g ~ u(@)bp + (1 u(@)by.
This number u(z) will be the utility of the prize =. We know that one such
number exists by lemma 2, and this number is unique by lemma 1. Take
any lottery p: 
Lemma 4. For w : X R defined as above, any lottery p is indifferent
to the lottery that gives prize b with probability 3 w(@)p(x) and w with the
complementary probability, where the sum is over all = in the support of p.
Once we have this result, we can use lemma 1 to finish the main
part of the proof: Compare any two lotteries, p and g. The lottery p
is indifferent to the lottery that gives b with probability 3 u(z)p(z) and
w with the complementary probability, and is indifferent to the lottery
that gives b with probability 3 u(z)g(z) and w with the complementary
probability. We know by lemma 1 how to compare the two lotteries over
b and w: Whichever gives a higher probability of b is better. But this is
precisely the representation.
Proving lemma 4 is fairly simple in concept but rather cumbersome
notationally. The idea is that we take each prize z in the support of p
and substitute for it the lottery that gives b with probability u(z) and
w with probability 1 u(z). By lemma 3, each time we make such a
substitution we will have a new lottery that is indifferent to p. And
when we are done with all these substitutions, we will have the lottery
that gives prize b with probability > u(z)p(z) and w with probability
3.1. Vor NeumannMorgenstern expected utility 79
1 3 u(@)p(z). Figure 3.3 shows how this works for a particular lottery:
We begin with p, which has prizes z, ', and gz" with probabilities 1/2,
1/3, and 1/6, respectively. This is shown in 3.3(a). In 3.3(b) we replace
the prize with a lottery giving prize b with probability u(z") and w
with probability 1u(z"); this is the lottery p;, which we show both as
a compound lottery and as a one-stage lottery. We claim that p ~ p:
by lemma 3: Write p as (5/6)[(3/5)8; + (2/5)6z1] + (1/6)65 ; Dy lemma 3
this is indifferent to (5/6)[(3/5)85 + (2/5)6z:1+ (1/6)u(z")bs + (1 wz bw],
which is p,. Continuing in this fashion, from p; we create p, which
substitutes for @ in p; the lottery that gives b with probability u(z)
and w with probability 1 w(z'); we know that py ~ po. And then
we create ps from p,, substituting for z in p,. Once again, lemma 3
tells us that p, ~ ps. But then p ~ pr ~ p2 ~ Ps, and by transitivity
of indifference, p ~ ps, which (for the lottery p) is just what lemma 4
claims.
Of course, this is only a demonstration of lemma 4 on a particular ex-
ample; it is not a proof. The exact proof is left as an exercise (problem 1(d));
if you try this, you should use induction on the size of the support of p.
All this was based on our added assumption that there was a best
and worst prize. But this assumption can be done away with; you can
either consult one of the standard reference books or try your hand at
problem 1(e).
To complete the proof of the proposition, we need to show that if
preferences have an expected utility numerical representation, then those
preferences satisfy assumptions 1 through 3, and, we need to show that
a representing utility function w is unique up to positive affine transfor-
mations. (That is, any other function v that gives an expected utility
representation for fixed preferences > satisfies v = au + b for constants
a> 0 and b.) These parts of the proof are left to you.
To summarize: We began by taking a choice space that had some
special structure a set of probability distributions. We used that struc-
ture to pose some axioms for the consumer's preferences that exploited
this structure. Then, using those axioms, we showed that a numerical
representation for consumer preferences can be created that exploits this
structure; viz., the representing function U on P takes the form of ex-
pected utility for some function u defined on X. We continue this in the
next section, by making further assumptions about X and ~.
But first we address a concern voiced earlier: In this development we
only got the representation for probability distributions with finite support.
Can this sort of representation be extended to probability distributions such
as, say, the Normal distribution? Yes, it certainly can be. We sketch one
80 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
1/2
2 1/2 x
1/3 x
p= x = u
6 u(x") /6 b
(1-u{x")/6
Ww
(a) 
1/2 ] 1/2
u(x)/3 + u(x" /6
A-u(x"N/3 + Q-ulx"N/6
w
(c)
" u(x)
w(x)/2 + u(%')/3 + u(x"}/6
P3= T-u(x)
(L-1(x))/2 + (Q-ue(x"0)/3
1-n(x") + (-u(x")/6
@
Figure 3.3. Lemma 3 in action.
In the figure above, we successively replace each prize in the lottery p
with the lottery between b and w that is just indifferent to that prize.
Lemma 3 ensures that, at each step, the lottery replaced is indifferent to
the lottery that replaces it. So, in the end, we have a lottery between b
and w that is just indifferent to the original lottery. This final lottery gives
prize b with probability 7 u(z)p(z), and since (by lemma 1) we know
that lotteries over b and w are ranked by the probability with which they
give b, we know that all lotteries are ranked by their expected uiility.
Sg
yp
3.2. On utility for money 81
way to proceed, which requires that you know some advanced probability
theory. Assume that X is R* or the positive orthant of R (If you know
enough math, take X to be a compact subset of a complete separable met-
ric space.) Let P be the space of all Borel measures on X and assume
that preferences are continuous in the weak topology on measures. If as-
sumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold for all probability distributions in P, they hold
for the subspace of simple probability distributions, so we produce an ex-
pected utility representation for some function : X R that works for
simple probability distributions. We can then use the continuity assumption
to show that must be bounded. (If were unbounded [say] above, we
could find a sequence of prizes {z,} with u(z,) > 2". Construct the lot-
tery that gives prize z, with probability 1/2". This has expected utility
infinity. If you are clever, you should be able to show that this poses real
problems for the Archimedean axiom and weak continuity) And then use
the fact that simple probability distributions are dense in the Borel probabil-
ities in the weak topology fo extend the expected utility representation to all
of P. You can go on to show that must be continuous (on X) as well as
bounded. .
The boundedness of u is somewhat limiting in applications. For exam-
ple, for reasons to be explored later, a very nice utility function in applications
is exponential, or u(z) = e~*7, where X is the real line. This utility function
is unbounded below. So we would want a way to obtain an expected utility
representation for more than simple probability distributions that didnt re-
quire bounded . This can be done as well. Essentially, we obtained bounded
u because we took P to be all Borel probability distributions and we assume
continuity over all of P. If one restricts P, say to distributions that meet cer-
tain tail conditions, then the set of compatible utility functions becomes those
u that dont grow too quickly relative to the assumed rate at which tail
probabilities must die off. For further details, see Fishburn (1970) or Kreps
(1988).
3.2. On utility for money
Now we specialize even further to the case where the prizes are dollar
values. That is, X is the real line, or some interval thereof. We'll continue
to refer to the probability distributions p as lotteries, and we'll continue
to restrict attention to simple probability distributions. Throughout, we
assume that we have the three assumptions of the previous section and,
therefore, an expected utility representation.
In this case, it seems reasonable to suppose that our consumer prefers
more money to less. This has a straightforward consequence for the rep-
resentation, which you should have no difficulty proving.
Proposition 3.2. Suppose that for all and y in X such that > y, 6; > 6.
This is so if and only if the function wu is strictly increasing.
82 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
Risk aversion
More subtle is the property of risk aversion. First we need a piece of
notation. For a lottery p, let Ep represent the expected value of p, or
Ep=Y, ap().}
Proposition 3.3. Suppose that for all lotteries p, 8pp =p. This is true if and
only if the utility function u is concave.
A consumer who prefers to get the expected value of a gamble for sure
instead of taking the risky gamble, (and whose utility function, in con-
sequence, is concave) is said to be risk averse. We could also define a
risk-seeking consumer as one for whom p = 6g, for all p; this sort of
behavior goes with a convex utility function u. And a consumer is risk
neutral if p ~ gp, which goes with a linear utility function. In economic
theory, risk aversion, which includes risk neutrality as a special case, is
typically assumed.
The proof of proposition 3.3 is left as an exercise. We draw a picture
that indicates what is going on. Consider figure 3.4. We have graphed
there a concave utility function u, and we've joined by a line segment
two points (z, u(z)) and (z',u(z)). Take any a (0,1), say a=2/3, and
consider the lottery p = abs + (1 a)b,s; that is, an chance at and a
1 a chance at z. The expected value of p is precisely z" = az +(1 a)z'!
Which does our consumer prefer, dz Or the lottery p? We can answer this -
by comparing the expected utilities of the two. For 6,~, we have utility
woz + (1 @)z'), while the expected utility of p is cu(z) + (1 a)ulz).
By concavity, the former is at least as large as the latter, which is what
we want. Of course, the property of risk aversion is meant to hold for all
lotteries and not just those with supports of size two. But concavity of u
is just what is needed, in general.
We have defined risk aversion in terms of comparisons of a lottery with
its expected value. We can generalize this sort of thing as follows. It is
possible to partially order lotteries according to their riskiness. That is, for
some pairs of lotteries p and p', it makes sense to say that p is riskier than p
For example, suppose that p gives prizes 10 and 20 with probabilities 2/3
and 1/3, and p gives prizes 5, 15, and 30 with probabilities 1/3, 5/9, and
b We later will write Ef for the expected value of a random variable f. No confusion
should result.
1 Carefull The lottery p = 06s + (1 06, denotes a probability distribution with two
possible outcomes, whereas the number z= = ax+(1a)z is the convex combination of two
numbers. And, appearing momentarily, 6, is a probability distribution with one possible
outcome, namely =.
3.2. On utility for money 83
Utility
u(x)
x 3 x" x Prize
Cp)
Figure 3.4. Concavity, risk aversion and certainty equivalents.
For a lottery p that gives prize = with probability 2/3 and z' with
probability 1/3, we mark the expected value of the lottery as z", the
expected utility of the lottery as e, and the certainty equivalent of the
lottery as Cp).
1/9, respectively. I claim that p is riskier than p' Among the many ways to
justify this claim, one is that p is p' plus noise. Imagine conducting p- If
the outcome is 10, then either take 5 away (leaving 5) or give 5 more (leaving
15), each with probability 1/2. If the outcome is 20, either take away 5 with
probability 2/3 (leaving 15) or give 10 more with probability 1/ 3. Think
of this as a compound lottery, and you will see that first I do p and then,
conditional on the outcome, I conduct a lottery with expected value zero. But
this compound lottery reduces to p. Since p is gotten from p' in this fashion,
if a consumer was risk averse, she would (weakly) prefer p to p. (Why?) In
general, if p and p are related in this fashion (p is p plus zero-conditional-
mean noise), then any risk averse decision maker will (weakly) prefer p' to
p. This will be true also if p is pi plus zero-conditional-mean noise, p; 18 Pz
plus such nose, ..., and pis pn plus such noise. oo
As something of a converse, we can define riskier than by p is riskier
than p if p and.p have the same expected value and every risk averse con-
sumer (weakly) prefers p' to p. Then an interesting question is, What is the
relationship between this definition of riskier than and the characterizations
that involve zero-conditional-mean noise? The general notion of more or less
risky gambles is an important one in the literature of the economics of uncer-
tainty, although we will not develop it here; see Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970,
1971, 1973), Diamond and Stiglitz (1974), or Machina (forthcoming).
Certainty equivalents
Because the utility function u in figure 3.4 is continuous, we know
(from the intermediate value theorem of calculus) that for every a [0,11
there is some value z* with u(z*) = aux) + (1 )ulz"). For any such z*,
84 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
we know from the expected utility representation that 6, ~ p. Such an
x* is called a certainty equivalent of p. In general, 
Definition. A certainty equivalent for a lottery p is any prize x such that
ba ~ Dp.
Proposition 3.3. If X is an interval of R and u is continuous, then every
lottery p has at least one certainty equivalent. If u is strictly increasing, every
p has at most one certainty equivalent.
(The proof is left as an exercise.) We henceforth assume that the utility
function under consideration is continuous, strictly increasing, and con-
cave, the latter two reflecting increasing and risk averse preferences. Hence
every p has a unique certainty equivalent, which we denote C(p). Note
that risk aversion, in this setting, can be characterized by C(p) < Ep.
What right have we to assume that u is continuous? It turns out that
concavity of u implies that is continuous on the interior of the interval X,
although perhaps not at any endpoints of the interval. (Can you show this?
Does the assumption that wu is strictly increasing help about the endpoints in
any way?) But we will want u to be continuous even at the endpoints, and
we might want u to be continuous even if u didnt represent risk averse pref-
erences. One can prove that u must be continuous if and only if preferences
are continuous in the weak topology, relative to the space of simple proba-
bility distributions. So if you know about the (relative) weak topology, you
know what is necessary and sufficient for this often very useful assumption |
about u.
Absolute (and relative) risk aversion
Assume henceforth that any von NeumannMorgenstern utility func-
tion u we consider is strictly increasing, concave, and has at least two
continuous derivatives. This implies, of course, that u is continuous,
and so each lottery p has a unique certainty equivalent C(p) that is less
than or equal to Ep. We will call the difference EpC(p) the risk premium
of p, written R(p).
Now consider a lottery p and a (dollar) amount z. Write p@z for the
lottery that gives prize 2+z with probability p(x). That is, p@z is just the
 What justification is there for the assumption that u is twice differentiable? We can
justify continuity and concavity. This then implies that u will have left- and right-hand
derivatives everywhere. The properties of nondecreasing or nonincreasing risk aversion are
then sufficient to show that u is continuously differentiable. (This makes a good homework
exercise.) Concavity again implies that u! is decreasing, and we could, by complicating mat-
ters substantially, get away without assuming a continuous second derivative. But unless
one is being very much more exact about this than we are, it isnt worth the difficulty entailed.
3.2. On utility for money 85
lottery constructed from p by increasing each prize of p by the amount
z. By thinking of these prizes as the after the gamble wealth level of
our consumer, as we increase z in p@ z, we increase the consumers gen-
eral wealth level. It seems somewhat natural to suppose that as someone
becomes richer, she cares less and less about risks that she takes in given
gambles. In symbols, this would say that as z increases, R(p @ z) should
not increase; the consumers risk premium for a fixed gamble should not
increase as the consumer becomes wealthier. We formalize this notion and
two related to it as follows:
Definition. For a fixed consumer with utility function u, if R(p z) is non-
increasing in z, the consumer is said to be nonincreasingly risk averse.*If
R(p@z) is constant in z, we say that the consumer has constant risk aversion.
If R(p@ z) is nondecreasing in z, then we say the consumer is nondecreasingly
risk averse.
Our assertion about what seems somewhat natural is that consumers
are nonincreasingly or perhaps constantly risk averse.
What does all this portend for the utility function u? We give a
definition and then the result.
Definition. Given a (twice continuously differentiable, concave, strictly increas-
ing) utility function u, let Ma) = u'(x)/u'(a), and call the function the
coefficient of absolute risk aversion for the consumer.
Since u is concave and strictly increasing, A(z) > 0..
Proposition 3.4. A consumer is nonincreasingly risk averse if and only if X (de-
fined from her von NeumannMorgenstern utility function u) is a nonincreasing
function of x. The consumer is nondecreasingly risk averse if and only if X is
4a nondecreasing function of . And the consumer has constant risk aversion if
and only if is a constant function, in which case the utility function wu is a
positive affine translate of the utility function e~**. (If X is the constant zero,
then u(z) is a positive affine translate of the function x; the consumer is risk
neutral.)
We do not attempt to prove this or the subsequent proposition in this
subsection. References will be supplied at the end of the chapter.
a Sloppy terminology is sometimes used, and this property is called decreasing risk aver-
sion.
86 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
We can use this general concept of the coefficient of risk aversion to
compare the risk averseness of two different consumers. Imagine we have
two consumers who conform to the model we are investigating. Let u
be the first consumer's von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function, with
Aa) = u"(z)/u(z), and let v be the second consumers von Neumann-
Morgenstern utility function, with n(z) = v"(z)/v' (). We wish to capture
formally the idea that the first consumer is at least as risk averse as the
second. A natural definition is:
Definition. The first consumer is at least as risk averse as the second if, for
every lottery p and sure thing = such that the first consumer weakly prefers the
lottery p to = for sure, the second consumer prefers the lottery as well.
Put another way, any time the at-least-as-risk-averse consumer is willing
to take the risk, so is the at-most-as-risk-averse consumer.
Proposition 3.5. The first consumer is at least as risk averse as the second if
and only if Mz) > 7(z) for every =, which is equivalent to the statement that
v() = Ful) for some strictly increasing, concave function f.
Another variation sometimes played on this theme concerns how a single
consumer responds to proportional gambles with her wealth. We suppose,
for purposes of this discussion, that X = (0,00), and the consumers von
* Neumann-Morgenstern utility function u is concave, strictly increasing, and
twice continuously differentiable. We imagine that the consumer has at her
disposal an amount of wealth z, all of which she stakes in a gamble that pays
a random gross return. Such a random gross return is specified by a simple
probability distribution p with domain X, where our consumers wealth after
the gamble is 6z (for supp(p)) with probability p(@). We can define a
certainty equivalent rate of return, CRE(p;), which is that number such
that our consumer is indifferent between staking her wealth according to the
gross return distribution p or taking fz for sure. And we can ask how
CRR(p;z) changes with changes in the consumers initial level of wealth =z.
It is generally considered somewhat natural to suppose that CRR(p;z) is
nonincreasing in z the richer our consumer is, the more conservative she
becomes in staking all of her wealth. If we define ule) = zu(z)/u' (2), we
can get results such as CRR(p;) is nonincreasing in z if and only if u(z)
is nonincreasing in z. The function p is called the coefficient of relative risk
aversion, as distinguished from A = u" fu, the coefficient of absolute risk
aversion. For more on this, consult one of the references at the end of the
chapter.
re t iA ee
 But see Ross (1981) for a critique of this definition.
3.3. Applications to market demand 87
3.3. Applications to market demand
Many applications can be given for the model developed above, and
many books are filled with those applications. What follows is a very
haphazard selection of a few applications. The first is intended to tie up
a loose end from the previous section; the second two are there to whet
your appetite for more.
Induced preferences for income
In section 3.2 we looked at the special case where the prize space X is
single dimensional. The obvious application is to the case of money prizes.
But consumers dont eat money money is useful for the commodities
one can buy with it. So a fairly obvious question is: If a consumer has
von Neumann-Morgenstern preferences for consumption bundles and if
her preferences for money arise entirely from the purchasing power of that
money, what conditions on her preferences for consumption bundles will
translate into the sorts of properties we discussed in section 3.2?
To explore this question, we take the following setting. There are
k commodities, and the consumption space X for our consumer is the
positive orthant in R*. We assume that the consumer, considering simple
lotteries over the consumption bundles z that she might consume, con-
forms to the three assumptions of section 3.1. Thus there is a function
wu: X R, which is her von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function for
simple lotteries on X. Note well, u is a perfectly good ordinal repre-
sentation for our consumer's preferences on sure-thing consumption bun-
dles. That is, u could be used in all of the developments of chapter 2;
in particular, corresponding to u is an indirect utility function v(p,Y)
which gives the amount of utility (on the scale of u) our consumer de-
rives from income Y at prices p. But u is more than just any ordinal
numerical representation for preferences on X. We can use u (and posi-
tive affine transformations of u) to compute expected utilities for simple
lotteries on X to rank-order our consumer's preferences for those simple
lotteries.
We also assume for the time being that prices are fixed and given by
some price vector p. (We will explore uncertain prices later.)
The notation we used earlier in this chapter conflicts with the nota-
tion from chapter 2, and we will proceed conforming to the notation in
chapter 7. We will use Y to denote a level of income, so that simple lot-
teries on income have prizes denoted by Y. The space of income levels
will be taken to be [0,00). A simple probability distribution or lottery on
the space of possible income levels will be denoted by 7.
88 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
Now we pose the basic issue: Suppose our consumer attempts to
compare two simple probability distributions on her income, say 7 and
w'. Suppose that our consumer learns how much income she has to spend before
she makes any purchases of consumption bundles. Then it is natural to assume
that, if she has income Y to spend, she purchases x(p,Y) (her Marshallian
demand) which gives her utility v(p,Y). Accordingly, the expected utility she
achieves from is
>. vp, Yn),
Y esupp(x)
so that m= if and only if
do veYI)> 3 up, IT).
Y supp(m) Y supp(ar)
That is to say, v(p,Y), viewed as a function of for the fixed prices p, is
a von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function for our consumer when she
examines her preferences for lotteries over levels of income.
The italic in the previous paragraph is there because what is asserted
is more subtle than may be apparent. In the first place, the assumption
that all uncertainty about income resolves before any consumption deci-
sions are made is crucial. See the remarks about temporal resolution of
uncertainty in section 3.5. Secondly, here, for the first time in this book,
is a dynamic structure to choice. The consumer is (presumably) choosing
some lottery on income that she will spend for consumption purposes.
That uncertainty resolves, and then she chooses how to spend that income.
The phrase it is natural in the previous paragraph assumes that when our
consumer chooses her income lottery, she thinks ahead to how she will
spend the income she might have available, and her tastes over income
levels today are completely consonant with her later tastes for consump-
tion bundles. All of chapter 4 is given over to exploring just how natural
this really is. You should grant that this is natural for the sake of argu-
ment now, but don't be too convinced by it at least until after finishing
chapter 4.
So questions about properties of the consumer's utility function for
income become questions about properties of the indirect utility function.
"We have used the Marshallian demand function z(p,Y) for purposes of exposition only.
It should be clear that we dont require the consumers problem (CP) to have a unique solu-
tion.
3.3. Applications to market demand 89
We give a few basic results in the following proposition. We begin by
summarizing the basic state of affairs.
Proposition 3.6. Suppose the consumer has preferences over lotteries of con-
sumption bundles that satisfy the three assumptions of section 3.1. Let u be
the resulting von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function on consumption bun-
dles and let v(p,Y) be the corresponding indirect utility function. Then the
consumer's preferences over lotteries pertaining to income satisfy the three von
Neumann-Morgenstern assumptions, and Y v(p,Y) is a von Neumann
Morgenstern utility function for income. Moreover:
(a) Assuming the consumer is locally insatiable, v(p,Y) is strictly increasing in
Y. If u is continuous, v(p,Y) is continuous in Y.
(6) If u is a concave function, then v(p,Y) is a concave function in Y; that is,
our consumer is risk averse.
Proof. To begin, note that the preamble asserts that the consumers pref-
erences on income lotteries satisfy the three von Neumann-Morgenstern
assumptions. We know this because her preferences over income lotteries
have an expected utility representation; note that proposition 3.1 states
that the three assumptions are necessary and sufficient for expected util-
ity. Part (a) follows from proposition 2.13(b,c). As for (b), take any two
income levels and Y and a (0,1). Let z solve (CP) for (p,Y), and
let 2 solve (CP) for (p,Y"). Then az+(1a)s is feasible at prices p with
income aY + (1 a)Y, and
av(p,Y) + (1 a)vip, Y") = aul) + (1 a)ulz")
< ulaz + (1 a)z) < vip, aY + (1 a)Y'),
where the first inequality follows from the concavity of u, and the second
follows from the definition of as the most utility that can be obtained at
prices p with a given income level.
We had rather a lot to say in chapter 2 about concavity of utility func-
tions on consumption bundles; essentially we said there is no particular
fundamental reason to think it is a valid assumption. Now it would seem
we need this assumption. But now we can motivate this assumption by
considerations that were not available to us in chapter 2. Now we can
ask our consumer: For any two bundles z and z/, would you rather have
the bundle .5z + 52 (where we are taking the convex combination of the
bundles) or a lottery where you get = with probability 1/2 and z with
probability 1/2? If our consumer always (weakly) prefers the sure thing,
90 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
and if she conforms to the assumptions of the von Neumann-Morgenstern
theory, then her von Ni eumannMorgenstern utility function, which is a
perfectly good representation of her (ordinal) preferences on X, will be
concave.?
We leave for the reader the interesting task of exploring what con-
ditions on u give properties such as constant absolute risk aversion for
lotteries in Y.
In the derivation above, we assume that prices are certain, given by a
fixed p. What if there is uncertainty about prices? Specifically, imagine that
our consumer enters into a lottery that determines her income Y, and at the
same time prices are determined by a lottery p. All uncertainty resolves, and
then our consumer chooses what to consume.
If we want to speak of the consumer's preferences over lotteries in her
income in this setting, we must assume that the uncertainty affecting her in-
come is statistically independent of the uncertainty affecting prices. A simple
example will illustrate the point. Consider a consumer who is evaluating an
income lottery that gives her $10,000 with probability 1/2 and $20,000 with
probability 1/2. Suppose that prices will be either p or 2p, each with prob-
ability 1/2. If our consumers income level is perfectly positively correlated
with the price level, she faces no real uncertainty; her real purchasing power
is unchanged. If, on the other hand, her income level is perfectly negatively
correlated with the price level, she faces rather a lot of uncertainty in her
purchasing power. It will be a rare consumer indeed who is indifferent be-
tween these two situations, even though in terms of the lotteries on (nominal)
income, the two situations are identical. Either we must consider how the
consumer feels about lotteries jointly on prices and income (in which case all
the developments of section 3.2, which depend on one-dimensional prizes, go
by the board), or we have to make some assumption that prevents this sort
of problem. Independence is one such assumption.
Assuming the price and income level are independent and letting be
the probability distribution on prices, the induced expected utility our con-
sumer obtains from the probability distribution = on Y' is given by
C3 NY ve Yee).
Yesuppin) p suppip)
Thus the consumer's von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function for income,
which we will now write v(Y), is
v(Y) = > v(p,Y)p(p).
pESUPpP(p)
9 Assume that her preferences are continuous in the weak topology, so checking for 50-
50 convex combinations is sufficient to obtain concavity. Alternatively, ask the question for
general a (0,1).
3.3. Applications to market demand 91
You can quickly check that in this setting proposition 3.6 holds without any
change except for this redefinition of the utility function on income.
We can ask here a different question. How does the consumer respond to
uncertainty in the price level? Imagine that we fix the consumer's income Y
and we let the consumer select the economy in which to buy, where different
economies have different distributions over prices. To put it simply, imagine
we ask this consumer: Given two price vectors p and p, would you rather
be in an economy where prices are certain to be given by 5p + Sp or in an
economy where prices are either p or p', each with probability 1/27 There 1s
no clear answer to this question; see problem 3.
Demand for insurance
One of the most important markets in w. ich uncertainty plays a role is
the insurance market. We will return to this market in part IV of the book,
when we examine some advanced issues pertaining to insurance. But for
now, let us establish some simple basic properties about the demand for
insurance.
Imagine a consumer whose income level is subject to some uncer
tainty. Specifically, her income will be with probability = and with
probability 1 7, where > Y' Think of the difference A=Y Y as
some loss the consumer might sustain, either because of an accident, or
ill health, or theft, or some other misfortune. An insurance company is
willing to insure against this Joss; if the consumer will pay a premium of
, the insurance company is prepared to pay A back to the consumer if
she sustains this loss. The consumer may buy partial coverage; if she pays
ab, she gets back ad if she sustains the loss. We do not restrict a to [0,1].
There are good reasons why such a restriction or one even more severe
might be in place, but they have to do with matters we take up later in
the book.
We assume that this consumer satisfies the three assumptions of the
von Neumann-Morgenstern theory concerning lotteries in'her final level
of income, net of any payments to/from the insurance company, and her
utility function v is strictly increasing, concave, and differentiable. Then
the consumers problem concerning how much insurance to buy can be
written
max mu(Y ad) + (1 Mu(Y" + ad ab).
Rewrite Y/ +ad as (1 a)A, and the first-order condition on this
problem becomes
x60 (Y ab) = (1 mA (EY (1 a)A ad).
92 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
Note that since is concave and a is unconstrained, the first-order con-
dition is necessary and sufficient for a solution.
The surance contract is said to be actuarially fair if the expected
payout (1 mA equals the premium . This equality can be rewritten
as m6 = (1 m)(A ); so if the contract is actuarially fair, the first-order
condition becomes
VY ad) =v'(Y (1 a) A ab),
and we see that this equation holds when a = 1.
The contract is actuarially unfair if the expected payout is less than the
premium. Let f = 76/((1 m)(4 6), so that for an actuarially unfair
contract, > 1. The first-order conditions can be written
BV'(Y ab) =v'(Y (1 a)A af),
80 at any solution to the first-order equation, we will need
V'(Y ab) <v'(Y (1 a)A ab).
Since v is assumed to be concave, its derivative is decreasing, and so we
will find a solution to the first-order equation at a point where
Y-ab>Y (1a)A as,
which is at some a < 1.
We'conclude that if the insurance contract is actuarially fair, the consumer
will purchase full insurance. If the insurance contract is actuarially unfair, the
consumet will purchase only partial insurance. (If the contract were actuari-
ally overfair, the consumer would overinsure.) These are somewhat rough
statements because we need to worry about whether the first-order condi-
tion and the problem have a solution at all.2 And we must worry whether
this problem has multiple solutions. But except for these worries, these
are precise statements, and they can be generalized substantially. The ba-
sic idea is that insofar as insurance insures dollar for dollar against a loss,
consumers will wish to smooth their income. If the insurance is actuarially
2 What would happen if the consumer was risk neutral and the contract was actuarially
unfair? What would happen if we added in the constraint that a >0?
 Suppose the consumer is risk neutral and the contract is actuarially fair. What is the set
of all solutions?
3.3. Applications to market demand 93
unfair, there is a cost to do this, and consumers do not completely smooth
their income. Instead, in this case they choose to bear some of the risk.
(But see problems 4 and 5.)
Demand for financial assets
Imagine a consumer who will do all her consuming one year hence.
This consumer has W dollars to invest, and the income out of which she
will consume next year will consist of the proceeds from her investments.
Letting V' denote the proceeds from her investinents, we assume that her
preferences over lotteries on Y satisfy the von Neumann-Morgenstern
assumptions, with v her von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function on
Y, which is strictly increasing, concave, and differentiable.
Assume that our consumer can invest her money in one of two as-
sets. The first of these is a riskless asset for every dollar invested, our
consumer gets back r > 1 dollars next year. The second asset is risky. Its
gross return, denoted by 6, has a simple probability distribution , so that
m(f) represents the probability that the risky asset has a gross return of
6. By gross return we mean a dollar invested in the risky asset returns
dollars next year.
The consumers problem, then, is to decide how much money to invest
in each of the two assets. Since every dollar invested in the second asset
is precisely one dollar less invested in the first, we can write her decision
problem as a problem in one variable a, the amount of money she invests
in the second, risky asset. Now if 6 is the gross return on the risky asset,
investing in this asset means she will have
Y=0a+r(W-a)=ald r)+rW
dollars to spend on consumption next period. So her problem is to
max > v(alf 1) + rW)n (9).
 gsupplm)
Should we constrain a? That depends on the ability of the consumer
to short-sell either or both of the assets. If she can borrow as much money
as she pleases at the riskless rate of r to invest in the risky asset, then
we would not constrain above. (If, as is more realistic, she can borrow
money but at a rate of interest exceeding what she may lend at, the problem
becomes more difficult but not intractable.) If she can short-sell the risky
asset, which means she is given the purchase price of the asset today (to
94 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
invest in the riskless asset) but must make good on the return of the asset
in a year, then we would not constrain o below. We will proceed assuming
that she cannot short-sell the asset but that she can borrow money at the
riskless rate; you may wish to try other variations on your own.
Hence we add to this problem the constraint that > 0. Since v is
concave, we find the solution to the problem by looking for a solution to
the first-order condition
Yo @-@@n) + Wm) <0,
@esupp(n)
where the inequality must be an equality if a > 0.
What can we say about solutions to this problem? A few obvious
remarks are
(a) If > r for all supp(n), then there can be no solution. This is so
mathematically because v' is always strictly positive. (That is, v is strictly
increasing.) The economic intuition behind this is straightforward. If > r
for all possible values of , then the consumer can make money for sure
by borrowing money (selling the riskless asset) and buying the risky asset.
Since we have not constrained borrowing, the consumer will wish to do
this on an infinite scale, reaping infinite profits. Such a thing is called
an arbitrage opportunity, and one presumes that arbitrage opportunities are
rarely to be found. (Note that if 6 > r with strict inequality for at least
one 6 supp(r), we have exactly the same problem.)
(b) Suppose the consumer is risk neutral. That is, v(Y) = oY +b for
a > 0. The first-order condition is then > sesuppim( rand <0. If
we write Ef for the expected gross return on the risky asset, or Ef =
> 9esuppm 67(9), the first-order condition becomes Ef < r, with equality
if @ > 0. Since is entirely removed from the first-order condition, there
are three possibilities: If Ef < r, the consumer chooses a =0. If E9=r,
any a is a solution. And if Ef > r, there is no solution. The economic
intuition is: If the consumer is risk neutral, she compares assets according
to their expected gross return only. If the expected gross return on the
risky asset equals that of the riskless asset (the middle case), she is happy
to invest in any fashion. If the expected gross return on the risky asset
exceeds that of the riskless asset, she wishes to borrow at the riskless rate
in infinite amounts and invest in the risky asset. If the expected gross
return on the risky asset is less than that of the riskless asset, she wants
none of the risky asset and, in fact, she would wish to short-sell the risky
asset in infinite amounts if she were allowed to do so.
3.3. Applications to market demand 95
(6) Now return to the case where the consumer is strictly risk averse. As-
sume that there is a solution to the first-order conditions. (See problem 6
for a case in which this can be guaranteed.) Suppose that Ef < r. Then
we assert that the only possible solution of the first-order conditions is
= 0. That is, if the expected return of the risky asset is less than that of
the riskless asset, a risk averse consumer will necessarily buy none of it.h
Constructing a precise and detailed argument that this is so is left as an
exercise. But the basic idea is easily sketched. Recall that if v is concave,
o' will be decreasing. Suppose that.a > 0. In the first-order condition,
we multiply ( r) by v'(:- )m(0). The stuff inside the v' increases with
increasing # and so multiplying by v' (which decreases as the stuff inside
increases) puts relatively more weight on ( r) for smaller values of 6.
But if we look at the weighted sum of r weighted by the probabili-
ties (0) alone, we would get something strictly negative. Putting more
weight on the smaller terms makes the weighted sum even smaller, so for
any a > 0, the sum is strictly negative. Only a =0 can be a solution. *
(d) Finally, suppose that Ef > r. Then the only solutions of the first-
order conditions have a > 0. It is easy to see this mathematically; plug
a = 0 into the first-order condition, and you will find that the sum term
is o'(Wr)(EE r). In terms of economic intuition, for the first little bit
of the risky asset the consumer buys, she is approximately risk neutral.
If EO > r, the risky asset is a good deal for a risk neutral investor. It is
only when the scale of her investment in the risky asset grows to some
significant size that her risk aversion begins to take over, and then she
may find that, on the margin, it is no longer worth purchasing still more
of the risky asset.
In fact, the intuition of this problem is entirely captured by the pre-
vious sentence. Think of beginning in a position where the investor has
none of the risky asset. Then for small changes in her holdings, she is risk
neutral, and the direction she wishes to move in depends on the sign of
E@ r. If this sign is positive and she increases her holdings of the risky
asset, the marginal impact on her expected utility of still more risky asset
is given by the sum term in the first-order conditions. As noted above,
this puts more and more relative weight on the smaller values of ~r as
PR Before getting too excited about this, see later discussion concerning more than one risky
asset.
i We can shortcut this argument if we assume that v is strictly concave. Using the strict
concavity, we can prove rather simply that the problem has a unique solution in a as long
as the risky asset is risky. And verifying that the first-order conditions are satisfied at a =0
is easy.
96 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
a grows. Now if all the terms are positive, there is no end to this process
(which is [a]). And if the shift in weight is never sufficient to make the
marginal impact on her expected utility nonpositive, this process never
stops (which includes [b]). Of course, if we start out with the sign being
negative, we never get started at all (which is [c]). And if the sign is posi-
tive, we will have to move some distance away from a = 0 before coming
to the level where the marginal value of the risky asset is zero (which is
[dD. Once you understand intuitively why the sum term is the marginal
value of the risky asset and you understand how, when u is concave, the
relative weights shift as they do as a function of a, the intuition of this
situation should be crystal clear.
Conclusions {c) and {(d) are no longer valid when there is more than one
risky asset, unless the returns on risky assets are statistically independent of
one another. We will illustrate the basic problem in a setting with two risky
assets. As before, we imagine that there is a riskless asset with gross rate of
return 7. The two risky assets will be indexed by i = 1, 2, with 6 repre-
senting the gross return on asset {. We do not assume that the two assets
returns are statistically independent; instead we take as given the joint dis-
tribution of their gross returns. This is given by a probability distribution =
which, for a finite number of two dimensional vectors (6',6%), specifies that
m(",6%) is the joint probability that the first asset has gross return ' and
the second has gross return 6 (You will recall, I hope, that the two random
returns are statistically independent if and only if there are one-dimensional
probability distributions 7' and # such that (",6%) = '(6)7*(6%.) The
expected values of the two assets gross returns will be written E for s = 1,
2.
Our consumers problem is to decide how much to invest in each of the
two risky assets, with anything left over going into the riskless asset. We let
o' be the amount invested in asset . As in the previous subsection, we work
with the case in which the risky assets cant be sold short but the riskless
asset can be (that is, the consumer can borrow at the riskless rate), so the
consumers problem is
ex > v(a'(0' = 1) +08" 1) + Wr) n(d", 6%)
(6*,6%
subject to ' > 0,a* > 0. (I will be sloppy about the supports of distributions
throughout this discussion, on the presumption that, if you've survived this
far, you can stand the sloppiness.) The first-order condition for o' is
D0 (8 =) (M0 0) + 0X 1) + Wr) w(8, 6) < 0,
01,6%
with equality if e > 0.
rt tn + ogame eee pe +
3.3. Applications to market demand 97
It shouldn't be hard to see that these first-order conditions can have no
solution if either (a) * > r with probability one for one of the two assets, or
(') the consumer is risk neutral and E6 > r for one of the two assets. Those
conclusions carry over intact. In fact, we can sharpen (a) a bit: I must not be
possible to find nonnegative #' and #* such that '+4% = 1 and 8'6'+6%* > +
with probability one, with a strict inequality with positive probability. If we
could find such #' and #*, then arbitrage would be possible. (Prove this!)
However, in contrast to the case of one risky asset, we assert that it is
possible that () a > 0 when Ef" < =, and (d) o' = 0 when Ef > r.
The problem is that we dont know, at a particular ' and o?, how the
term v'( - -) is shifting weight on the 8 terms. For example, if both a!
and o are positive and 6" and 6* are negatively correlated, then at large
values of 6" the stuff inside +" could tend to be small because of the c*(*r)
part, which would make v' large when 6" is large. This, then, could give (").
Alternatively, if the two assets gross returns are positively correlated, even at
o' =0, we get from the o*(6* r) term some relative shift of weight towards
lower values of 6", which would permit (d").
That, to be sure, is a fairly opaque way of demonstrating the possibilities
suggested in () and (d"). In fact, this is no demonstration at all. A proper
demonstration would consist of a pair of concrete (and, one hopes, simple)
examples. This task is left to you; see problem 8 for some hints. Moreover,
we asserted at the outset that, if assets 1 and 2 had gross return distributions
that were statistically independent, everything would work as in the previous
subsection. This is left to you as well.
The first-order conditions in our problem with two risky assets tell us
that the marginal effect of putting money into risky asset 7 when one is hold-
ing a particular portfolio of assets depends upon how the return of asset i
covaries with the marginal utility of consumption at the given portfolio.
Very roughly put, the smaller the covariance, the worse it is for putting
additional funds into asset 1, since this means weight is shifted to the smaller
terms in the first-order conditions. The intuition behind this is not too dif-
ficult. If asset i pays off relatively well when times are good (when the
marginal utility of consumption is low) and relatively poorly when times are
bad, holding more of asset compounds the risk the investor faces. But if
asset pays off well when times are bad and (relatively) poorly when times
are good overall, then asset serves as insurance against the other assets be-
ing held. And as we saw in the subsection on insurance, one may be willing
to take up some insurance, even if it is actuarially unfair.
Moreover, since the marginal utility of consumption at a given portfolio
is a decreasing function of the overall return on ones portfolio, this intuition
suggests that the marginal value of an asset in a given portfolio has to do
with the covariance between the returns of the asset and the returns of the
portfolio; everything else held equal, the marginal value of an asset is smaller
the larger is its covariance with the overall return on the portfolio.
9 Assertion () shouldn't come as a complete surprise. Remember that there can be de-
mand for insurance, even when the insurance is actuarially unfair. But the point is a bit more
subtle here, since the risk against which one buys insurance is given exogenously, and here
all risks that the consumer faces are chosen by her.
98 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
This intuition can be made quite precise (which is to say, we can remove
the quote marks from the word covariance) if we assume that our consumer
evaluates her possible portfolios in terms of the portfolios means and vari-
ances. Holding variance fixed, a higher mean return is better, and holding
mean fixed, a lower variance is better. If our consumer's preferences over
portfolios could be reduced to something this simple, then we would have
available a very nice theory. Looking at any finite set of risky assets (and, for
simplicity, one riskless asset), all we would need to compute the mean and
variance of a given portfolio of assets is the vector of expected returns and
the variance-covariance matrix of those refurns.
We will not develop the theory of mean-variance efficient portfolios here;
this is one of the starting points of the modern theory of finance, and you
may consult one of the many textbooks on the subject. (See the end of this
chapter for one recommendation.) But I did wish to suggest this last step and
to make one comment which good textbooks in finance will amplify.
Moving from von NeumannMorgenstern preferences to mean-variance
driven preferences is not a trivial step. A consumer who maximizes the ex-
pectation of some utility function v defined on the gross income from her
investments does not, in general, have preferences that can be reduced to a
comparison of the mean-variance pairs of various portfolios she might hold.
If her utility function is quadratic, oY) = a + bY c? (for b,c > 0), then
this works. (Why?) But quadratic utility functions are not so nice; they are
concave, but for Y > b/{2c) they are decreasing. Alternatively, we could re-
strict aftention to assets whose distributions are such that risk averse expected
utility maximizers always prefer higher expected returns holding variance
constant and lower variance holding expected return constant. For example,
if assets have a joint Normal (multivariate) distribution, then any portfolio of
the assets has a Normal distribution. And for any risk averse expected utility
maximizer (whose utility function is increasing), two Normal distributions
with the same variance are ranked according to their means (higher is better),
and two Normal distributions with the same mean are ranked according to
their variances (lower is better). The reader who knows a bit of mathematics
and who knows about multivariate Normals may wish to construct a proof.
3.4. States of nature and subjective probability
In the preceding development, the objects of choice were probabil-
ity distributions over prizes. That is, the probabilities numerical ex-
pressions of likelihood were given exogenously. As discussed in sec-
tion 3.1, this would be inadequate for modeling certain situations. In
some contexts, the odds of various outcomes are not at all clear, and
what a consumer chooses depends very critically on what she subjec-
tively assesses as the odds of the outcomes. To take a very simple ex-
ample, imagine you are offered your choice of two bets: In the first,
you win $100 if a Latin American team wins the next World Cup soc
cer tournament, and zero otherwise. In the second, you win $100 if
3.4. States of nature and subjective probability 99
a European team wins the next World Cup. If we tried to apply the
von Neumann-Morgenstern model to this problem, things would be very
trivial. The von Neumann-Morgenstern model would regard the two
gambles as lotteries with objectively specified probabilities. And then
our consumer would pick whichever has the better chance of getting
for her the $100 prize. Any (reasonable) consumer would bet the same
way. But what makes this sort of bet interesting are the odds one con-
sumer or another assesses. We dont expect all consumers to bet the
same way on this (although see the final subsection of this section). And
so we need a model of choice under uncertainty that develops within
itself the subjective probabilities that are assessed by a consumer faced
with this sort of uncertainty. (To distinguish between situations where
the probabilities are objective and those where probabilities are subjec-
tive, one sometimes encounters the following terminology: The former
situations are cases where there is risk, while the latter are cases of uncer-
tainty.)
The framework
The classic formal treatment of choice where there is subjective uncer-
tainty is that of Savage (1954). The framework employed by Savage runs
as follows. We have a set of prizes X, just as before. And we have a set
of states of nature, . Each s isa description of the resolution of any
(relevant) uncertainty. The states in should be mutually exclusive and
exhaustive. You might think in terms of a horse race (or, if you prefer,
the next World Cup competition). Each s will describe the order of finish
of all the horses in the race, and S will be the set of all such orders of
finish.
Since the formality may be a bit forbidding, let us carry along a simple
example. Imagine a two-horse race between horses named Secretariat
and Kelso. There are three possible outcomes of the race: Kelso wins,
Secretariat wins, or the race is a dead heat. We will label these three si, 5;
and s;, respectively.
We next form from X and S the set of all horse race lotteries, H. A
horse race lottery h will describe for each state s a prize z that is won if
s is the outcome of the race. Formally, H is the set of all functions from
 to X; in very formal notation, H = XS. We write h(s) for the prize won
at the horse race lottery h if the state is s.
So, for example, imagine that for $2 you can purchase a betting ticket
that pays off $3.85 if Secretariat wins the race and $0 if Kelso wins. If
the race is a dead heat, then you get your $2 back. Net of the cost of
the ticket, this gamble is represented by the function h, which is given
100 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
S
1 2
5
2 1.85
3 0
Figure 3.5. A horse race chance node.
by h(s;) = 2, h(sy) = 1.85, and h(s;) = 0. We will depict horse race
gambles by chance nodes; in figure 3.5, you see this particular horse
race gamble.
If we were being less fanciful thinking of S as the set of all states
of the world, and X as a space of commodity bundles then standard
terminology would style H as the set of state contingent commodity bundles
or state contingent claims.
In the classic theory due to Savage, H is the set of objects of choice.
(He calls them acts instead of horse race lotteries.) The consumer's prefer-
ences are given by > defined on H; certain properties of > are assumed
and a representation of > is derived.
The representation and a weaker alternative
What sort of representation is sought? Savage seeks (and most econ-
omists employ) a representation of the following form. There exist a prob-
ability distribution 7 over S and a utility function w: X R such that
h > b' if and only if Y u(h(s)m(s) > > uh (s)ms). =)
seS 36S
(This representation has been written under the presumption that 5 is
a finite set. In fact, Savage's treatment requires that S be infinite, and
the summations just given become appropriately defined integrals.) This
is just like von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility, except that the
probabilities of the various prizes are obtained by a two-step process:
Probabilities are subjectively assessed for the various states of nature. The
probability of getting a particular prize z if horse race lottery h is chosen
Is just the sum of the probabilities of those states s S such that h(s) = z.
If we are able to obtain representation (x), we have done quite well.
To understand how well, consider the following two cases in which (x) is
inappropriate:
(1) Imagine you are marketing a particular product and trying to decide
how much advertising to do. To keep things simple, imagine that the
3.4. States of nature and subjective probability 101
product will either sell 1,000 units or 10,000. If it sells 1,000, you will lose
$1,000, not including the cost of advertising. If it sells 10,000, you will
make $3,000. You can either advertise a lot or not at all. Not advertising
costs you nothing, while advertising a lot costs you $1,000.
Create the following model. The prize is your net profit. Possible
values are $ 2,000, $ 1,000, $2,000, and $3,000, so these four dollar
amounts constitute X. The states are your level of sales: You sell 1,000
units (state s;) or 10,000 (state s,). Hence there are two states in S. The
two acts you can consider are: advertise, which we denote by h, where
h(s1) = $ 2,000 and h(s,) = $2,000; and dont advertise, which we
denote by kh, where h'(s;) =$ 1,000 and A (s2) = $3,000.
As long as your utility function u is increasing in increasing profits,
if the representation (x) holds you never choose to advertise. Whatever
probabilities you assess for s; and s,, always gives a better outcome
(by the $1,000 cost of advertising) in both states. The problem is that
your choice of an act presumably influences how many units you sell. In
Savage's representation (x), the probabilities of the states do not depend on the
act chosen. That is, we dont write n(s; h) or anything like that. So in cases
where acts influence state probabilities, we couldn't expect (x) to hold.
(In this example, a cure is very simple. The problem is that our state
space is deficient. We really need three states: s;, which is the state that the
product sells 1,000 units whether you advertise or not; s,, which is the state
that the product sells 1,000 units if you dont advertise and 10,000 units
if you do; and s;, which is the state that the product sells 10,000 whether
you advertise or not.* The question of whether to advertise becomes one
of how likely is the state s,, in which you increase your profits by $3,000
if you do advertise, compared to the lost $1,000 in advertising fees in
states s; and s;.)
(2) Imagine that you are thinking of undertaking one of two gambles.
In the first, you will win $100 if the yen:dollar exchange rate (i.e. the
number of yen that can be bought with $1) increases over the next month
and otherwise you lose $100. In the second, you win $100 if the yen:dollar
ratio doesn't increase and lose $100 if it does. We create a model where
the states of natures (s ) are the various possible yen:dollar exchange
rates and where the prizes (z X) are $ 100 and $100. It should be
easy for you to see (given todays yen:dollar exchange rate) how to model
the lotteries from which you are meant to choose.
*1If there is a chance that advertising will anger potential customers, we would add a
fourth state.
102 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
Do we expect the representation (%) to hold in this case? Probably
not. In the representation Gx) the value of any prize u(x) independent of
the state of nature in which the prize is won. But inning $100 when the
yen:dollar exchange rate is low is worse than winning $100 when the
yen:dollar exchange rate is high. This should be very clear if you live in
Japan. But, if you think about it, it is probably true if you live in some
country other than Japan. Put another way, suppose, for the sake of
argument, that you think it as likely that the yen:dollar ratio will go up as
that it will go down. Then according to the representation (x), you should
be indifferent between the two gambles. But because $100 is worth more
when the yen:dollar ratio is high and less when the ratio is low, the first
of these two gambles is (pretty clearly) the better of the two.
What can we do to salvage the representation (x) in cases such as this?
One thing to try is to redefine prizes X in'a way that makes the value
of a given prize independent of the state in which it is won. Instead of
making the prize a dollar amount, we might consider recording prizes in
terms of the purchasing power the prize represents, using some standard
market bundle of goods. But this can get very messy, very quickly. And
so, as an alternative, we might consider giving up on (x) and trying for a
weaker representation. We might ask for a probability distribution 7 On
 and a state-dependent utility function u: X x R such that
hs I if and only if _ u(h(s), s)m(s) > > lb! (s), S)mls)-
sS s8
If this is what we are after, we can simplify one level further. Given 7 and
u, define v: Xx8Rby viz, s) = ulz, s)m(s). Then the representation
just given becomes
hs if and only if 3 0(a(s), 8) > D_v(H'(s),9) (ek)
3S sS
Since this form conveys what i important in this weaker type of represen-
tation, we will use it. Whereas representation (x) is styled as a subjective
expected utility representation, the weaker alternative (ox) is styled as an
additive across states representation.
er 
5 suppose you live in the United States. The market bundle of goods that $100 will buy
at 150 yen to the dollar is better than the bundle that $100 will buy at 125 yen to the dollar,
insofar as the lower exchange rate means that Japanese goods in the market bundle are more
expensive.
Ek pees the probability distribution convey any information if we allow u to be state
dependent? See problem 10 for more on this.
3.4. States of nature and subjective probability 103
Savage's sure thing principle
Now that we know what sort of representation we are after, we can see
how it might be obtained. The classic derivation of the representation (x),
as we said before, is due to Savage (1954). Savage begins with preferences
 defined on H and develops a number of properties of > that lead to the
representation (x). Some of the properties are those you've seen before;
~ is asymmetric and negatively transitive.! Other properties exploit the
particular structure we have here. Although we won't go through the
Savage treatment here, it may help (to give a flavor of the subject)-to give
the most important of the other properties that he invokes, which is
called the independence axiom or the sure thing principle. (This comes the
closest to our substitution axiom in the theory of section 3.1.) It runs as
follows:
Savage's sure thing principle. Suppose we are comparing two horse race lot-
feries h and g. Suppose moreover that the set of states contains a subset T
on which h and g are identical; for every s T, h(s) = g(s). Then how the
consumer feels about h compared to g depends only on how h and g compare
on states that are not in T. Formally, if h >= g, and if h' and g' are two other
horse race lotteries such that (a) h is identical with b' and g is identical with
g on S\T, and (b) h' and g' are identical on T, then h' =~ g must follow.
This is easier than it seems. The idea is that the ranking of h and
g doesnt depend on the specific way that they agree on T that they
agree is enough. Figure 3.6 shows this idea in pictorial form.
CL You should have little difficulty seeing that Savage's sure thing principle
is implied by the representation (x) and even by the representation (x). If
we write, in the spirit of (xx), U(h) = J 5 v(h(s),8) = Yoser V(R(s),8) +
Yoses\T (h(s),s), and write a similar expression for g, then as h(s) = g(s)
for s T, a comparison of U(k) and Ulg) depends on how eS\T v(h(s),s)
compares with es\T v(g(s), 8). This comparison is entirely independent of
what h and g are on T.
The theory of Anscombe and Aumann
Savage's treatment goes on from the sure thing principle to other
assumptions that are more complex, and then develops these assumptions
mathematically in very complex fashion. His treatment is a bit hard for
l . .
These would have to be entailed, since we obtain a numerical representation.
Ss
1 +
5
g= 2 y
5
3 Z
5
51 . 1 +
5 . 52 ,
I= ? vy gs y
53 2 3 2
Figure 3.6. Savage's independence axiom in action.
Since h and g give the same prize in s;, a comparison between them
depends only on what they give on the other states. The prize they give
on s; is irrelevant to the comparison. Hence, however h and g are
ranked, h' and ' rank the same way.
a first pass on this subject, so we will continue with a different, easier
formalization, taken from Anscombe and Aumann (1963).
Anscombe and Aumann avoid the complexities that Savage encoun-
ters by enriching the space over which preferences are defined. Like Sav-
age, they take as given a prize space X and a state space . We will
assume that is a finite set.
Their innovation comes at this point. Let P denote the set of all sim-
ple probability distributions on X, and redefine H so that it is the set of all
functions from to P. In comparison, Savage has H as the set of functions
from to X. A story that might be told about the Anscombe-Aumann
construction runs as follows: Imagine that we have at our disposal a set
of objective randomizing devices coins we can flip, dice we can roll,
roulette wheels we can spin that allow us to construct any objective
probability distribution that we wish. That is, given any p FP, we can use
the devices at our disposal to stage the gamble p in a way such that every
consumer we might meet agrees to the objective probabilities in p. For
example, if we wish to create a lottery that gives the prize $10 with prob-
ability 4/5 and $0 with probability 1/5, we might roll a symmetrical die,
paying $10 if it comes up with one through four spots up, paying $0 if it
comes up with five spots up, and rolling again (until we get an outcome be-
tween one and five) if it comes up with six spots up. It is assumed that ev-
ery consumer we might encounter regards this as an objective probability
lottery with prizes $10 and $0 and probabilities 4/5 and 1/5, respectively.
3.4. States of nature and subjective probability 105
1 1
Figure 3.7. A horse race lottery with roulette wheel lotteries for prizes.
We'll call such objective gambles roulette wheel gambles or lotteries. The
next step is to construct the set H of all functions from to P. In words,
an h from this H is a betting ticket that specifies, for each possible outcome
of the horse race, a roulette wheel lottery that is won by the holder of the
betting ticket. Embedded in this new, fancy H is the old (Savage) H,
where the prize contingent on each state s is a degenerate roulette wheel
lottery that gives some prize in X for sure. But this new H is bigger,
because the set of possible prizes is larger; a prize in the horse race lottery
is now a roulette lottery.
To give an example, imagine a (very complex) betting ticket that pays
the following: In state s; (Kelso wins), you get $ 2 for sure. (That
is, you lose $2 for sure.) In state s, (Secretariat wins), you get $3 with
probability 1/2 and $1 with probability 1/2. In state s, (a dead heat),
you get $6 with probability 1/3 and you lose $4 with probability 2/3.
This sort of creature is depicted by a compound chance node, as in figure
3.7, where the compounding is now an important part of the mathematical
formalism. 
And (the punchline) Anscombe and Aumann (and we) will assume
that the consumer has preferences given by ~ defined on this fancy H.
Before talking about those preferences, we introduce a bit of notation.
First, if h H is a horse race lottery in the new, expanded sense, we
write h(s) for that element of P that is the prize under h in state s,
and we write h(z|s) for the objective probability of winning x X under
h, contingent or conditional on the state s. Second, suppose h and g
are two horse race lotteries (in the new, expanded sense), and is a
number between zero and one. Define a new horse race lottery, denoted
ah+(1-a)g, as follows: For each state s, the new horse race lottery gives
as prize the roulette wheel lottery ah(:|s) + (1 a)g(-|s), where this last
object is defined as in section 3.1. Figure 3.8 gives an example of this sort
of operation.
Now we can start suggesting properties for the consumer's prefer-
ences >.
106 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
Figure 3.8. Taking mixtures of horse race lotteries.
When mixing horse race lotteries, you mix the prizes for each outcome
of the horse race.
Assumption 4. (a) is asymmetric.
(b) is negatively transitive.
(c) > satisfies the substitution axiom of section 3.1.
(d) = satisfies the Archimedean axiom of section 3.1.
The first two parts of this assumption should come as no surprise, but
the latter two properties may take some explanation. Look back at the
substitution and Archimedean axioms in section 3.1. They dont depend
on the fact that p, g, and r are probability distributions only that
convex combinations of the objects of choice can be taken. And in the
preceding paragraph you were told how to take convex combinations of
horse race lotteries. So the latter two properties make mathematical sense.
Do they make sense as properties of consumer choice? That is a
harder question to answer, of course. This is left to your own judgment
ee
 In, more advanced texts these properties are stated for algebraic objects called mixture
spaces, and the conclusions of these properties for general mixture spaces, which is some-
thing just short of the von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility representation, is given
by the so-called Mixture Space Theorem. See any of the advanced texts referenced in section 3.7.
3.4. States of nature and subjective probability 107
(although read section 3.5 if you are too optimistic or too pessimistic) with
the (obvious) remark that buying these properties in this setting takes
somewhat more courage than buying them in the context of section 3.1.
Whether you find them sensible or not, they do produce a rather nice
result.
Proposition 3.7. Suppose that is finite. Then the four properties in assump-
tion 4 are necessary and sufficient for > to have a numerical representation U
of the following form. There exists for each state s a function us from X to the
real line such that for h H, 
Uy => us@hlals).
seES =
Some hard staring is required to comprehend this result.. Of course,
when we say that U is a numerical representation of >, we mean that
hg ifand only if U(h) > U(g).
The result here establishes the existence of such a numerical representation
and tells us something about the structure we can assume for the function
UU: For each state, there is a state-dependent utility function us. To evaluate
h, first, for each state s, compute the expected utility of the roulette gamble
h(:|s) using the utility function for state s. This is the term 3 us(@hlx]s).
Then sum these expected utilities, summing over the states s.
Example: Suppose that your utility functions, depending on the outcome
of the horse race, are: In state s;, us (2) = z/2; in state s,, ug, (xz) =
2e2%; in state ss, Us (z) = .0le'*. Then the overall utility of the
gamble depicted in figure 3.7 is computed as follows. In state s;, you have
$2 for sure, so your state-dependent expected utility in state s, is 2/2=
1. In state s,, your state-dependent expected utility is (1 [2)(2e~2%3) +
(1/2)(=2e~2") = 1.3675. And in state s;, your state-dependent expected
utility is (1 /3)(.01e~1%6)+(2/3)(.01e~*~*) = .0118. Hence the overall
index (utility) of this gamble is (~1) + (1.3675) + (.0118) = 2.3793.
What is nice here is that (a) we get additive separability over outcomes
of the horse race and (b) for each outcome of the horse race, we compute
expected utility as in section 3.1. What is less nice is that we only get
additive separability over horse race outcomes; the state-dependent utility
functions needn't bear any particular relationship to one another. Put
108 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
another way, this representation is very much like the representation (x),
where the state dependent utility function v(h(-|s), s) defined on Px. has
the form, for each s, of von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility. Now
we could stop here (and go on to see what consequences this representation
has for demand behavior the consequences are substantial); or we could
add properties for each state-dependent utility function (such as decreasing
risk aversion, etc., if the prizes are money amounts). But instead we will
add another property for > that will tie together the various us.
This requires a bit of notation. For p P (a roulette lottery), write p
as an element of H (a horse race lottery) meaning the horse race lottery
that gives, regardless of the outcome of the horse race, the prize p. With
this, we can give the new property:
Assumption 5. Fix any p and q from P. Fix any state s*. Construct horse
race lotteries h and g as follows: Pick (arbitrarily) any r P, and let h(s) =r
if s# 5% Ms*) =p, gls) =r if s s*, and g(s*) = gq. Then p > q if and only
if hg.
What does this mean? First, understand what h and g are. Both h and
g give prize r if the horse race outcome is anything other than s*; h has
prize p if the outcome is s*; and g has prize q if the outcome is s*. Note
that as long as the other four properties hold, the choice of r is (therefore)
irrelevant to the preference relation between h and g; the difference in
U(h) and Ug) is the difference between
> us@pl@) and Yue (@)g).
With this, we can reinterpret the property given: It says that the sign of the
difference between the two terms in the display just above is independent
of the particular state s*. If the difference runs one way for one s*, it runs
the same way for all. (This isn't quite what the property says, but you
should be able to convince yourself that it is equivalent.) In other words,
the preference that the consumer has between a pair of roulette lotteries
is independent of the state in which the two are compared. See figure 3.9
for an illustration.
And the consequence is
Proposition 3.8. For finite S, satisfies assumptions 4 and 5 if and only if we
have a representation U of the following type. There is a function uw: X R
3.4. States of nature and subjective probability 109
51 51
p q
5
Sy , \ 2 ,
5 5
3 , 3 ,
If and only if
51 51
r . r
5 5
2 ros 2 r
53 53
p q
Figure 3.9. An equivalent formulation of the extra property.
The extra property is equivalent to the assumption that the consumer's
preference over roulette wheel lotteries at any given outcome of the horse
race doesnt depend on outcome. (We find preference over roulette wheel
lotteries at a given outcome by holding constant the prizes won at all
other outcomes.)
and a strictly positive probability distribution on S such that
UR) = mls) ul@hlzls).
SES z
In this representation, mw is unique and w is unique up to positive affine trans-
formations.
The interpretation is that our consumer assesses subjective probability = (s)
that the outcome of the horse race will be s, and he has a utility function for
prizes u that is (otherwise) independent of the state. In words, a horse race
gamble is as good as its subjective expected utility. Except for the objective
lottery part of these gambles, we have Savage's representation (x).
For example, in our horse race example, a typical representation
might be that w(z) = e%, n(s;) = .6, n(sy) = .399, and 7(s;) = .001. We
would interpret this as the consumer has constant absolute risk aversion (recall
the previous section) and assesses probability .6 that Kelso will win, probability
.399 that Secretariat will win, and probability .001 that the race will end in a
dead heat.
110 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
If you like a challenge, you should be able to prove this proposition
from earlier propositions without difficulty; remember the uniqueness part of
the proposition in section 31. In this version we require that the subjective
probability of every state s is strictly positive. This we did for convenience;
it is easy to dispense with. Finally, all this requires a finite state space 5.
The AnscombeAumann treatment, and especially the result of propo-
sition 3.7, is more subtle than it may seem at first. Let me support that
contention with one that is more concrete: Tt is crucial for this theory that the
horses run before the roulette wheel is spun. That is, one could imagine begin-
ning with H =X Sas in Savage's treatment, and then letting > be defined on
all simple probability distributions on H. Posing assumption 4 on this space,
where, more or less, we build compound lotteries with the objective uncer-
tainty coming first, would lead to a result far weaker than the representation
in proposition 3.7. Until you understand why this is, you miss an implicit
assumption that is crucial to the Anscombe-Aumanin representation. I will
not attempt to explain this here but send you instead to Kreps (1988,105-8).
The Harsanyi doctrine
There is a final philosophical point to make about subjective expected
utility and subjective probability. In economics, one usually takes the tastes
and preferences of the consumer as exogenous data. This isn't to say, for
example, that you can't present a consumer with information that will
cause the consumer to realize a particular product is a good or one he will
enjoy; but, in the end, there is no arguing about tastes. Is the same true of
subjective probability assessments? Are subjective probability assessments
as subjective and personal as tastes?
To be very pedantic about this, return to the question of betting on the
next World Cup. We will look at gambles whose outcomes depend only
on whether the winner of the next Cup comes from Europe (including
the Soviet Union) or from Latin America or from the rest of the world,
so we take a three-element state space S = {51,852,855 where 8 is the
state that a European team wins the next World Cup, s, is the state that a
Latin American team wins, and s; is the state that some other team wins.
We will take the prize space X to be [0,100], with numerical amounts
representing dollars won. Now imagine that we give some consumer her
choice of the three gambles (from the AnscombeAumann version of H)
depicted in figure 3.10. Suppose she ranks the three as h > h > Rh. Then
if her preferences conform to the Anscombe-Aumann axioms (and if she
prefers more money to less), we interpret this as: Our consumer as-
sesses probability greater than 48 that a Latin American team will win
and probability less than 48 that a European team will win. Indeed,
by varying the probability in i and looking for a value where she is
3.4. States of nature and subjective probability 111
h" =
Figure 3.10. Three compound lotteries.
indifferent between h and h' (as modified), we will find the subjective
probability that she assesses that a Latin American team will win. All
this talk about subjective probabilities that she assesses is entirely a con-
struct of the representation that is guaranteed by the Anscombe-Aumann
axioms, and it arises entirely from our consumer's preferences for lotter-
ies like those shown. A different consumer might express the preferences
Bw h = h, and we would, therefore, know that these consumers pref-
erences are represented by different subjective assessments over the state
space S, if each set of preferences satisfies the Anscombe-Aumann axioms.
Economists (of a neoclassical stripe) would rarely if ever insist that
consumers have the same ordinal preferences over bundles of goods or
the same levels of risk aversion or risk tolerence. Individual consumers
are allowed to have individual preferences. Seemingly then, one would
allow subjective probabilities, as another part of the expression of per-
sonal preferences, to vary across individuals. If this seems so to you, and
it certainly does to me, you are forewarned that, amongst many micro-
economists, it is dogma (philosophy?) that two individuals having access
to the same information will necessarily come up with the same subjective
probability assessments. Any difference in subjective probability assess-
ments must be the result of differences in information. Our two consumers
might express the preferences given above, but only if they have been ex-
posed to different pieces of information about the qualities of the various
teams, etc. This assumption has very substantial implications for exchange
among agents; we will encounter some of these later in the book. I leave
it to others to defend this assumption see, for example, Aumann (1987,
section 5) as I cannot do so. But the reader should be alerted to this
modeling assumption, which plays an important role in parts of modern
microeconomic theory; it is called both the common prior assumption and
the Harsanyi doctrine.
3.5. Problems with these models
The von Neumann-Morgenstern model, where probabilities are objec-
tive, and the Savage (or Anscombe-Aumann) model, where probabilities
are subjective, are the chief models of consumer choice under uncertainty
In microeconomics. Indeed, chief is an understatement; predominant
is better, but still not strong enough. One wonders, then: (a) Are there
theoretical reasons to distrust these models? (b) How good are they empir-
ically? (c) If there are problems with the models, what are the alternatives?
In this section we begin to answer these questions.
Theoretical problems
There are a number of theoretical reasons for distrusting these models.
These reasons often arise from the way the models are used in applica-
tions; only a limited portion of the consumers overall decision problem
is modeled, and it is assumed that the consumers choice behavior on the
limited problem conforms to this sort of model. Even though the consumer's
overall choice behavior might conform to this sort of model, choice behavior can
fail to conform on pieces examined in isolation. Two of the most important rea-
sons for this have to do with portfolio effects and the temporal resolution
of uncertainty. -
Portfolio effects are, in spirit, the same as complement/substitute
effects in the usual theory of consumer choice under certainty. If we.
wished to model the demand for, say, wheat, it would be important to
realize that the price of corn is a key variable. We (probably) wouldn't
try to analyze the wheat market in isolation. Or, rather, when we do try
to analyze the wheat market in isolation, there is a lot of incanting of
ceteris paribus (or, everything else, and in particular the price of corn,
held equal). With lotteries, something similar but even more sinister takes
place. Suppose we asked the consumer how he felt about lotteries posed
by taking positions in the stock of General Motors. According to these
models, we would describe the lotteries by probability distributions over
the dollar returns from the positions (possibly having the consumer give
his subjective assessment of those distributions), and we would expect the
consumers preferences concerning the gambles are given by the expected
utilities they engender. But if this consumer already has a position in the
stock of General Motors, or a position in the stock of, say, Ford, we would
expect his preferences to be affected. Put another way, given the consumer
has an initial position in Ford, if we had two gambles with the exact same
probability distribution, but one involved the stock of General Motors and
the other involved the stock of General Mills, because of differences in the
Pte pe Gr
3.5. Problems with these models 113
correlations in returns between Ford and General Motors and between Ford and
General Mills, we expect the consumer to feel differently about them. We
would see this if we modeled the entire portfolio choice problem of the
individual including in one model all the separate gambles that make
up the one grand lottery that this individual faces. But we cannot look at
preferences between gambles involving the stock of General Motors and
the stock of General Mills in isolation and expect the model to work. And
we cant incant ceteris paribus here with much conviction holding fixed
the consumers net position in Ford isnt the issue. The issue is instead
the differences in correlation between the gambles being investigated and
the gambles left out of the model. The (marginal) probability distributions
of the gambles under consideration are not sufficient descriptions of the
objects under choice; two gambles with the same marginal distributions
(but different joint distributions with the consumers unmodeled portfolio)
would rank differently.
As for temporal resolution of uncertainty, the easiest way to introduce
this is with an example. Suppose a coin will be flipped (independent of
everything else in the world). If it comes up heads, you'll be given a
check for $10,000; if it comes up tails, you'll get nothing. Or you can
have a check for $3,000. (You may wish to supply a number in place of
the $3,000, so that you just slightly prefer the gamble.) One complication
arises; the money will be given to you next September 1. This isn't so
complicated that we can't gear up the models of choice from the previ-
ous sections. Assuming it is a fair coin, this sounds like a gamble with
probability .5 of $10,000 and .5 of nothing, against a sure thing of $3,000.
But consider a real complication. We have in mind three gambles that
you might be given. The first is just as above, a coin flip gamble, where
the coin is flipped today and you are told the result today. The second is just
as above, a coin flip gamble, where the coin is flipped next September 1
and you are told the result at that date. And in the third, we have the same
coin flip, flipped today, and you will be told the result next September 1. How
do you rank these three?
If you conformed to the models above when applied to this choice
problem in isolation, then you would rank them identically. They all
have the same probability distribution on prizes. (Note also, they are
independent of other gambles you may be facing; this isnt a portfolio
problem.) But if you are like most people, you like the first gamble better
 Readers who followed our earlier discussion of demand for assets with more than one
risky asset will recognize that discussion as a more precise version of what has been de-
scribed here.
114 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
than the second two, and you are indifferent between the second two. Two
things are at work here:
(a) Getting the information sooner is valuable to you
(b) The important time is when the uncertainty resolves for you, the deci-
sion maker, and not when the uncertainty is physically resolved
These two statements follow from things we leave out of the model when
we think of these gambles simply as probability distributions over some
income you might receive. For example, between now and next September
1 you have a number of consumption choices to make how much to
spend on an apartment, on food, on a vacation. What you will do between
now and then depends, at least in part, on the resources you have now
and the resources you think you will have later. If the uncertainty in
this gamble is resolved for you now, you can use that information better
to fit your consumption choices between now and September 1 to your
(now better-known) resources. If the uncertainty resolves for you next
September 1, you will have to temporize in the meantime. Note well that
what drives this is the presence of (consumption) decisions you must make
that are not analyzed if we look at the gambles in isolation. It is a problem,
as before, of a partial or incomplete model of your overall choice problem.
(This is why in our discussion of induced preferences for income, induced
from preferences for consumption, we said that it was important that the
uncertainty about income resolved before any consumption decisions had
to be made.)
This shows that timing of resolution of uncertainty can matter. When
viewing these gambles in isolation, it isr't enough to describe the possible
prizes and their probabilities. What is less obvious (but still true) is that
we mightn't expect the usual sort of model to hold in comparing gambles,
if we fix all gambles to resolve at a specified later date. (Problem 11 will
confirm this.)
What do we do in the face of these problems? One solution is to
include in our models all the relevant portions of the consumer's overall
choice problem. This is fairly unpalatable; putting everything in makes
the model unwieldy and, often, intractable. Or you could restrict attention
6 The timing of resolution of uncertainty can be important for psychological reasons as
well, even if the consumer has no particular use for the information in the sense that it could
change some decisions he must make. Pending/hanging uncertainty can, in itself, be a good
or a bad. The commonplace view is that hanging uncertainty when there is a small chance of
very good news and no chance of bad news is typically good, while any hanging uncertainty
about a possible bad is in itself a bad. These are important effects, worthy of attention. But
they are different from the effects that concern us here.
3.5. Problems with these models 115
only to those pieces for which the standard models do apply. This is unpal-
atable because the conditions required for the standard models to apply are
quite stringent (see the next paragraph). A better alternative is to look for
models of choice that are correct for pieces of a bigger model. Such models
will necessarily have less structure than the standard von Neumann-Mor-
genstern or Savage models but can still have enough structure to permit
some analysis. For example, in dealing with portfolio effects, if you choose
a states of the world model, then you can have additive separability
across states and (even) some comparability of the various state-dependent
utility functions. In dealing with problems in temporal resolution of un-
certainty, you can have preferences that are locally linear in probabilities;
recent work by Machina (1982, 1984) shows that this is enough to get back
some of the standard results in the economics of uncertainty.
Empirical evidence in simple settings
For the two reasons above (and others besides), one worries about
the application of these models of choice to contexts that study an isolated
piece of the consumer's overall choice problem. It can be shown, though,
that isolating a piece is okay if the consumer obeys the model of choice
overall and if the piece has the simplest possible structure; the risk in the
gambles is independent of other risks the decision maker might face, and
the uncertainty in the gambles resolves immediately. But we can (and do)
still wonder how these models perform as descriptive models of individual
choice under uncertainty, even in settings with this ultra-simple structure.
The typical method for investigating this question is to run experi
ments on subject populations. The caricature subject population consists
of college sophomores who are told in their introductory psych courses that
they need to take part in a certain number of such experiments to pass
the course. The subjects are asked hypothetical questions: How would
you pick if offered a choice between and ; between and
; etc.? And we look for violations of the usual models of choice. Such
studies are often criticized as being artificial: The subject population isn't
used to dealing with the sort of question asked; the subjects aren't given
appropriate incentives to take the question seriously (the questions are hy-
pothetical); it isnt clear that the experiments have anything to say about
choices made in economically important contexts, and so on. (Since these
studies draw so much fire, you can already guess what they will say.) But
experimental economists and psychologists have dealt within their limited
budgets with these criticisms, and these experiments continue to give over
and over a few results that are not in keeping with the models above and
that make it incumbent on economists to offer excuses for themselves and
their models.
We will discuss three of the most important effects suggested by the
experimental literature. They all have to do with choice under uncertainty.
This isnt to say that the models of choice under certainty haven't been
scrutinized in like manner they have been and problems arise there
as well, along with very nice perceptual and cognitive models concerning
how individuals do make choices.
(a) The Allais Paradox. The most famous violation of the von Neumann
Morgenstern expected utility model is named after its discoverer, Maurice
Allais. One variation on this runs as follows:
Choose between two gambles. The first gives a .33 chance of
$27,500, a .66 chance of $24,000, and a .01 chance of nothing. The
second gives $24,000 for sure.
Choose between two gambles. The first gives a .33 chance of
$27,500 and a .67 chance of nothing. The second gives a 34 chance
of $24,000 and a .66 chance of nothing.
The typicdl (modal) response pattern is to take the sure thing in the first
case, and the first gamble in the second. This particular response pattern
violates the substitution axiom.
A number of explanations have been hypothesized for this. The spirit
of most of them is that individuals rescale probabilities, with more weight
(proportionately) given to small probability events.
(b) The Elisberg Paradox. Due to Daniel Elisberg, this runs as follows:
An urn contains 300 colored marbles; 100 of the marbles are ted,
and 200 are some mixture of blue and green. We will reach into
this urn and select a marble at random:
You receive $1,000 if the marble selected is of a specified color.
Would you rather that color be red or blue?
You receive $1,000 if the marble selected is not of a specified color.
Would you rather that color be blue or red?
The modal responses are red in the first case and red in the second. And
the preferences are strict.
7 Try to prove this yourself, or see the discussion on framing, Alternatively, you can show
that no expected utility maximizer could express the two choices above. _
3.5. Problems with these models 117
This violates the Savage or Anscombe-Aumann axioms. If those ax-
ioms are satisfied, then the decision maker chooses as if he assessed sub-
jective probabilities that the marble selected is red, blue, and green. (It
seems natural to assess probability 1/3 for red, and it seems natural to me
at least to assess 1/3 each for blue and green as well. But the assessment is
up to the consumer) If the consumer strictly prefers red in the first case,
he must assess a higher probability for red than for blue. But then he
should assess a higher probability for the event the marble is not blue than
for the event that the marble is not red. Hence he should, if he conforms to
the model, strictly prefer to answer blue in the second question.
Ellsberg (and others both before and after him) use this sort of behav-
ior to claim that there is a real distinction to be made between situations
where there is risk (objective uncertainty) and situations with uncertainty
(subjective uncertainty). The story goes: People dislike the ambiguity that
comes with choice under uncertainty; they dislike the possibility that they
may have the odds wrong and so make a wrong choice. Hence in this
example in each case they go with the gamble where they know the odds
 betting for or against red.
(c) Framing. Early in chapter 2, we discussed the effect that framing can
have on choice. In fact, the example given there about various vaccination
programs was an example of choice under uncertainty. In that example,
the two different ways of framing the options amounted to a shift of the
status quo are the six hundred still alive or already dead? and
experimenters have shown that, in general, choices made under uncer-
tainty can be powerfully influenced by the decision makers perception of
the status quo. (See Kahneman and Tversky, 1979.)
There are many interesting aspects of framing and its impact on choice,
many more than we can describe here. But one aspect of framing is es-
pecially relevant to our earlier discussion. Consider the two compound
gambles in figure 3.11(a) and (b). Which would you choose?
3/34
34 33/ $27,500 34
C 1/34 $0 a $24,000
66 $24,000 $6 $24,000
(a) (b)
Figure 3.11. Two compound lotteries.
118 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
33/34
$27,500 34
34 $24,000
66
$0 8g
(a) (2)
Figure 3.12. Two more compound lotteries.
And how would you choose between the two compound lotteries in fig-
ure 3.127
These gambles are drawn so that the decision maker naturally focuses
on the differences between the two in each pair a 33/34 chance of
$27,500 (and a 1/34 chance of nothing) in (a) against $24,000 for sure
in (b). The.incidence of consistent choices, that is, (a) in both cases
or (b) in both cases, is higher than in the Allais paradox.? But these
compound gambles are precisely the gambles of the Allais paradox;
that is, they reduce to the single-stage gambles of the Allais paradox if the
rules of probability theory are applied. Insofar as framing these gambles
as compound lotteries changes choice from when the gambles are framed
as single-stage lotteries, the entire structure on which the standard theory
is built begins to shake. 
Rather a lot of work has been done recently on recasting von Neu- 
mann-Morgenstern expected utility theory in ways that allow preferences
to accommodate the Allais paradox. Somewhat less, but still some, work
has been done on modifying the standard Savage and Anscombe-Aumann
models to allow for Ellsberg paradox-like preferences. Machina (forthcom-
ing) contains a good survey of this material, together with an exposition
of the standard models and the experimental evidence that is available.
Very little indeed has been done (at least, in the literature of economics) to
confront generally problems of framing. This is a very important frontier
in choice theory.
Validity of the models in complex settings
Another reason to disbelieve these models of choice, especially in
how they are applied in economic contexts, concerns the complexity of
the decision problems in which they are employed. They are used, for
8 Gee, for example, Tversky and Kahneman (1986).
9 This indicates, of course, how it is that the Allais paradox is a violation of the von
Neumann-Morgenstern substitution axiom.
3.5. Problems with these models 119
example, to model the consumption-investment budgeting problems of
an individual, over the individual's entire life. They are used to model
individuals who are assumed to be solving statistical inference problems
that the economist who is writing down the model cannot solve. They are
used to model extraordinarily complex interactions between individuals,
where each individual is (correctly) assessing what others will be doing in
response to information that they have, even though the person writing
down the model cant make that assessment, and so on. (Lest you think
I am sneering at such silly applications, which are quite common among
microeconomic theorists, the three sins listed above are my Ow.)
This problem is sometimes described as one of assumed unlimited
rationality on the part of individuals in economic models. Individuals
are assumed to understand to an amazing extent the environment within
which they act, and it is assumed they can perform fantastic calculations
to find their own best course of actions at no cost and taking no time.
This is, of course, ridiculous. Faced with complexity, individuals resort
to rules of thumb, to back of the envelope calculations, to satisficing
behavior (taking the first satisfactory alternative that arises), and the
like. It seems patent that such limitedly rational behavior would, when
placed in a complex economic context, have important implications.
We hinted in chapter 1 at the excuses that are typically made. There is
the positive economics defense: It is only necessary that behavior is as
if these calculations were performed. For example (this line of defense
often goes), the calculations necessary when driving a car and determining
whether it is safe to pass someone ahead are incredibly complex. Yet we
see individuals, even those without the benefit of a high school education,
succeed in such calculations every day. (We also see them fail occasionally,
but there is some chance of a bad outcome any time there is uncertainty.)
One might retort that such choices are made, but they are done heuristi-
cally, and (probably) with a greater than optimal margin of safety built in.
The defender of the faith would respond that this is as if the individual
were optimizing with a more risk averse utility function.
Moreover (the defender of the faith will say) small variations from
the theory on the individual level are not important if they cancel out in
aggregate. Of course, this presumes that it is the aggregate outcomes that
are of consequence. And it presumes no systematic bias in the deviations in
behavior from that which is posited. Any systematic bias would (probably)
have aggregate consequences that are important.
The defender of the faith has yet another line of defense that was not
mentioned in chapter 1: There are no palatable alternatives. Most alter-
natives that have been proposed have been criticized as being ad hoc and
without any testable restrictions: If we allow any behavior at all, or if the
behavior that is allowed is at the whim of the modeler, Predictive power
is lost. But this rejoinder is something of a non sequitur. If the alternatives
so far developed are ad hoc (and I dont mean to prejudge this issue at
all), this doesnt mean that acceptable alternatives cannot be developed.
One always hopes that some good and generally accepted models of limit-
edly rational behavior will come along. (And there are, occasionally, some
attempts in this direction. Indeed, as this is being written, there is rather
more activity in this direction than usual.) But until they do....
Finally (and this is the line of defense with which I am personally the
most comfortable), you should not rule out the possibility that you can
learn things of value by making such heroic assumptions about powers
of economic actors. This isnt to say that you cant be misled, or that you
cant learn other things with more reasonable assumptions. But neither of
these precludes insight coming from models of behavior that are somewhat
incredible along this dimension.
3.6. Normgtive applications of the theory
Another way to view the models of this chapter is to interpret them
as normative rather than descriptive theory. The normative view runs:
(0) Suppose you are in a situation in which you must make a particular,
fairly complex choice. The choice in question might involve random events
without objective probabilities, many different outcomes, and so on.
(1) Ask yourself: Can this situation be embedded within a general choice
situation that has the structure of one of the models above?
(2) If the answer to the first question is yes, do the properties of pref-
erence that we have discussed seem sensible in this situation? In other
words, is it reasonable to take a choice based on preferences that conform
to these properties?
(3) If the answer is yes again, then we know that you want your choice to
be based on the sort of criteria that is implied by the particular framework
and properties expected utility maximization or subjective expected
utility maximization.
(4) And (the punchline to this) it may be possible to get the data needed for
the representation by asking yourself about less complex specific choices
and about general properties of your preferences. This will give you the
3.6. Normative applications of the theory 121
data for the representation then with that data you compute the best
option in the complex situation.
For example, suppose you are offered a gamble in which the prizes
are $1,000, $700, $470, $225, $32, $-87, $-385, $642, and $745. The
probabilities depend on the exact closing level of the Dow Jones Industrial
Average next Friday afternoon. For example, the gamble might specify
that you get $1,000 if the DJIA is 100 points above its current level, $700
if it is between 100 and 80 points over its current level, and so on.
(1) Can we formulate this in terms of one of the models above? Quite
definitely the Anscombe~Aumann model applies, where the states of
the world are various levels of the DJIA.
(2) Do you subscribe to the appropriate axioms? In this case, you might.
The uncertainty resolves quite soon, and you may not have significant
asset holdings that are correlated with this uncertainty. (If you did, a
more complex normative model could be used.)
(3) Hence your choice-whether to take this gamble or not should be made
according to the representation of the Anscombe~Aumann framework. We
need to get your subjective probability assessment for the future level of
the DJIA, and we need to get your utility function for money.
So far, nothing useful has come out of this exercise. Indeed, in (1) and
(2) you were asked some hard questions, which (one hopes) you thought
hard about. But now:
(4a) Consider first your subjective assessment for the DJ[A. A number of
procedures help to do this. Some, involving inference from past data, are
probably already familiar to you. Others involve framing questions for
yourself in a way that is easy to perceive and that eliminates systematic
biases. In the end, you will still have to give your subjective assessment,
but there are ways to increase your confidence in the validity of the
assessment you make. :
(4b) It is somewhat easier to describe how to simplify getting your utility
function. First, it is probably safe to assume that your preferences are
increasing in money; your utility function is monotone. Second, as long
as you can afford to lose the $745, you can probably be convinced that
you are risk averse; your utility function will be concave. Kahneman and
Tversky (and others before them) tell us to be careful around the level of
zero you may exhibit a zero illusion putting more significance into
the difference between gains and losses on this gamble than you would
122 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
want, once this is pointed out to you. We need your utility function for a
range of $1,000 to $745, and we can get this, at least roughly, by asking
you relatively simple questions such as: What is your certainty equivalent
for a coin flip gamble where the prizes are $1,000 and $ 800? Note
what we're doing here. We ask the simplest possible certainty equivalent
question, involving a coin flip gamble. With the answers to such relatively
easy questions, we can build your utility function for the entire range, and
we can put you through consistency checks of the answers you give.
And more besides. Now you know about increasing and decreasing
and constant risk aversion. It is likely that you can be convinced in gen-
eral that you wish to be (weakly) nonincreasingly risk averse. And if the
range of prizes isn't too significant for you, as might be the case for this
particular problem, then you may even be able to be convinced that you
wish to exhibit virtually constant absolute risk aversion over this range.
If you accept this, then we are really in business; we have the determi-
nation of your utility function down to finding a single constant, which
we determine by a single question about a coin flip gamble (although
we'll ask several, as a consistency check). The greater is the number of
qualitative properties to which you are willing to ascribe in this particular
problem (and constant risk aversion over this range of prizes is an easy-to-
understand and incredibly powerful property), the easier it is to carry out
probability and utility function-assessment. Once we have your subjective
probability assessments and your utility function, we can quickly grind
through the complex gamble given to see if you want to take it.
3.7. Bibliographic notes
The material of this chapter combines a lot of the theory of choice
under uncertainty and a bit of the economics of uncertainty. On the sub-
ject of choice under uncertainty, you are directed to three text/reference
books: Fishburn (1970), Kreps (1988), and Machina (forthcoming). For
getting all the details of the standard model, Fishburn is highly recom-
mended. Kreps (1988) omits some of the details of proofs, but is perhaps
more immediately accessible than Fishburn. Machina (forthcoming), be-
sides providing a complete treatment of the standard theory, gives the
9 One approach is to frame the same gamble several different ways. For example, we ask
you for your certainty equivalent for a coin flip gamble where the prizes are $ 1,000 and
$0, and then we ask you for your certainty equivalent for a coin flip gamble where the prizes
are $0 and $1,000, where you first must pay $1,000. These are the same questions in terms
of the final balance of your bank account, and, upon reflection, you are likely to decide that
you want to give the same net answer.
3.7. Bibliographic notes 123
reader an up-to-date account of recent developments in choice theory that
are intended to address Allais and Ellsberg style paradoxes. If you like
to consult original sources, see VOL Neumann and Morgenstern (1944),
Savage (1954), and Anscombe and Aumann (1963).
The material on utility functions for money (and especially absolute
and relative risk aversion) is further developed (in varying degrees) in
the three books listed above. The classic references are Arrow (1974) and
Pratt (1964) (the coefficient of absolute risk aversion is sometimes called the
Arrow-Pratt measure of risk aversion in consequence). We touched very
briefly (in smaller type) on the subject of more and less risky gambles;
Machina (forthcoming) gives a particularly good treatment of this.
The economics of uncertainty (demand for insurance, demand for
risky assets) is developed in many different places. Borch (1968) provides
a very readable introduction and Arrow (1974) contains a number of clas-
sic developments. Matters concerned with asset markets quickly merge in
the academic discipline of finance; a good text on this subject is Huang
and Litzenberger (1988).
The papers cited concerning the empirical problems with these mod-
els are Allais (1953), Ellsberg (1961), and Kahneman and Tversky (1979).
Machina (forthcoming) provides an overview of much of this, with re-
cent theoretical developments that are intended to respond to Allais and
Ellsberg style paradoxes.
References
Allais, M. 1953. Le Comportement de Homme Rationnel devant le
Risque, Critique des Postulates et Axiomes de I'Ecole Americaine.
Econometrica 21:503-46.
Anscombe, F, and R. Aumann. 1963. A Definition of Subjective Proba-
bility. Annals of Mathematical Statistics 34:199-205.
Arrow, K. 1974. Essays in the Theory of Risk Bearing. Amsterdam: North
Holland.
Aumann, R. 1987. Correlated Equilibrium as an Expression of Bayesian
Rationality. Econometrica 55:1-18.
Borch, K. 1968. The Economics of Uncertainty. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
Diamond, P, and J. Stiglitz. 1974. Increases in Risk and in Risk Aversion.
Journal of Economic Theory 8:337-60.
Elisberg, D. 1961. Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 75:643-69.
Fishburn, P. [1970] 1979. Utility Theory for Decision Making. New York:
John Wiley and Sons. Reprint. Huntington, N.Y.: R. E. Krieger Pub-
lishing.
Huang, C-f,, and R. Litzenberger. 1988. Foundations for Financial Economics.
New York: Elsevier Science Publishing Company.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky. 1979. Prospect Theory: An Analysis of
Decision Under Risk. Econometrica 47:263-91.
Kreps, D. 1988. Notes on the Theory of Choice. Boulder, Colo.: Westview
Press.
Machina, M. 1982. Expected Utility Analysis without the Independence
Axiom. Econometrica 50:277-323.
. 1984. Temporal Risk and the Nature of Induced Preferences.
Journdl of Economic Theory 33:199-231.
(Forthcoming). The Economic Theory of Individual Choice Under
Uncertainty: Theory, Evidence, and New Directions. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Pratt, J. 1964. Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large. Econometrica
32:122-36.
Ross, S. 1981. Some Stronger Measures of Risk Aversion in the Small and
in the Large with Applications. Econometrica 49:621-38.
Rothschild, M., and J. Stiglitz. 1970. Increasing Risk. I A Definition.
Journal of Economic Theory 2:225-43.
. 1971. Increasing Risk. II: Its Economic Consequences. Journal
of Economic Theory 3:66-84.
 1973. Addendum to Increasing Risk. Journal of Economic Theory
5:306.
Savage, L. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: John Wiley and
Sons. Rev. and enl. ed. New York: Dover Publications, 1972.
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman. 1986. Rational Choice and the Framing
of Decisions. Journal of Business 59:5251-78.
Von Neumann, J., and O. Morgenstern. 1944. Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. (2d edition 1947;
3d edition 1953).
3.8. Problems
= 1. (a) Prove lemma 1. (Assumption 2 should figure prominently in your
proof. Begin with the case a=1.)
3.8. Problems 125
(b) Prove lemma 2. (Deal with the cases p ~ 8, and p ~ ,, first. Then
define a = inf{@: 86, + (1 Bb, = p}. Use the Archimedean property to
show that ady + (1 @)by ~ p.)
(c) Prove lemma 3. (This is harder than lemmas 1 and 2 and is left as
something of a challenge. Consider three cases: p~ g~ s forall s P;
there is some s P with s p; and then there is some s P with p > 5.)
(d) Give a formal proof of lemma 4. (Use induction on the size of the
support of p. Recall here that we assume that all probability distributions
in question have finite support.)
(e) Extend the proof of lemma 4 to cases without best and worst prizes.
(Suppose there are two prizes with & > ,. Arbitrarily set u(b) = 1 and
w0) = 0. If > 8; > Oy, define u(z) as in lemma 2. If , > &, use
lemma 2 to show that there is a unique a such that af, + (1 a)b, ~ 8
and define w(z) = 1/a. If 6, > ., use lemma 2 to show that there is a
unique a such that ady + (1 a)d; ~ 6, and define u(z) = a/(1 @).
Then show that this works. Everything should be clear, if a bit tedious,
once you figure out why this gives the right definition for wu.)
(f) Prove the uniqueness part of proposition 3.1. (Hint: Begin your proof
as follows. Suppose u and v (with domain X) both give expected utility
representations for . Suppose it is not the case that v(-) = au(-) +b for
constants a > 0 and b. Then there exist three members of X such that....)
m2. Let p be a probability distribution giving prizes $10 and $20 with
probabilities 2/3 and 1/3, respectively, and let p be a probability distri-
bution giving prizes $5, $15, and $30 with probabilities 1/3, 5/9 and 1/9,
respectively. Show that any risk averse expected utility maximizer will
(weakly) prefer p to p. (Hint: Construct p as a compound lottery as
discussed at the end of the subsection on risk aversion.) Can you supply
a general statement of the principle at work in this specific example?
= 3. At the end of the first subsection of section 3.3, we asked the ques-
ton: Fix a consumer with von Neumann-Morgenstern preferences over
lotteries for consumption bundles, and fix this consumers income at some
level Y. Given two price vectors p and p/, would the consumer rather be
in an economy where prices are either p or p/, each probability 1/2, or
in an economy where the prices are sure to be .5p + .5p'? We asserted
that there is no clear answer to that question. In this problem, you are
asked to develop two examples that indicate what can happen along these
lines.
126 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
(a) Imagine that there are two goods, and the consumer's ordinal pref-
erences are given by Uz, 22) = Tr + @;. That is, the consumer's von
Neumann-Morgenstern utility function is wy, zp) = fz; +2,) for some
strictly increasing function f on the real line. Suppose that p = (1,3) and
p= 3,1). Show that regardless of what the function f is, this consumer
prefers to take her chances with the risky prices.
(b) Imagine that there are two goods and the consumers von Neumann-
Morgenstern utility function is w(x, 22) = f(min{z;, z,}) for some concave,
strictly increasing function f on the real line. Assume that f(0) is finite.
Now suppose that the risk in prices is entirely risk in the overall price
level: p = (v,7) and p = (1/7,1/7) for some scalar v > 1. Prove that
for fixed you can always find a function f such that the consumer
prefers the, certain prices 5p+.5p" to the risky prices. And prove that for
every concave, strictly increasing function f with F(0) finite there is a =
sufficiently large so the consumer prefers the risky prices to the certain
prices.
m 4. Recall the analysis of an insurance buying consumer in section 3.3.
Suppose this consumer has a concave utility function for net income that is
not necessarily differentiable. What changes does this cause for the results
given in our discussion? :
-
 5. Suppose that.an insurance policy compensates a victim for loss, but .
does so somewhat imperfectly. That is, imagine that in the story given
about the insurance buying consumer our consumers income prior to any
insurance is Y A, where A is a simple lottery whose support includes 0
and some strictly positive amounts. The available insurance policy pays a
flat amount B in the event of any loss, that is, in the event that A exceeds
zero. The premium is still . Let = be the probability that the consumer
sustains a loss. The contract is actuarially fair if = 7B. Suppose this is
so and that B is the expected amount of the loss, if there is a loss. If the
consumer has a concave, differentiable utility function, will she buy full
insurance? (Use a simple parameterized example if you cant do this in
general.)
Questions 6 through 9 all concern the discussion in section 3.3 of demand for
risky assets.
u 6. Consider the following specialization of the discussion in section 3.3:
The consumer has $W to invest, which he must allocate between two
possible investments. The first is a sure thing put in $1, and get $r > $1
back. The second is risky for every $1 invested, it returns a random
3.8. Problems 127
amount $6, where 6 is a simple lottery on (0, 00) with distribution 7. We
assume that the expected value of & is strictly greater than r but that
there is positive probability that 0 takes on some value that is strictly less
than . We allow this investor to sell short the riskless asset but not the
risky asset. And we do not worry about the net payoff being negative; the
consumer's utility function will be defined for negative arguments.
This investor evaluates his initial choice of portfolio according to the ex-
pected utility the portfolio produces for his net payoff. Moreover, this
consumer has a constant coefficient of absolute risk aversion A > 0. That
is, he chooses the amount of his wealth to invest in the risky asset (with the
residual invested in the safe asset) to maximize the expectation of eY,
where Y is his (random) net payoff from the portfolio he picks. Let us
write a(W, A) for the optimal amount of money to invest in the risky asset,
as a function of the consumer's initial wealth W and coefficient of risk
aversion A. .
(a) Prove that a{W, 2X) is finite for all W and . That is, the consumers
investment problem has a well-defined solution.
Even if you cant do part (a), assume its result and go on to parts (b) and
(.
(b) Prove that a(W, A) is independent of W; no matter what his initial
wealth, the consumer invests the same amount in the risky asset.
() Prove that o(W, )\) is nonincreasing in A; the more risk averse the
individual, the less he invests in the risky asset.
= 7. Consider the general formulation of the consumers problem with one
risky asset. Show that if the risky asset is genuinely risky that is, it has
non-zero variance and if the consumers von Neumann-Morgenstern
utility function is strictly concave, then the consumers problem, if it has
any solution at all, must have a unique solution.
8. Recall that in the discussion of demand for risky assets with more
than one risky asset, we asserted that it was possible that an asset could
have an expected return less than 7 and still be demanded and that an
asset could have an expected return greater than r and not be demanded
at all. (Recall that we are not allowing short-sales of risky assets.) Produce
examples to support these claims. (Hints: For the first example, recall that
you want negative correlation between the returns on the two risky assets.
Imagine that each asset returns either =1 or =5 and that r =2. You
should be able to construct an example from this. The second example is
even easier. What happens if ' and 6? are perfectly positively correlated
and 6* always exceeds 6!7?)
9. Prove that if we have two risky assets with independent return
distributions, all the results obtained in the text for the case of one risky
asset extend.
m 10. With regard to the additive across states representation (x) in sec-
tion 3.4, we might wonder whether there is any value in obtaining the
representation with subjective probabilities over the states, so that the rep-
resentation becomes one of subjective state dependent expected utility. Prove
the following: If we have a representation (++), then for any strictly pos-
itive probability distribution 7 on , there is a state-dependent utility
function u : X x R such that subjective state-dependent expected
utility, using this probability distribution 7 and the utility function wu,
represents >. (Since nr is completely arbitrary here, up to being strictly
positive, the answer to the question posed at the start of this question
is there is apparently very little value. Which is why we don't include
subjective probabilities in (xx).)
u 11. Consider a consumer who will live today and tomorrow. On each
date, this consumer consumes a single good (manna); whose price on
each date is $100 per unit. We write , for the amount of manna this
consumer consumes today and ; for the amount he consumes tomorrow. -
This consumer faces some uncertainty in how much manna he will be
able to afford (to be explained in the next paragraph), and his preferences
Over uncertain consumption pairs (cy, ;) are given by the expectation of
the von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function u(c, ;) = In (g)+ In (ec),
where In is the logarithm to the base e.
This consumer currently possesses $100 of wealth. He can spend it all
today, or he can put some of it in the bank to take out and use to buy
manna tomorrow. This bank pays no interest and has no deposit or with-
drawal charges $1 put in today will mean $1 taken out tomorrow. In
addition to any savings that he carries forward, the consumer has a ran-
dom amount of extra income, which he will receive tomorrow. If there is
any uncertainty about this income, that uncertainty doesnt resolve until
tomorrow until after todays levels of consumption and savings must
be fixed.
(a) Suppose the consumer is sure to receive an extra $34 tomorrow. What
consumption level does he choose today, and what is his overall expected
utility?
3.8. Problems 129
(b) Suppose that, tomorrow, the consumer will receive an extra $100 with
probability 1/2, and nothing more with probability 1/2. What consump-
tion level does he choose today, and what is his overall expected utility?
(To solve this analytically, you will have to solve a quadratic equation.)
(c) Suppose that, tomorrow, the consumer will receive nothing with prob-
ability 1/4, $34 with probability 1/2, and $100 with probability 1/4. What
consumption level does he choose today, and what is his overall expected
utility? (A good approximate answer is acceptable here, because to get
the exact solution you have to solve a cubic equation. You will need to be
quite accurate in your calculations; the third significant digit is important.)
(d) Assuming you get this far, what strikes you about the answers to parts
(@), (b), and (c)? In particular, if we asked for this consumer's prefer-
ences over lotteries in the extra income, where it is understood that
all uncertainty resolves tomorrow, would this consumer satisfy the von
Neumann-Morgenstern axioms?
 12. Kahneman and Tversky (1979) give the following example of a vi-
olation of von Neumann-Morgenstern theory. Ninety-five subjects were
asked:
Suppose you consider the possibility of insuring some property against
damage, e.g., fire or theft. After examining the risks and the premium
you find that you have no clear preference between the options of pur-
chasing insurance or leaving the property uninsured.
It is then called to your attention that the insurance company offers
a new program called probabilistic insurance. In this program you pay
half of the regular premium. In case of damage, there is a 50 percent
chance that you pay the other half of the premium and the insurance
company covers all the losses, and there is a 50 percent chance that
you get back your insurance payment and suffer all the losses....
Recall that the premium is such that you find this insurance is barely
worth its cost.
Under these circumstances, would you purchase probabilistic insur-
ance?
And 80 percent of the subjects said they wouldn't.
Ignore the time value of money. Does this provide a violation of the
0 Because the insurance company gets the premium now, or half now and half later, the
interest that the premium might earn can be consequential. T want you to ignore such effects.
130 Chapter three: Choice under uncertainty
von Neumann-Morgenstern model, if we assume (as we usually do) that
all expected utility maximizers are risk neutral or risk averse? Is someone
who definitely turns down probabilistic msurance exhibiting behavior that
is inconsistent with the model (with risk aversion/neutrality a maintained
assumption)? You will have gotten the problem half right if you show
rigorously that the answer to this question is yes. But you will be getting
the entire point of this problem if you can provide a reason why I, an
utterly consistent von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility maximizer,
would say no to probabilistic insurance. (Hint: See problem 11.)
a 13. We earlier showed that the Ellsberg paradox is a violation of the
Savage-AnscombeAumann theories by referring to their representations
of preference. Demonstrate directly that the Ellsberg paradox is a violation
of their axioms; that is, show (by example) a specific axiom that is being
violated. You may choose either the Savage axioms or the Anscombe
Aumann axioms only one of the two is necessary. (In the case of Savage,
you only know three of the axioms preference is asymmetric, negatively
transitive, and the sure thing principle. One of these three is violated by
the Ellsberg example. There are five axioms in Anscombe-Aumann to
choose from, so it might be easier to work with the three Savage axioms,
which are fewer.)
a 14. The following bit of nonsense is often heard:
Suppose I offered you, absolutely for free, a gamble where with prob-
ability .4 you win $1,000 and with probability .6 you lose $500. You
might well choose not to take this gamble (if the alternative is zero)
if you are risk averse; although this gamble has a positive expected
value ((4)(1000) + (.6)(500) = $100), it also has substantial risk. But
if T offered you, say, 100 independent trials of this gamble, then you
would certainly wish to take them; the law of large numbers says
that you will wind up ahead. That is, risk aversion is perhaps sensi
ble when a single gamble is being contemplated. But it is senseless
when we are looking at many independent copies of the same gamble;
then the only sensible thing is to go with the long-run averages.
Is this nonsense? Can you produce a particular consumer who is ratio-
nal according to the von Neumann-Morgenstern axioms, and who would
To do this, you could assume that if the insurance company does insure you, the second half
of the premium must be increased to account for the interest the company has foregone.
While if they do not, when they return the first half premium, they must return it with the
interest it has earned. But it is easiest to simply ignore these complications altogether.
cp
gp mp TTT
ey
3.8. Problems 131
turn down all independent copies of this gamble, no matter how many
were offered? Or would any von Neumann-Morgenstern expected util-
ity maximizer take these gambles if offered enough independent copies?
(Hints: Either answer can be correct, depending on how you interpret the
phrase enough copies of the gamble. The problem is easiest if we read
this phrase as: We offer the consumer a number of copies, fixed in advance,
but very large. Then you should be able to produce a Consumer who will
not take any of the gambles. If you are worried about bankruptcy of this
consumer, you may take your pick: [1] This consumer is never bankrupt
 his utility function is defined for all monetary levels, however positive
or negative; [2] this consumer is bankrupt if his wealth, which begins ata
level of $2,000, ever reaches $0; and we will stop gambling with this con-
sumer the moment he becomes bankrupt. Interpretation [1] is the easier
to work with, but either is okay.)
And, if you like challenges, try to prove the following: Suppose that we
play according to rule (2): The consumer is offered up to N gambles
with the proviso that we stop gambling if ever the consumers wealth falls
to $0. Assume that the consumer has a utility function for final wealth
that is strictly increasing and that is finite at zero. (a) If the consumer's
utility function is unbounded, then there is an N sufficiently large so that,
offered N gambles or more, the consumer will take them. (b) While if
the consumers utility function is bounded above, the result can go either
way: The consumer might turn down the gambles, for all sufficiently large
N; or the consumer might accept the gambles, for all sufficiently large N.
If you can further characterize the two cases in (b), that would be better
still.
= 15. A particular consumer that I know must choose between (1) a sure
payment of $200; (2) a gamble with prizes $0, $200, $450, and $1,000,
with respective probabilities 5,3,.1,and .1; 3) a gamble with prizes
$0, $100, $200, and $520, each with probability 1/4. This consumer, in
the context of these choices, subscribes to the von Neumann-Morgenstern
axioms. Moreover, this consumer, upon reflection, is willing to state that
her preferences exhibit constant absolute risk aversion over this range of
prizes, and her certainty equivalent for a gamble with prizes $1,000 and
$0, each equally likely, is $470. Which of the three gambles given is best
for this consumer (granting the validity of all her judgments)?
chapter four
Dynamic choice
Many important choices made in economic contexts are made through
time. The consumer takes some action today, knowing that subsequent
choices will be required tomorrow and the day following and so on. And
todays choice has impact on either how the consumer views later choices
or what choices will later be available or both. We refer to this as a situation
of dynamic choice, and in this short chapter we discuss how economists
model the process of dynamic choice. .
Actually, there are two theoretically distinct issues here. When a con-
sumer makes choices today, she presumably does so with some notion of
what further choices she plans to be making in the future. We can ask
how those plans affect the choice currently being made. That is, what are
the consequences for static choice of the fact that static choice is part of a
larger dynamic choice problem? Then tomorrow comes, and our consumer
makes a subsequent choice. We ask how choice on subsequent dates knits
together with choice on earlier dates. That is, what is the structure of
dynamic choice?
In microeconomics, the issue of dynamic choice is usually dealt with
by reducing dynamic choice to the static choice of an optimal dynamic strat-
egy which is then carried out. We will discuss this standard approach by
means of an example in section 4.1. (We have already seen examples in
chapter 3, but here we will be more explicit about what is going on.) Then
in section 4.2 we will discuss in the context of a different example both the
standard approach and a pair of alternatives. General discussion follows
in section 4.3.
4.1. Optimal dynamic strategies
A simple example
Imagine a consumer faced with the following problem. This consumer
will live for two periods, consuming in each. She consumes only two
things: artichokes and broccoli. Hence a full consumption bundle for her
is a four-tuple = = (ag, by, a, b1) where a; is the amount of artichoke she
134 Chapter four: Dynamic choice
consumes at date and b; is the amount of broccoli she consumes at date
t, for t = 0,1. We will refer to date zero as today and date one as tomorrow.
This consumers preferences over vector consumption bundles z are
given by some ordinal utility function Ulag, bo, a1, b1). (We do not consider
her preferences over lotteries of consumption for a while.)
We could imagine that at date zero markets are open in which this
consumer can purchase any bundle that she wishes (and can afford); that
is, she can forward contract for artichoke and broccoli delivery tomorrow.
This would make the choice problem that she faces a simple static problem
in the style of chapter 2, and no complications would be encountered. But
instead we imagine that today markets are open for current artichokes
and broccoli; tomorrow new markets will open for then current artichokes
and broccoli; and today the consumer has the ability to save (or borrow)
money at 4 bank that she can withdraw (repay) tomorrow for purposes of
subsequent consumption. Using, say, dollars as the unit of account, we
assume this consumer has $Y; to spend or save today, and she will receive
an additional $; in income tomorrow, to which will be added any savings
she may bring forward and from which will be subtracted any loans she
must repay. We assume that the dollar prices of artichoke and broccoli are
pg and pl today, the prices will be p and p? tomorrow, and the bank
with which our consumer deals will return r dollars tomorrow for every
dollar invested today (or will'give a dollar today in return for a promise
to repay r dollars tomorrow).
Our consumer, knowing all this, thinks things through strategically.
(1) She must decide today how much artichoke and broccoli to consume
today and how much to borrow from or lend to the bank. We use ao and
by for the first two decision variables, and we use z for her net position at
the bank today, where z > 0 means that she loans z to the bank today and
2 < 0 means that she borrows z from the bank. We assume that she can
consume only nonnegative amounts of vegetables, and so ao and bp are
constrained to be nonnegative. And she has to finance all her purchases
and banking activities with her current income Yp; she faces the budget
constraint
play + pybo +2 < Yo. (BCD
Note carefully the appearance of z in the budget constraint; if z> 0, she is
saving money for tomorrow, and this increases her expenditures today,
ee 
@ To keep matters simple, we assume that vegetables spoil very quickly, so any vegetables
bought today must be consumed today; they cannot be left for consumption tomorrow.
re erg ag gy TR Te TT TT
wv
~~
wv
Tg gp TT a TT Te mp pg TT Ter TT TTT TT TT
4.1. Optimal dynamic strategies 135
whereas if z < 0, she has extra money to spend today, which loosens her
budget constraint on vegetables.
(2) Tomorrow she must decide how much artichoke and how much broc-
coli to consume. Her resources for doing so will consist of her income
tomorrow Y; and her net proceeds from the bank, rz. So tomorrow she
anticipates she will choose a; and b; subject to the budget constraint
Prag + P2by <Y;+rz. (BC2)
Note again that the sign of z is correct; if z > 0, she saved money in
the first period, giving her more money to spend on vegetables tomorrow,
whereas if z < 0, she borrowed, giving her less.
(3) Anticipating all this, our consumer recognizes that she can choose any
bundle z = (aq, by, a1, by) that she wishes, subject to the single budget con-
straint :
plag + plbo + (02 [ray + (BF [Tbr < Yo + (2/7). (BC)
We obtain this single, combined budget constraint by moving the z to
the right-hand side in (BC1), dividing (BC2) by r, and then adding the
two.
The point is that we have turned the consumers dynamic choice
problem into a static choice problem of the sort discussed in chapter 2.
We presume that our consumer will choose z subject to (BC) (and the
implicit nonnegativity constraints) to maximize her utility from consump-
tion. Once we obtain a solution to this static overall choice problem, we
can work out how much the consumer has to save or borrow to implement
the solution; that is, given the optimal levels of ap and by, the consumer
will set z = Y; plage pSbo today.
This example illustrates the basic approach that is typically taken to
dynamic choice. One imagines that the consumer looks ahead to all de-
cisions that she will be called upon to make and considers her choice
today as part of an overall strategy for choice. She works out what the
consequences of each strategy will be in terms of an overall outcome; she
considers her preferences over the possible overall outcomes; and she eval-
uates strategies accordingly. She chooses the optimal stategy according to
her preferences and proceeds to carry out this strategy. The key implicit
assumptions are that her preferences are for overall outcomes; these pref-
erences on overall outcomes conform to a standard model of choice of the
sort we explored in chapters 2 and 3, and they are stable through time.
And the consumer is blessed with a farsighted strategic sense: She can
foresee what her options will be in the future; how current decisions will
affect later choices; what overall strategies she has available; and what the
consequences of her strategic choices will be.
The example complicated with uncertainty
One should not be misled by the example into believing that the con-
sumers farsighted strategic sense implies that she possesses perfect fore-
sight. There may be things about which she is uncertain, including the
consequences of some of her actions. But she accommodates those with a
model with uncertainty in the style of chapter 3. We can adapt our basic
example to illustrate how this works.
Imagine that the consumer in our example can place her money not
only in the bank but also in a risky asset that pays either or next
period, each with probability 1/2. (We assume > r > .) She cannot
sell this risky asset short, although she can borrow money from the bank.
Imagine as well that the consumer is uncertain about the price of arti-
chokes tomorrow; the price will be p* with probability 1/3 and oy with
probability 2/3. (We assume, to keep the example simple, that there is no
uncertainty about the price of broccoli tomorrow.) Finally, the return on
the risky asset and the price of artichokes are correlated: The joint prob-
ability that the price of artichokes will be pf and the return on the risky
asset will be 4 is 1/4.
Since there is now uncertainty, we assume that our consumers pref-
erences over lotteries of consumption bundles x satisfy the assumptions
of von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility theory, and u(z) is the con-
sumers von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function.
As in the simple example, our consumer thinks through her choice
problem strategically.
(1) Today she must decide how much to consume, how much to invest in
the risky asset, and how much to borrow or lend to the bank. We denote
her consumption decision variables by a, and b, as before, and we let 
be the amount of money she invests in the risky asset. All these must be
nonnegative. Since our consumer always likes more to eat, we can safely
4.1. Optimal dynamic strategies 137
assume that she will satisfy her budget constraint today with equality. The
amount she lends to the bank is, therefore,
z=Yy ( pag pbs.
(Note that if z < 0, she is borrowing.)
(2) Next period both her assets and the prices of the consumption goods
are random. Four states are possible: She has at her disposal Y; +rz+(8
and the price of artichokes is pf with probability 1/4; she has at her
disposal Y; + rz + f and the price of artichokes is py with probability
1/4; she has Y; + rz + (8 to spend and the price of artichokes is py with
probability 1/12; and she has Y; +7z+ (8 and the price of artichokes is p*
with probability 5/12.1 -
We assume that our consumer will know which of these four situations
prevails when she must decide how to allocate her resources between
artichokes and broccoli tomorrow. Thus she has eight decision variables
tomorrow: How much artichoke and how much broccoli to consume in
the first state (as a function of her decisions today, since they determine
the resources she has to spend on vegetables tomorrow); how much to
consume in the second state; and so on. Since she always likes more
vegetable to less, we can reduce the problem to four decision variables for
tomorrow. Given the amount of artichoke she purchases in the first state
a;, where the subscript pertains to time and the superscript to state one,
it can be assumed that her broccoli consumption will be
_ Yi +712 + (0 alp?
bt
! J
7
and so on for states 2, 3, and 4, making the appropriate substitutions for
 and for p.b
(3) So we have her decision problem down to a seven variable problem:
ao, bo, , and af for n = 1,2,3,4. Given values for these seven decision
! Where did these probabilities come from? This is the first time in the book that we
have a two-by-two outcome space and you are given the two marginal distributions and one
joint probability, but it is very far from the last. If you have any problems replicating these
probabilities from the data given a couple of paragraphs ago, seek assistance immediately!
bos course, when we eliminate the decision variables b7 in this fashion, the nonnegativity
constraints on these variables must be incorporated as more constraints on the decision
variables that we leave in the problem. For example, the constraint 5! > 0, which is [; +
rz +0 a{Bf1/p} > 0, is reexpressed as Yi + rz + (8 > ape,
138 Chapter four: Dynamic choice
variables, we can work out our consumer's expected utility of consump-
tion; just for the record, this is a sum of four terms, the first of which (for
the first state) is .
1 : Y; +rlYo pao pibol + C8 api
rd Ap, bo, Gy, oP :
(This is the probability 1/4 of the first state times our consumer's von
Neumann-Morgenstern utility of consumption in the first state, as a func-
tion of her decisions. Be sure you could have come up with this term and
you know what the other three are) We have nonnegativity constraints
to watch for, and the nonnegativity constraints on tomorrows broccoli
consumption in each of the four states become nonnegativity constraints
on the fourth argument of u above and its mates. But given all this, if
we have u, we have a perfectly well-posed static optimization problem
to solve. This isn't as simple a problem as in the first example; in par-
ticular, we aren't able to reduce the problem to a problem with a single
budget constraint. But it is still an optimization problem that can be solved
without much difficulty.
As in the simpler version of the problem, we are following the basic
pattern of reducing the dynaric problem to a static problem of finding
an optimal strategy. A strategy here is a seven-tuple (subject to some
constraints); for each strategy we know how to evaluate its consequences
in terms of overall expected utility; and we assume that our consumer
selects what to consume and how to invest today and tomorrow in a way
that is consistent with the optimal overall strategy so determined. This is
the standard approach to dynamic choice in microeconomic theory.
At this point we can take two paths in further developments and
discussion. The usual path is to begin to think about how we might
effectively solve optimization problems such as the one just posed. The
mathematical technique of dynamic programming is especially useful here.
An unusual path is to wonder about alternatives to the standard way
of modeling dynamic choice. We will proceed in this chapter along the
unusual path, on the assumption that you have either already followed or
will follow the former. Appendix 2 gives a brief summary of the parts of
dynamic programming that are important in this book; all readers should
know about finite horizon dynamic programming, which is discussed in
the first two sections of appendix 2. And readers who consume all the
small type will need to know a bit about solving problems with infinite
horizons, which is covered in the second two sections of appendix 2. In
4.2. Menus and meals 139
case you wish to test your knowledge of these topics, problem 3 provides
the appropriate diagnostic.
4.2. Menus and meals
A context
Rather than work with the dynamic consumption budgeting problem
of the previous section, we will work with a simpler, discrete setting. As
in the previous section, we look at a two-period problem, with dates =0
(today) and t = 1 (tomorrow). Tomorrow the consumer will find herself
at a restaurant, and she will select some meal from the menu that restau-
rant offers. Today the consumer selects the restaurant, which (effectively)
comes down to choosing the menu from which choice will be made to-
morrow. To keep matters simple, we will assume that menu items are
completely described by the entre served, and the same entre at two
different restaurants is the same meal. Atmosphere, the chef's skills, etc.,
all come to naught; the only difference between menus/restaurants is in
the menus of meals that they offer.
Formally, we suppose that the set of all possible entres is given
by some finite set X, and the set of all possible menus is the set of all
nonempty subsets of X, which we denote by M. Today our consumer
has her choice from some subset of M; we write M for this set of feasible
menus. And if she chooses m M today, then tomorrow she chooses
some z from m.
This is, to be sure, a very stylized example. But for the examples we
wish to present, it captures the salient aspect of dynamic choice: Choice
today constrains the opportunity set from which one subsequently chooses.
(Another aspect of how choice today affects subsequent choice is by chang-
ing ones later tastes. This is something we will miss in our examples but
which you will see briefly in problem 5.) If the reader's imagination is
fired by the toy examples we give next, more realistic applications will
not be hard to imagine.
The standard, strategic approach
To develop alternatives to the standard approach, we first see what
the standard approach would look like in this context. It is quite simple.
We assume that the consumer has preferences defined on the space of
final consumption X. These preferences will be assumed to satisfy the
standard properties and (since X is finite) to be represented by some
(ordinal) utility function U : X R. The consumer, looking at all the
menus in M, considers that a strategy for dynamic choice is to choose
first an m M and then some z m, which has consequences z. Thus
she has available to herself any meal z X' = {cpp m. If we let z*
be the meal in X that has the greatest utility (according to the index U),
our consumer plans to choose z*, and she begins carrying out this plan
by choosing any m M' that contains z*. As we said, this is simplicity
itself.
We can take a step in this context that we didnt take in the first section
and ask what consequences this model of dynamic choice has for our
consumers static choice behavior today. The consumers choice behavior
today is represented quite simply: Comparing any two menus m and
m/, she strictly prefers m to m/ if and only if the U-best meal in m is
strictly better than the U-best meal in m. That is, if we define a function
V:M R from U by
then V' is a numerical representation of our consumer's static preferences
over menus.
Note that V so defined has the property that if V(m) > V(m'), then
V(m Um) = V(m). In words, if m is at least as good as m/, then mUm/
is indifferent to m. Or, in symbols; if we let > denote preferences defined
on M according to V (and we use > for weak preferences and ~ for
indifference), we have
m =m implies m ~ mUm'. (%)
Note well, is preferences defined on M; other, closely related prefer-
ences are defined on X and represented by U.
Revealed preference and the standard model
Now we can turn the questions we've been asking somewhat on their
heads. Following the standard approach to dynamic choice, we've looked
at the problem from the point of view of the consumer; what should she
do today and subsequently in view of her overall objectives (where it is
a maintained assumption that she has overall objectives). Suppose we
observe a consumer making choices today and we ask: Does this choice
behavior reveal that she is acting according to the standard model, or does
it refute that model?
4.2. Menus and meals 141
Suppose that we are in the enviable position of having quite a lot of
data with which to answer this question. Specifically, suppose we know
the consumer's preferences > defined on M. Since, in the standard model,
> has a numerical representation V, we know that it is necessary (if the
standard model is to apply) that the consumers preferences are asymmet-
ric and negatively transitive. Moreover, the previous discussion indicates
that (&) is a necessary condition for the standard model. In fact, these
conditions are sufficient.
Proposition 4.1. A consumer's preferences > on M are asymmetric, negatively
transitive, and satisfy (&) if and only if the consumer's preferences arise from
some function U : X R according to the standard model (as sketched in the
previous subsection).
Our statement of this proposition is no model of mathematical elegance,
but its meaning should be clear. The standard model generates very spe-
cific testable restrictions on static choice behavior on 3. When we
observe individuals who choose today in ways that are inconsistent with
those restrictions, we have individuals whose choice behavior is inconsis-
tent with the standard model.
The weak-willed dieter
With this as prologue, we can give our first example of choice behavior
that is inconsistent with the standard: model. Imagine that X consists of
precisely two meals, fish and pasts. Hence M contains three elements:
{fish, pasta}, {fish}, and {pasta}. Consider a consumer whose static choice
behavior is given by the preferences
{fish} = {fish, pasta} ~ {pasta}.
This consumer's preferences (on M) satisfy the standard assumptions on
M; that is, her strict preferences are asymmetric and negatively transitive.
But she strictly prefers the fish only menu to the menu that gives her a
choice of fish or pasta. It is obvious that this doesnt conform to (), so
the standard model doesn't apply.
But our consumer has a very simple explanation: She is on a diet
and is weak-willed. Today, as she chooses the menu from which she will
later choose a meal, her will is strong and she knows that she should avoid
pasta. And she knows that when it comes to the event and she must choose
a meal, her will will weaken; if pasta is available, she will choose it. Hence
 You are asked to prove this in problem 4. It isnt hard.
142 Chapter four: Dynamic choice
she prefers to choose today in a way that eliminates the opportunity to
choose pasta tOMOITOW.
This is an example of what is called sophisticated choice when a change in
tastes is anticipated. References to the literature in which this sort of model
is developed are given in the next section, but it is hard to resist giving an
early example. Odysseus, when sailing past the Isle of the Sirens, wishing
to hear their song but at the same time wishing not to give in to their
spell, had himself lashed to the mast. This behavior, which showed a
clear preference for smaller opportunity sets, cannot be explained by the
standard model of dynamic choice in @COTOMICS.
Uncertain future tastes and maintained flexibility
Our second example concerns a case in which three meals are possible,
X = {chicken, fish, pasta}, and a consumer whose immediate preferences
over M are given by
{chicken, fish, pasta} > {chicken, fish} ~ {chicken, pasta}
~ {fish, pasta} {chicken}
. - {fish} > {pasta}.
Again we have static (strict) preferences that are asymmetric and nega-
tively transitive. And again we find (&) violated; {chicken} > {fish}, and
so if (&) were to hold, we would require that {chicken} ~ {chicken, fish}.
Indeed, if (&) holds, then some single-element set would necessarily be in-
different to the menu containing all the options. And that certainly doesnt
hold here.
The explanation offered by our consumer in this case is again a simple
story. She is uncertain what her tastes will be when she sits down to dine
tomorrow. Perhaps she will like chicken most of all, then fish, and then
pasta. But perhaps her preferences will be fish, then chicken, and then pasta.
And perhaps they will be pasta, then chicken, and then fish. She believes that
cach of these is as likely as any other and she evaluates a menu as follows:
Given the menu and her (then) preferences, she gets three utils if her first
choice is available, two utils if her second choice is the best available, and
only one if all she can have is her third choice. If you compute expected
utils by this scheme, you will come to the preferences above.
The reader is entitled to object that we are introducing uncertainty into
the story surreptitiously. Had we mentioned this uncertainty about future
preferences at the start, we wouldn't have expected (db) to be necessary
and sufficient for the standard model. This objection is accepted, but
4.3. Bibliographic notes and discussion 143
then let us turn the question around: Which preference relations > on M
can we explain by the ustandard model where we allow the endogenous
incorporation of this sort of uncertainty?
Proposition 4.2. Assume X is finite. A (strict) preference relation = on M is
asymmetric and negatively transitive and, for the associated weak preference and
indifference relations >= and ~, satisfies
m Dm implies m = m', and x)
mm andm ~m' implies mUm ~ m' um forall m, Gk)
if and only if there is a finite set S and a function u: Sx X R such that
! if and only i max .
m > m' if an ry if Yale) > Dp ue
8 9g
We won't attempt to prove this here; it is here only for purposes of illus-
tration and doesnt reappear later in the book.? But let us interpret it. We
start with preferences > on menus that, when you think of menus as the
basic objects, satisfy the standard assumptions of chapter 2. In addition,
our consumer always (at least weakly) prefers to leave herself with more
choices (which is (x). And if more choices are of no value in some sit-
uation, adding more options to both sides doesnt make those original
extra options valuable. (This is a rough description of (3%).) Then (and
only then) can we justify this consumers preferences over menus by a
model with preferences over meals that depend on some implicit states
of future preferences and where preferences for menus are obtained by
adding up the utility of the best meal the menu provides in each state.
4.3. Bibliographic notes and discussion
To repeat from before, the standard approach to dynamic choice con-
sists of reducing dynamic choice to a problem of static choice of an opti-
mal strategy under the presumptions that (1) the consumer at each point
in time has coherent preferences over overall outcomes; (2) she believes
at each point in time that these preferences will not shift with time or cir-
cumstances; (3) she is smart enough to work out the consequences of her
choices, so she can find an optimal strategy according to the preferences
assumed in (1); and (4) the second presumption is correct in the sense that
the consumer subsequently carries out the optimal strategy she is assumed
to find. This approach is ingrained in almost all microeconomic theory,
so much so that it is often employed in textbooks without any discussion
whatsoever. This is something of a retreat from the careful consideration
given to these issues in seminal work on the theory of choice; see, for
example, the discussion and justification of the standard approach given
by Savage (1972, 15-17).
It is probably safe to assume that, for at least some consumers, tastes
and desires shift as time passes; (4) is likely to be false. Grant for the
moment that a consumer for whom this is so has coherent preferences
at each point in time. That is, grant (1). And grant that she can work
out the consequences of her actions, or (3). Granting (1) and (3), one can
wonder whether she acts under the false presumption of (2) or not. If
she assumes (2) and acts accordingly, then her static behavior at each point
in time will look sensible according to the standard approach to dynamic
choice, but her dynamic actions will be inconsistent. On the other hand,
if she is sophisticated enough to deny (2), and if her current tastes govern
her actions, she may act as does our weak-willed dieter, so that her static
choice does not conform to the standard model. These sorts of issues
are discussed and attacked generally in the literature on changing tastes.
A sampler of this literature (taking various positions on the value of such
models) would include Strotz (1955-56), Peleg and Yaari (1973), Hammond
(1976), Stigler and Becker (1977), and Thaler (1980).
Suppose that we rejected assumption (3) of the standard approach 
that individuals are able to foresee all the consequences of their actions.
How then can we possibly model dynamic choice behavior? Consider the
following general scheme: (a) Model choice at each given point of time
according to the basic models of choice of chapters 2 and 3, with strict
preferences that are asymmetric and negatively transitive, and so on. But
model choice at a given point in time as choice over things that are chosen
at that time only so that, for example, one incorporates in the description of
an item chosen the opportunities that current choice leaves for later choice.
When doing this, (b) pay attention to how the individuals bounded ratio-
nality might affect what static choices she does make, especially if she is
aware of her own limitations. And then, (c) consider how choice behavior
at different points in time might or might not fit together.
Our second nonstandard example is somewhat of this character. We
can imagine that our consumer, choosing a menu, cant conceive of all the
consequences of her choice of menu. But still, at the level of selecting a
4.3. Bibliographic notes and discussion 145
menu, she has standard preferences. That is, she satisfies (a). Because
of her inability to conceive of all the consequences of her choice of menu,
she generally prefers to leave herself with more flexibility. That is, her
preferences over menus satisfy (x) of proposition 4.2, as an example of
what we intend for (b). Then if her static preferences conform as well
to (xx), we have from the proposition a fairly nice (and quite standard
looking) representation of her preferences over menus, a representation
that was originally suggested by Koopmans (1964). And we could imagine
considering how her static preferences at different points of time might
evolve.
If we admit the possibility that the consumer is limitedly rational in
the sense the she cannot foresee all the consequences of her current deci-
sions, this in itself might lead us to reject the approach just sketched on
grounds that even her static choice behavior might fail to conform to the
usual assumptions; her inability to work out strategic plans in a complex,
dynamic environment leads her immediate choice by rules of thumb (or
serendipity) that cannot be represented by a single numerical index. Even
at this level one can pursue interesting models of static (and then dynamic)
choice: For example, Bewley (1986) suggests a model where once a con-
sumer has chosen a strategic plan of action, she will deviate from that plan
(as unexpected options arise) only if some alternative seems substantially
better than the status quo plan. Bewley formalizes this with a model where
static weak preferences are not complete and with an inertia assumption
that gives precedence to the status quo, and he considers how this would
affect dynamic choice behavior.
Having mentioned these possible alternatives to the standard ap-
proach to dynamic choice, we will follow the standard approach until
the end of the book. This discussion is meant to accomplish two things:
To make you aware of the strong assumptions that go into the standard
approach; and to indicate that interesting alternatives to the standard ap-
proach are possible. These alternatives are, at the time that I write this,
very far from mainstream microeconomic theory. But when we delve later
in the book into the serious deficiences of the techniques of the current
mainstream theory, we will return to issues in dynamic choice and to the
very strong assumptions of the standard approach.
References
Bewley, T. 1986. Knightian Decision Theory: Part I. Cowles Foundation
discussion paper no. 807, Yale University. Mimeo.
Hammond, F. 1976. Changing Tastes and Coherent Dynamic Choice.
Review of Economic Studies 43:159-73.
146 Chapter four: Dynamic choice
Koopmans, T. 1964. On the Flexibility of Future Preferences. In Human
Judgments and Optimality, M. Shelly and G. Bryan, eds. New York:
John Wiley and Sons.
Kreps, D. 1979. A Representation Theorem for Preference for Flexibility.
Econometrica 47:565-77.
Peleg, B., and M. Yaari. 1973. On the Existence of a Consistent Course of
Action when Tastes Are Changing. Review of Economic Studies 40:391-
401.
Savage, L. [1954] 1972. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: John Wiley
and Sons. Rev. and enl. ed. New York: Dover Publications.
Stigler, G., and G. Becker. 1977. De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum.
American Economic Review 67:76-90.
Strotz, R. 1955-1956. Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Max-
imization. Review of Economic Studies 23:165-80.
Thaler, R. 1980. Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice. Journal
of Economic Behavior and Organization 1:39-60.
4 4. Problems
ul. (a) Consider the first example, in which the consumer must decide how
much artichoke and broccoli to consume today and tomorrow and how
much to save (or borrow) today, where there is no uncertainty. Suppose
the consumer's preferences are given by the utility function
Ufag, bo, ay, by) = In(ag) + 9 In(by) + 8 In(ay) + 7 In(by).
Solve this consumer's dynamic consumption-savings problem, as a func-
tion of prices pg, ph, pf, and pb, the gross return 7 on loans to/from the
bank, and the consumer's incomes Y, and Y;. Recall that we assume that
the consumer can borrow or lend at gross return r.
(b) Suppose we assumed that the consumer could only lend money at rate
r but cannot borrow at all. What is the solution in this case?
m 2. Suppose in the problem described in problem 1(a) that the consumer
is able to store vegetables from today to tomorrow. Assume there is no
spoilage or anything like that vegetable put in the refrigerator today
and taken out for consumption tomorrow is just as good as vegetable
bought fresh tomorrow. What is the solution to the consumers dynamic
consumption-savings problem?
4.4. Problems 147
u3. Part (a) tests your knowledge of finite horizon dynamic programming. If you
cannot do this problem using the techniques of dynamic programming, consult
the first two sections of appendix 2. (The analysis of this problem is given there
in detail, so try the problem before looking at the appendix.) Part (b) tests your
knowledge of infinite horizon dynamic programming. This is a good deal more
difficult, and you will only need the skills required to solve this for some optional
material in later chapters. But if you are curious, this problem is worked out in
detail in the second two sections of appendix 2.
(a) A consumer lives for three periods, denoted by = 0,1,2, and con-
sumes artichoke and broccoli on each day. We let a; be the amount of
artichoke consumed on day t and b: be the amount of broccoli. This con-
sumer has preferences over lotteries on consumption bundles (where a con-
sumption bundle is a six-tuple (aq, bo, a1, b1, 02, b,)), which satisfy the von
Neumann-Morgenstern axioms and are represented by the von Neumann-
Morgenstern utility function :
Ulag, bo, as, bi, az, by) = (ache) + lab) + 8(azb).
This consumer can buy artichoke and broccoli in the marketplace each day.
Because both vegetables spoil rapidly, what he buys on any given day is
his consumption for that day. (He is constrained to consume nonnegative
amounts of each vegetable.) The price of artichoke is $1 per unit on each
and every day. The price of broccoli is more complex: It begins as $1 per
unit of broccoli at t = 0. Butatt=1, it is either $1.10 or $.90, each of these
being equally likely. And at t= 2, the price of broccoli is again random
and depends on the price the day before: If its price was $110att=1,
then it is either $1.20 or $1.00, with each equally likely. If its price was
$.90 at t = 1, then at = 2 it is either $.98 or $.80, each equally likely. At
date = 0, the consumer has no information (beyond what js given above)
about subsequent prices of broccoli. At date = 1, he knows the current
price of broccoli and no more. At date = 2, he knows the current price.
This consumer has $300 to spend on artichoke and broccoli over the three
days, which he can divide any way he wishes. Any money he doesn't
spend on a given day sits in his pocket where it earns zero interest.
(b) Imagine that our consumer eats at times t= 0,1,2,.... At each date,
he consumes both artichoke and broccoli. His utility function, defined for
an infinite stream of consumption (ag, bo, G1, br, ++) 18
Ulay, bg, ay, by, oe J) = > (95) (arb).
t=0
148 Chapter four: Dynamic choice
This consumer starts out with wealth $1,000, which he can spend on veg-
etable or can deposit in his local bank. Any funds deposited at the bank
earn interest at a rate of 2% per period, so that $1 deposited at time turns
into $1.02 at time +1.
The price of artichoke is fixed at $1. The price of broccoli is random. It
begins at $1. Then, in each period, it either increases or decreases. Being
very specific, if the price of broccoli at date # is Dt,
_ | 1-1p: with probability .5, and
Pe1= 199: with probability 5.
The consumer wishes to manage his initial wealth $1,000 in a way that
maximizes his expected utility. How should he do this?
m 4. Prove proposition 4.1.
u 5. Consider the consumer in the first example of this chapter, where
We specialize to the case in which p =p} =p? =p =r = 1, and Y=
Y; = 3. Suppose that this consumer is a standard sort of consumer (in
microeconomic theory), with preferences given by the utility function
Ulaq, bo, a1, br) =-In(ag) + In(by) + In(ay) + In(p,).
(a) What is the solution to this consumer's consumption-savings problem,
under the assumption that she is a completely normal consumer?
But this is not a normal consumer. She is quite abnormal, in that she is
susceptible to becoming addicted to broccoli! Specifically, if she eats (ag, bg)
today, then tomorrow when she goes to purchase vegetables, she chooses
according to the utility function
Ula, bi; ag, by) = nay) + by In(by).
Note well what is going on here; the more broccoli she consumes today,
the more she values broccoli consumption tomorrow.
(b) Assume that this consumer seeks to consume and save today in a
fashion that will maximize her U-utility over the consumption bundle
that she chooses dynamically, and she realizes that tomorrow she will
spend her resources in a way that maximizes her U! -utility. What does
she (optimally) consume and save today, and what is the overall outcome
that she achieves?
chapter five
Social choice and efficiency
So far we have discussed the choice behavior of a single consumer, both
in general and in market settings. For the rest of this book, we are in-
terested in what happens when many consumers are choosing simultane-
ously. Each consumer will come with the sorts of preferences we described
in chapters 2 and 3, and each attempts to choose in an optimal fashion
given those preferences. It will typically happen that the diverse prefer-
ences of consumers will be in conflict with each other. (For example, each
consumer typically wants more at the expense of the consumption of his
fellow consumers.) We will be looking at various institutional arrangements
by which those conflicts are meant to be resolved. But before moving to
institutional arrangements, we look briefly at the abstract theory of social
choice.
| The theory of social choice is concerned with the selection of some
| social (outcome that @ffects alnumber of individuals{when those individuals
- have diverse and(conflicting (preferences. We try to characterize desirable!
properties of the outcome that is to be selected, properties that usually
- involve (and blend) notions of(efficiency and (equity. In some cases, those
properties are insufficient to fix on a single social outcome, but instead
restrict attention to some subset of the feasible outcomes. Adding more
properties can sometimes pin down a single social outcome that has all
the desired attributes. And in some contexts we find that there is dio way
- tofsatisfy (simultaneously all the properties thought to be desirable.
We will not do justice to this very broad topic here. In this chapter we
will acquaint you with a few of the basic notions, with emphasis on the
concept of efficiency, and we will give a smattering of the classic results.
But we only scratch the surface.
5.1. The problem
We begin by formulating the problem in a very general setting. A
finite number of individual consumers, indexed by =1,2,...,I, make
up a society. Each member z of a set X of social outcomes describes how
Bl
150 Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
every member of this society is treated. Each consumer has preferences
over the possible social outcomes. We assume that these preferences can be
represented numerically, and we let V; : X R represent i's preferences.
We are interested, ultimately, in answering the question: For each
subset X C X of feasible social outcomes, which social outcome(s) should
be selected? Following our general approach to choice, along the way we
will be making binary comparisons trying to say when one outcome is
better than another.
Utility imputations
Fixing specific numerical representations for the preferences of each
consumer, to each social outcome z there corresponds a vector of utilities
v = (Vil), V3(@),..., Vix) RT for the I consumers. We call such a
vector of utility levels a utility imputation. Given a set X' of feasible
social outcomes, there is a corresponding set of feasible utility imputations.
For each social outcome z, we write V(z) for the I-dimensional vector
(Viz), Vala), -.., Vi(z)), and for a set X of feasible social outcomes, we
will write V(X) for the set of feasible utility imputations:
o
v(x) ={ve RR" : v=V(z) for some z XY.
~
Pictures of feasible utility imputations for the case of two consumers will
be used below, so we give a couple of examples in figure 5.1. In 5.1(a) the
Utility of Utility of
consumer 2 } consumer 2
S a
Utility of Utility of
consumer 1 consumer 1
(a) (b)
Figure 5.1. Feasible utility imputations for two-consumer societies.
Be a bit sceptical here. Just because individual choice is typically modeled as being
driven by such binary comparisons is no reason to suppose that when it comes to social
choice this approach ought to be taken. We will discuss this point.
5.1. The problem 151
shaded area gives one typical picture, while the finite collection of points in
figure 5.1(b) corresponds to a case in which the set X' is finite. Of course,
these pictures are all relative to specific numerical representations of the
preferences of individual consumers; as we change those representations,
we make corresponding changes in pictures such as those in figure 5.1.
Exchange of commodities
The general problem just described may be a bit too abstract to think
about, so let us sketch a more concrete setting. Imagine K commodities;
write Z for the positive orthant in RK: and assume that each consumer
; consumes some bundle z Z. Exactly as in chapter 2, imagine that
consumer 4 has preferences for his own levels of consumption, given by
a utility function U; : Z R.
A social outcome, in this case, is a vector = = (z,...,21) X =
ZF, which specifies the bundle z that consumer 1 consumes; the bundle
2, that consumer 2 consumes, and so on. Note that each 2; is itself a
(nonnegative) K -dimensional vector.
The preferences of consumer Over social outcomes x in this case are
represented by the function V;, with domain X, defined by
Vile) = Ui(z:), where = (z1,.--, 21).
Note well, in this specialization the preferences of consumer 4 depend by
assumption only on what consumer i consumes; consumer i's preferences
do not depend on what is consumed by anyone else. In our general for-
mulation of the problem this assumption is not imposed, and it may seem
to you a pretty silly assumption (unless you have taken economics courses
before and so are properly socialized into the discipline). But this is an
assumption that will play a critical role in developments in chapter 6.
As for the set of feasible social outcomes m this specification, it is typ-
ical to imagine that society has at its disposal a given stack of consumption
goods, called the social endowment and represented by an element e Zz,
which can be divided among the I consumers. So the set of feasible social
outcomes, in this context called the set of feasible allocations (of society's
resources), is
Z' = {z= (21,20) ZT Cm +..tzr Sel
Note that the sum of what is allocated to the consumers is required to
be less or equal to the social endowment; if one or more of the goods is
noxious and we cant dispose freely of this good, then we might wish to
replace the inequality with an equality.
The Edgeworth box
For the case of two consumers and two goods, a standard picture
of this situation is drawn, known as an Edgeworth box. We label the
two consumers 1 and 2 and the two goods a and b, and we write
% = (#10, 215), (22a, 228)). Consider figure 5.2. In figure 5.2(a), we repre-
sent the preferences of consumer 1 by the usual indifference curve dia-
gram. Note the heavy dot; this is meant to be the location of the social
endowment e = (e,, ep).
Good b Indifference curves
py for consumer 1
Good a
. Indifference curves
} (@) for consurner 2 :
(b ) Good b
Good b
Good a
 Good b
Figure 5.2. Edgeworth boxes.
Figures 5.2(a) and (b) give the two sets of data that make up an Edgeworth
box: the social endowment and the indifference curves of the two parties,
in (a) for consumer 1 and in (b) for 2. In figure 5.2(c) the indifference
Curves are superimposed.
5.2. Pareto efficiency and optimality: Definitions 153
In figure 5.2(b) the preferences of consumer 2 are represented by the
usual indifference curve diagram, except that we have rotated the usual
picture by 180 degrees and have put the origin up at the level of e in
figure 5.2(a), so the social endowment e in this picture is down at the level
of the origin in figure 5.2(a).
Given e, what are the feasible allocations? They are all allocations =
such that zi, + 25 < , and zy + 23 < 5. Since (according to figure 5.2)
our consumers always prefer more of either good to less, let us restrict
attention to allocations where none of the social endowment is wasted 
where the two inequalities above are equalities. Then given z, and zy;
(and holding e fixed), we know that z,, = , Zio and zp = ep 233.
In figure 5.2(c), we have all this recorded very neatly and compactly.
First, note that we have superimposed figures 5.2(a) and (b), locating the
origin of consumer 2's coordinate system at the point e in consumer 1's
coordinate system so that e in 2's coordinates is the origin in 1's coordi-
nate system. Then the box formed by the two sets of axes represents all the
feasible allocations of e (assuming no wastage of the social endowment);
each point (24,21) in 1's coordinate system is at the same time the point
(eq ~ 2z14,p 213) in 2's coordinate system.
5.2. Pareto efficiency and optimality: Definitions
Return to the general setting of the first part of section 5.1. That is,
there is a set X of social outcomes and I consumers whose preferences
over the social outcomes are represented by functions V;. We begin with
pairwise comparisons of two social outcomes = and =.
Definitions. Outcome x is said to be Pareto superior to outcome = if Vi(z) >
Vi(@') for every consumer i, with a strict inequality for at least one i. Outcome
x is said to be strictly Pareto superior to ' if Vi(z) > Vi(z') forall i.
Or, in words, one outcome is Pareto superior to another if no consumer
finds the first any worse than the second and at least one consumer finds
the first strictly better. And the first is strictly Pareto superior to the second
if every consumer strictly prefers the first. In such cases, we also say that
the second outcome is (strictly) Pareto inferior to the first.
It should be carefully noted that Pareto superiority is a partial ordering
of social outcomes, in general. That is, we might have two social outcomes
z and x such that some consumers strictly prefer z to and others
strictly prefer z to z. In such cases, we would say that z and are
Pareto incomparable.
154 Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
It is easy to see Pareto superiority and inferiority in pictures of utility
imputations for two consumers such as figure 5.1. The outcome z is Pareto
superior to if the corresponding utility imputation V(x) is above and/or
to the right of V(z). And is strictly Pareto superior to z if Viz) is
above and to the right of V(z').
Definitions. Given a set X' of feasible social outcomes, an outcome T X' is
said to be Pareto efficient or Pareto optimal in X "if no other feasible outcome
' X' is Pareto superior to =. The subset of Pareto efficient outcomes in X'
is called the Pareto frontier of X'.
In the definition of Pareto efficiency, a fine point arises concerning whether
Pareto inferiority or strict Pareto inferiority should be the criterion by which
a point is disqualified. That is, suppose we have a point which is Pareto
dominated by some other feasible point z', but which is not strictly Pareto
inferior to any feasible point. Should we say that is Pareto efficient? In the
definition we have given, we do not. But in other treatments of this subject,
such a point would be included. This is a place where you have to watch
carefully the definitions that are made.
Paretoefficiency is easy to see in pictures of utility imputations. Con-
sider the sefs of feasible utility imputations in figure 5.3. These are just the
same as in figure 5.1. In both 5.3(a) and (b) we show a utility imputation
marked v', which is not Pareto efficient, and another marked v, which -
Utility of
consumer 2 Utility of
consumer 2
 * v
 v' 8
Utility of * Utility of
consumer 1 * consumer 1
(a) (b)
Figure 5.3. Pareio efficiency in the space of utility imputations.
In each figure, the point marked v is Pareto efficient and the point
marked v' is not.
5.2. Pareto efficiency and optimality: Definitions 155
Utility of Utility of
consumer 2 consumer 2
_ Pareto
N _ ~ Pareto
 frontier
+ J frontier
FR
. i
1
Utility of
consumer 1
(b)
Figure 5.4. Pareto frontiers in the space of utility imputations.
In (a), the Pareto frontier is the heavy curve. In (b), points on the Pareto
frontier are the heavier dots.
is.] In each case there is a simple test. From any utility imputation,
say v in 5.3(a), draw a positive orthant with origin at v. If no feasible
utility imputation falls in this orthant (including its edges), then v is Pareto
efficient. In figure 5.3(b) we do the same thing for v', and we see, by
virtue of the point v", which is Pareto superior to o', that is not Pareto
efficient. In figure 5.4 we draw in (with a heavy curve in [a], and with
heavier dots in [b]), the two Pareto frontiers.
Pareto efficiency and the Edgeworth box
To illustrate these notions, consider the Edgeworth box depicted in
figure 5.5(a). Consider in particular the points and z marked there.
From the point 2, it is possible to find points that give more utility to
each of the two consumers the set of points for which this is true is the
set of points in the shaded lens-shaped area. On the other hand, the point
, which lies at a point of tangency of the two consumers indifference
curves, is Pareto efficient. To make one consumer better off (staying along
or above the consumers indifference curve through x), you must go intoa
region that is below the indifference curve of the other consumer through
. Thus is Pareto efficient and z' is not.
We draw the corresponding pictures of utility imputations in figure
5.5(b). We show both v/ = V(z') and v = V(z). Note that v is on the Pareto
frontier and v' is not. (Test your understanding of this picture by answer-
Utility of
,_ Gooda consumer 2
TX, v= V(x)
Oo ss. x |
= \ 8 os
S a y 3] Utility of
0 \ consumer 1
Good a 3
(a) (b)
Figure 5.5. Pareto efficiency and Edgeworth boxes.
In (a), we show a Pareto efficient point z, an inefficient point z, and (the
heavy line) the Pareto frontier or contract curve. The points v and + in
utility imputation space corresponding to and z are shown in (b).
ing: Where in figure 5.5[b] do you find utility imputations corresponding
to the shaded lens shaped area in figure 5.5[a]?)
Finally, returning to figure 5.5(a), note the heavy line passing through =.
This is the set of points at which the indifference curves of the two con-
sumers are tangent; hence this is the Pareto frontier for this Edgeworth
box. When dealing with Edgeworth boxes, the Pareto frontier is often -
called the contract curve.
One variation on the picture in 5.5(a) should be mentioned. We have
characterized the contract curve as the set of points in the Edgeworth box for
which the two indifference curves through the points are tangent. You should
try to draw a picture where this characterization doesnt work, because the
point in question is against a boundary of the box, corresponding to a non-
negativity constraint for the consumption of some good by some consumer.
In general, the contract curve is defined to be those points that are Pareto
efficient in the box; the tangent indifference curves" characterization is only
used informally.
5.3. Benevolent social dictators
and social welfare functionals
Imagine that you, an outsider (not one of the consumers), have been
appointed dictator for a given society; it is up to you to select a social
outcome from among those feasible. We will suppose that you wish to be
5.3. Benevolent social dictators and social welfare functionals 157
a benevolent dictator, and we explore what might be said about how you
should choose.
An obvious first question is whether we should expect that your choice
can be rationalized by some (asymmetric and negatively transitive) pref-
erence relation > on the set X of social outcomes. To see why this might
not be such a reasonable thing, suppose there are three individuals in
this society and two feasible outcomes: X = {z,z'}. Suppose that two
of the consumers strictly prefer z to = and one strictly prefers z to =.
You might worry about the relative strengths of these strict preferences,
but such interpersonal comparisons may be difficult to make, and so you
might reasonably suppose that you should select z. But now imagine that
a third option is available, =. The first two consumers rank z = =x
while the third ranks z > 2 > z. Since everyone prefers z to &, it
seems unreasonable that you would select 2.2 But is it now reasonable
to suppose that you will take z over z/? The outcome = is no worse than
the second choice of each individual, whereas z is the third consumers
worst alternative. It certainly isnt clear that z' should be chosen in this
case, but neither is it clear that z should be chosen; it is certainly less clear
that z should be chosen than it was when only = and 2 were available.
Nonetheless, if your choice behavior (as benevolent dictator) can be
rationalized by a preference relation, a choice of z in the first instance
necessarily implies a choice of z (assuming z isnt chosen) in the sec-
ond; this is an easy consequence of Houthakkers axiom of revealed
preference.
Objections concerning our discussion of this example are easy. Per-
haps you find z the obvious choice in the second case, and (what I person-
ally find more compelling) perhaps is not so obvious a choice in the first
instance; as a benevolent social dictator, you (perhaps) feel that you must
somehow consider intensity of preferences. Nonetheless, we proceed on
the basis of the following assumption, although you may wonder if this
assumption is at all sensible in this context. :
Assumption 1. The social dictator's choice behavior can be rationalized by an
asymmetric and negatively transitive strict preference relation = on X. More-
over, ~ is sufficiently well behaved so that it admits a numerical representation
V*: X R.
* We'll formalize this restriction on your choice behavior in just a moment; for now we
are only dealing with an example.
3 Your intuition might be that =z should be prefered to = in both cases because z is
preferred to z in both cases by a majority of society. We will discuss majority rule below.
158 Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
The last part of assumption 1 follows immediately if X is a finite set. But
if X is infinite, we may need something more, such as continuity of =.
To this we add two assumptions that relate your preferences as social
dictator to those of the members of the society.
Assumption 2. If = is Pareto superior to z', then = > = or, equivalently,
V*(z) > V*().
Assumption 3. If Vi(z) = Vila") forall i=1,2,... LI, then V*(z) = Vv.
Assumption 2 is virtually an axiom of benevolence, if you are willing to
accept that members of society are en itled to their own tastes. Given this,
how could one argue with the assertion that if one social outcome is Pareto
superior to a second if everyone in society at least weakly prefers the
first, and some strictly prefer it then the dictator, if she is benevolent,
should prefer the first? We could imagine a slightly weaker assumption,
where it is necessary that is strictly Pareto superior to before we
condlude z > , but assumption 2 as stated seems pretty reasonable.
Assumption 3, in a sense, pushes assumption 2 to a limit." If every-
one is indifferent between = and ', then what business does a benevolent
social dictator have in choosing between them? One might retort: If every
consumer is indifferent between z and z', then no one will mind if the
dictator chooses according to whim or her own tastes. But we will proceed
assuming this as well.
Proposition 5.1. Fix numerical representations of the consumers preferences
V;. Then the social dictator's preferences satisfy assumptions 1, 2, and 3 if and
only if the social dictator's preferences are represented by a function V* : X R
that takes the form
Vz) =W(V (=)
for some function W : RI R that is strictly increasing on the range of the
vector function V = (W,..., V1): X RA
b We won't spend time on continuity of the preferences of the social dictator, but you
might think about whether this is reasonable if the preferences of the consumers in this so-
ciety are not continuous.
 Suppose that social outcomes come from some convex subset of a finite dimensional
Euclidean space, and for each x and e > 0, there is some that is Pareto superior to and
within of z. This would hold, for example, if social outcomes are consumption allocations,
individual's preferences depend only on what they consume, and at least one consumer is
locally insatiable. Suppose, moreover, that the dictator's preferences are continuous. Then
assumption 3 follows from assumption 2 (and continuity) in precisely the sense of a limit.
4 Recall that V(z) is shorthand for the vector (Vi(z),..., Vr(z)).
5.3. Benevolent social dictators and social welfare functionals 159
The bit about strictly increasing..." is less ferocious than it may seem.
The idea is that if we have z and z from X such that Vi(z) > Vi(z') for
all 7, with a strict inequality for at least one i, then W(Vi(z)) > wiz).
Proving one direction of this proposition is easy. Suppose that for some
given W with the postulated properties we define V* by V*(z) = W(V(z))
and then we define the dictator's preferences from V*. Showing that these
social preferences satisfy assumptions 1, 2, and 3 is a simple matter of com-
paring definitions. The other direction (going from the assumptions to the
existence of such a W) is a bit harder, but only a bit. Assumption 1 guaran-
tees that some V* represents . For each vector r R! such that r = V(z)
for some z X, define W(r) to be V"(z). Then W is well-defined by as-
sumption 3, and it is strictly increasing on the range of V' by assumption 2.
One can extend W to all of R' in any way you please. One might wish w
to be extended to be increasing or even strictly increasing on all of R, and
the mathematically adept reader might find it interesting to consider whether
either or both of these wishes can be fulfilled in general.
Note well that the function W defined on R! depends crucially on
the particular V; that are chosen to represent the preferences of individual
consumers. We could, for example, replace V; with a function V] given
by Vi(z) = (Vil) + 1000) (which is a strictly increasing transformation),
and then we would have to change how W responds to its first argu-
ment. Still, the notion is simple. Fixing representations of our consumers
preferences, every #reasonable benevolent social dictator has preferences
given by a strictly increasing function W on the space of utility imputa-
tions, and every such function W defines a reasonable benevolent social
dictator, where the definition of reasonable is that the dictator conforms
to assumptions 1, 2, and 3.
Functions W of this sort are sometimes referred to as social welfare
functionals. Standard examples are
r
@ Wiq,...,rD) = > r;, the so-called utilitarian social welfare functional
) Wiry,..., m0) = SOL, aur; for a set of strictly positive weights {a}, the
so-called weighted utilitarian social welfare functional. This class of func-
tions is also referred to as the class of Bergsorian social welfare functionals.
They will reappear later.
In example (a), all members of society are given equal weight. 4 In example
(b), we may possibly weight consumers differently. We might agree, for
example, that it would be sensible to give the utility of professors ten
times the weight given to the utility of undergraduates, who in turn get
ten times the weight given to the utility of graduate students.
As an alternative way to weight utilities, you might consider making
the weight given to a consumer depend on the relative utility the consumer
receives.
@Llet yy >a >...>ar>0bea nonincreasing sequence of positive
weights, and for any vector (r,...,7), let ry; be the th smallest number
in the set {ry,...,rr}. (Thatis, if I =4 and r = (4,5,4,3), then we have
Tm = 3, TR = TE = 4, and Tu = 5.) And set Wry, ceey TI) = >i QT - This
gives relatively more weight to the worse off" members of society.
(d) To take an extreme case of (c), let W(ry,---, rp) = min{r; : i=1,...,1}.
That is, the worst off member of the society gets all the weight. This isnt
quite going to give a social welfare functional as we've defined the term,
since it isnt strictly increasing. (It gives rise to a benevolent social dictator
for whom assumption 2 is replaced by the weaker assumption: If z strictly
* Pareto dominates z, then = > z.) This (almost-) social welfare functional
is sometimes called a Rawlsian social welfare functional.
The range of possible choices of a social welfare functional
What are we to make of these social welfare functionals? Put another
way, what conclusions can we draw if we believe that social choice is
determined by sone preference ordering that satisfies assumptions 1, 2,
and 37
Proposition 5.2. Suppose that choice out of any set X' of feasible social states
is made by maximization of a function W(Vi(z), ..., Vi(z)), where W is strictly
increasing in each argument. Then the chosen social state will always be Pareto
efficient (in X').
There is almost nothing to this; it is virtually a matter of comparing
definitions. So we can rephrase the question: Are there any Pareto efficient
outcomes that are not selected by some suitably chosen social welfare
functional? For all practical purposes the answer to this question is no. In
fact, we can, under certain conditions, get a virtually negative answer if
we restrict attention to Bergsonian social welfare functionals.
To see how this works, we need the mathematical notion of the convex
hull of a set. For any set of points 4 of RX (for any integer K), the convex
hull of A is the set of all points z RX such that z= 3" a2, for some
integer IV, some selection of points z, 4, and some selection of scalars
5 You may decide how much weight is appropriate for assistant professors.
re
rere ge
5.3. Benevolent social dictators and social welfare functionals 161
ay, > 0 such that > 1 &n = 1. Dont be put off by the symbols; the convex
hull of any set is just the smallest convex set that contains the original set.
It is obtained by filling in" any holes or concave pieces in the set.
Proposition 5.3. Suppose z* is Pareto efficient in some set X' and the utility
imputation corresponding to *, or V(z*), is Pareto efficient in the convex hull
of V(X'). Then for some selection of nonnegative weights {0} iaa,.,1, at least
one of which is positive, z* maximizes Y 1 a; Vi(z) over the set X.
(We will sketch the proof in a bit.)
Note two things about this proposition: first, this ugly condition about
V(z*) being Pareto efficient in the convex hull of V(X). Since z* is Pareto
efficient in X, we know that V(z*) is Pareto efficient in V(X) itself. So,
for example, if we know that V(X) is a convex set, then this added
condition is unnecessary. It is a little too much to hope that V(X) will
be convex, but still we can eliminate the ugly condition by some quite
standard assumptions.
Proposition 5.4. Suppose X' is a convex set and each V; : X R is concave.
Then if z* is Pareto efficient in X', the utility imputation V(z*) is Pareto
efficient in the convex hull of V(X).
(The proof is left as a homework exercise.) Consider, for example, the spe-
cific application of division of some endowment of commodities among
I consumers, where each consumer cares only about how much he con-
sumes. Then X' is convex, and all we need is an assumption that the
utility functions of the consumers are concave. We discussed at some
length the reasonableness of such an assumption on consumer's utility,
and we do not repeat that discussion here. But this assumption is met in
many applications.
The second remark to make about proposition 5.3 is that the weights
in the sum of utilities are only nonnegative; we dont guarantee that they
are strictly positive. If one or more of the weights is zero, then we dont
have a social welfare functional as we've defined the term, because the
8 If you've never seen this notion before, get someone who has to draw a few pictures for
you.
7 Recall that V(X") = {v R : v = V(z) for some z X'}.
 What if the ugly condition is not met? Can one still guarantee that every Pareto efficient
point is selected for some legitimate social welfare functional, albeit not a Bergsonian socal
welfare functional? The answer is virtually yes, where one waffles a bit for the same reason
that we permit zero weights in proposition 5.3. Untangling this statement is left to the more
mathematically inclined reader.
162 Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
Utility of Utility of
consumer 2 consumer 2
7
vt
Utility of
consumer 1
(a) 
Utility of
consumer 1
Figure 5.6. Why zero weights are needed in the proof of proposition 5.3.
i
function is not strictly increasing in the utility of consumers who have
zero weight in the sum. Allowing for zero weight is necessary if we are
to get all the Pareto efficient points. Consider, in this regard, figure 5.6(a).
We have here the set V(X) for a two-person society, and we imagine
that V(X) is a circle. Since the slope of the Pareto frontier at the point
marked v* is zero, if we put any (positive) weight on consumer 1's utility
in a weighted sum, we will not choose v* as a maximizing point. But
if we allow zero weights, and if V(X") is as in 5.6(b), then points such
as v' might be selected as maximizing social outcomes. In terms of our -
definitions, such points are not strictly Pareto dominated by any other
(as long as one of the weights is strictly positive, we could never select
a point that is strictly Pareto dominated), but they are not Pareto effi-
cient either. One can either give up guarantees that points such as v* are
obtained as maxima, or allow the possibility that points such as v' are;
both these solutions to the problem of zero weights can be found in the
literature.
Now we give a proof of proposition 5.3. This will be in small type
and so is optional material, but all readers are urged to persevere. We are
about to introduce the separating hyperplane theorem, a very important
tool in economic theory.
We begin by stating the separating hyperplane theorem. Suppose A and
B are nonintersecting convex sets in R?. By drawing pictures, you should
be able to convince yourself that it is always possible to draw a line between
them, with all the points from A lying on one side of the line and all the
points from B lying on the other. If you are really clever in your pictures,
you will be able to draw a situation in which points from one or both of
the two sets must lie on the line, so we will permit this. The mathematical
rT
~
5.3. Benevolent social dictators and social welfare functionals 163
result that formalizes your ability always to draw such a line or, in higher
dimensions, to draw the appropriate analogue to a line, is
The Separating Hyperplane Theorem. If A and B are convex sets in RX that
dont intersect, then there is a vector a = (a1,..., ax) RX, not identically zero,
and a scalar B, such that oa < f for all ac Aand a-b> pg forall b eB,
where - means the dot or inner product.
With this it is easy to prove proposition 5.3. Take any Pareto efficient point z*
that satisfies the hypothesis of the proposition. Consider the following two
convex sets in RI. Let A = the convex hull of V(X); and let B={v RT :
v > V(z*)}. In the definition of B, the strict inequality (which is between
two I-dimensional vectors) should be read v is greater or equal to V(=) in
every component and strictly greater in at least one. Because g* is Pareto
efficient in the convex hull of V(X) and B is the set of utility vectors that
Pareto dominate the utility imputation associated with z*, A and B do not
intersect. The set A is convex by definition; it shouldn't take you too long
to prove that B is convex. Hence there exists a vector @ = (e,...,ar) and a
scalar 8 such that -a <8 forall a 4 and b> 8 forall b B. Since
V{(g*) is almost in B, a-V(z*) =f. (To be precise, use continuity.) Hence
V(z*) maximizes the function -v over v in A, hence over v V(X). And
hence z* maximizes the function 31 a:Vi(z) over = X'. We are done as
soon as we show that each ; > 0. For this we use our definition of the set
B. Suppose that o; < 0 for some 7. For each integer NV, let
oN = Viz"), ..., Viea@), Vilz) + N, Viale), ..., Vila).
That is, we look at the utility imputation resulting from z*, and we give
consumer 3 an increase of N in his utility. Then " B by definition. And
if o; < 0, then by making N very large, we can make ov as small as
we wish, in particular smaller than , which would contradict the defining
property of and .
If you get lost in this mathematical proof, simply consider the picture in
figure 5.7. We've drawn the set V(X") here as a finite collection of points,
presumably resulting from a finite set X'. We then shade in both the convex
hull of V(X") and the set of utility vectors that Pareto dominate the utility
imputation v* = V{(z*) for some z* X'. We can separate these two by a
line that necessarily passes through V(z*). Using this line and lines parallel
to it to define iso-social welfare" lines, we see that for some linear social
welfare functional, z* is socially optimal. Since the separating line has to
stay outside the interior of the set B, it cant have positive slope. Note also
the point v', which is Pareto efficient in V(X) but not in the convex hull
of V(X). We cant, therefore, obtain ' as the choice of a Bergsonian social
welfare functional. Finally, draw the corresponding picture for the point v*
in figure 5.6. This should show you again why we sometimes need zero
weights.
Apparently, then, assumptions 1, 2, and 3 don't do a lot to pin down
social choice. They do tell us how to restrict social choice to the Pareto
164 Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
Utility of
consumer 2
A separating
hyperplane
Utility of
consumer 1
i
Figure 5.7. Separating feasible utility vectors from Pareto
 dominating vectors in the proof of proposition 5.4.
frontier, but (following propositions 5.3 and 5.4) in many cases of interest
even Bergsonian social welfare functions allow us to get almost the entire
Pareto frontier as socially optimal. So how should we proceed?
We might try to say more about how social choice should be deter-
mined in general from arrays of consumer preferences.-That is, we might
deal not with a single array of consumer preferences but stead with
a family of them, discussing how social preferences should change with .
changes in the array of consumer preferences. This approach is discussed
in section 5.5 with the most famous result along these lines, Arrows possi-
bility theorem.
54. Characterizing efficient social outcomes
But before doing this, we illustrate how social welfare functionals can
be used as a tool of analysis. Their usefulness analytically springs from
precisely their weakness in normative choice theory: They can be used to
find the entire Pareto frontier as the solution to a parametric optimization
problem. That is, suppose we have a social choice problem in which (for
simplicity) proposition 5.4 applies. Then we know that every point on the
Pareto frontier is the solution to maximizing social welfare using a Bergso-
nian social welfare functional for some selection of weights. As we vary
the weights, we trace the entire Pareto frontier. It might be interesting to
see what conditions must hold at an efficient outcome in a particular set-
ting, which thus comes down to the conditions that must hold at solutions
of maximizing a weighted sum of individuals utilities.
La aa
5.4. Characterizing efficient social outcomes 165
To illustrate this technique, we develop three examples that will be
used to some extent in the rest of the book.
The production and allocation of private goods
Our first example takes place in the context of production and allo-
cation of commodities. We imagine a situation with K commodities and
I individuals. We write Z for the positive orthant in RX , and we write
z= (21,%,...,2r) for a social outcome an allocation of commodities to
the individuals. Each 2; is an element.of Z, a nonnegative K -dimensional
vector, and we write 2; for the amount of good k allocated to individual i.
We restrict attention for now to the case in which these are private
oods, meaning that the preferences of individual 7 concerning the social
outcome x depend only on i's own bundle of commodities. More pre-
cisely, if V; : X R represents i's preferences over X , then V; can be
written as Vi(zy,..., 21) = Uj(z;) for some function Ui: Z R. We as-
sume that U; is concave and continuously differentiable; the usual remarks
about these assumptions are taken as read. We also assume that none of
the commodities are noxious, so that each U; is nondecreasing.
So far everything is as in section 5.1. But now we add one com-
plication. Instead of supposing that a social endowment bundle is to
be distributed, we imagine that this society is endowed at the outset
with a supply of some K +1 good that no one wishes to consume but
which can be transformed into various bundles of the XK goods individ-
uals wish to consume. We assume that this society has at its disposal a
production or transformation technology that is characterized by a func-
tion : Z [0,00) with the following interpretation: For each bundle
z Z, the amount of the K +1 good needed to produce z is (z). We
assume that society has at its disposal an amount e, of this K +1 good,
so the social choice problem is to (a) choose a bundle from Z to produce
from societys supply e, of the K +1 good and then (b) divide the bundle
produced among the I individuals. That is, the space of feasible social
outcomes X is
I
X'={zeX: z= (s,..., 2), $0 zi) < eo}.
i=1
Let us be clear: > #; is the vector sum of the commodity bundles allo-
cated to the individuals; it is a K -dimensional vector. So the constraint
reads that it must be feasible to produce from e, what is to be allocated.
f This K +1 good is simply an expository device. Readers who know a bit about mod-
eling technologies will see that we could dispense with it.
166 Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
We assume that the function is strictly increasing (it always takes
more to make more), continuously differentiable, and quasi-convex. Dif-
ferentiability of is assumed for ease of exposition, but quasi-convexity
of is essential for what follows. Quasi-convexity basically says that if
 and 7 can both be produced from e, units of the K +1 good, then so
can any convex combination of z and #'. The reason for the assumption
is so that we obtain: The set X' defined above is convex, hence proposition
54 applies. We leave this to the reader to prove. We go on to harvest the
consequences, which are that every efficient social outcome can be found
as the solution of the following maximization problem:
1 1
Maximize > ealitz) subject to $d 2) < eg,
i=1 i=1
for nonnegative weights (ay).
To keep matters simple, we will assume that the weights ; are all
strictly positive, that solutions to the problem above are characterized by
the first-order conditions, that at those solutions relevant multipliers and
partial derivatives are strictly positive, and that the only constraint that
binds is the social feasibility constraint, or dL, 2) < ep. The first of these
three assumptions can, at the cpst of some analysis, be dispensed with. The
second is fairly innocuous (and is completely innocuous if the function
 is convex). The third takes some work, but for most applications it
will hold.? But the fourth assumption is quite strong. Essentially we
are characterizing efficient allocations where every consumer is allocated
a positive amount of cach of the K consumption goods. The diligent
reader may wish to redo our analysis without this assumption.
The characterization is now easy to derive. Letting \ be the multiplier
on the social feasibility constraint, the first-order condition for zi, the
amount of good k allocated to consumer iis
oU; o
Qt 
* Ozix Oz 
where partial derivatives are, of course, evaluated at the optimal solution.
We should be careful about one thing in this first-order condition. When
9 The mathematically well-versed reader can try to do without it.
8 For more on this assumption, which is essentially an assumption that the production
technology is convex, see chapter 7.
kt involves an implicit assumption that each consumer's utility rises in increases in each
good, at least for some levels of the goods consumption.
5.4. Characterizing efficient social outcomes 167
reading 0/0z; on the right-hand side, remember that is a function of
K variables; we mean here the partial derivative of taken with respect
to the total social production of commodity k.
Take any two goods k and &', and take the two first-order conditions
for zy and zy. With all the assumptions we have made, we can divide
one by the other, cancel the a;s on one side and the As on the other, and
obtain
ou. / 20 C99 [0g
Ozik Ozik - Oz Oz 
The ratio on the left-hand side is called the marginal rate of substitution for
individual 1 of good k for k', whereas the ratio on the right-hand side is
called the marginal rate of technical substitution of k for k', and we have
the result; at an efficient social outcome these ratios should be equal for
each consumer for each pair of goods. Moreover, since the right-hand
side is independent of the consumer i, we see that the marginal rates
of substitution of each pair of goods should be equal for each pair of
CONSUIMeTs.
These characterizations of efficient social production and allocation
are easy enough to explain. First, suppose that for two consumers, and
#!, their marginal rates of substitution of k for k' were different; suppose
the marginal rate for was larger. Then we could take a bit of k' away
from 4, compensating her with just enough k so she is indifferent, and
give the k' to i in return for the k we gave to i. The ratio of k to k that
makes i indifferent will, because of the presumed difference in the ratios,
strictly benefit i. Hence we didnt have a socially efficient allocation.
Next, suppose that for consumer i the marginal rate of substitution of k
for Kk is not the same as the marginal rate of technological substitution.
Suppose her ratio is larger. Then we can make a bit less k and a bit more
k in a ratio that is technologically feasible and give the extra Eto iin
exchange for the k' we need to make the extra. Given our assumptions
on her rate of marginal substitution relative to the rate of technological
substitution, this makes her strictly better off, and we were not efficient in
terms of our choice of production plan.?
i Note that it has to be possible to take k from the second consumer and &' from the first
to make these variations. This is where our assumption that nonnegativity constraints dont
bind come into play, and it is where we would have to modify these simple characterizations
if nonnegativity constraints did bind.
168 Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
The production and allocation of private and public goods
If you have had a course in intermediate microeconomics, you prob-
ably already knew all that, at least at some level. But now we consider
a variation that you may not have seen before. We suppose that of our
K commodities, the first is a public good. A public good is one where the
consumption of the good by one individual in no way prevents others
from consuming the good or diminishes their enjoyment of it. Classical
examples of public goods include clean air and national defence. Parks
and highways have some of the character of a public good, but they dont
quite qualify the more people consume Yellowstone Park or the Penn-
sylvania Turnpike, the less utility each takes from it.7
We formalize this situation as follows. Now a social outcome is a
1+I(K 1) vector,
z =(y, (Zn, ..., 215). -+, (212, +, 21K),
where y is the amount of the public good, # = (2p,..., 21x) is the amount
of the priyate goods consumed by individual 1, and so on. The prefer-
ences of individual 7 over social states are given by a utility function U;
defined on the space of vectors (y, 2) = (y, (212, -.., 21x). Otherwise, the
formulation of the technological possibilities for this society remains the
same, so now the space of feasible social outcomes is :
I
X ={z=(y,=x,...,2z1) RWIE=D $y, 2) < eo}.
i=l
Convexity of X is unaffected, and if we make assumptions similar
to those made in the previous subsection, to characterize efficient social
outcomes in this setting we have to solve the problem
I I
maximize > o;U;(y, z;) subject to (y, > a) < e.
i=1 i=l
J Public goods are extreme examples of goods with externalities, which we discuss in the
next chapter. A useful exercise, once you've read the discussion given in the next chapter on
externalities, is to characterize the efficient allocation of goods in the style of this section in
cases with general externalities.
<7 +. +
5.4. Characterizing efficient social outcomes 169
First-order equations on the zy for i =1,... IT and k=2,...,K are just
as before, but for the public good we get the first-order condition
Now consider any one of the private goods, say good #2. By manipulating
the first-order condition for z;, we obtain
9/00;
=A
* Oz, Oz; 
Substituting for a; in the first-order condition for y gives
3 pa 20] 00; _ 30
O0z/ 0z5| 8y ~ oy
i=1
and dividing through by A(@/8z) on both sides, we get
L rou; oui] 8g | 84
S52 37%
1 zz
Or, in words, the marginal rate of technological substitution of the public
good for any of the private goods (the right-hand side) should equal the
sum of the marginal rates of substitutions of the public good for the private
good summed over consumers.
Syndicate theory
Our third illustration of this technique, syndicate theory (Wilson, 1968),
comes from the economics of uncertainty. There are I consumers who
jointly own a gamble that pays off different amounts of money in N dif-
ferent states of nature. The IN states of nature are written {s1,...,sn}, and
in state s,, the gamble pays off $;,. A social outcome consists of a shar-
Ing rule for dividing the payoff of the gamble in each state. We write Yin
for the amount of money received by consumer in state Sp, 50 the set of
all feasible social outcomes is the set of all vectors @Windi=1,. Imei. N RIV
such that for each =, SL Yin = Y,. The last constraint is the adding
up" constraint; the consumers cant divide among themselves more than
they have to divide. (Thus, in the notation of the general formulation, all
170 Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
vectors (yin) that meet this constraint make up the set X of feasible social
outcomes.) Note that we don't restrict the yin tO be nonnegative; we will
permit consumers in some states to contribute funds.
Each consumer (or member of the syndicate) cares only about what
he receives. Fach evaluates his part of any division Windnat,..N using
an expected utility calculation with probabilities {mn} and with utility
function u;. That is, the utility to 4 of the sharing rule (yin) is given by
N
> mts (in)-
n=l
Note carefully: We are assuming that the different consumers all have the
same probability distribution over the N states. You may wish to consider
how what follows will change if we imagine that different CONSUmers have
different subjective assessments concerning the likelihoods of the various
states. We are also assuming that the individual consumers evaluate their
shares in this gamble without regard to any other risky assets they might
hold; this (presumably) makes sense only if this risk is independent of
any other risks they might face. We assume that the consumers are ail risk
averse (intluding risk neutrality as a limit case); that is, the functions ug
are all concave. And for technical reasons we assume that the functions
u; are all continuously differentiable.
Now we pose the question in which we are interested. Which sharing
rules are Pareto efficient? _
The set of feasible sharing rules is clearly convex. And the utility
functions of the individuals viewed as functions on the sharing rules are
concave because each of the utility functions u; is concave. So proposi-
tion 5.4 applies; and then according to proposition 5.3, we can find all the
efficient division rules by maximizing various weighted averages of the
consumers expected utilities.
That is, if we let (@:)ia,..I be a vector of nonnegative weights, then
the solution to
I N I .
max y a; > ros) subject to >. Yin = Yn for each n
i=1 n=l i=l
is a Pareto efficient sharing rule, and as we vary the weights a;, we get
all the Pareto efficient sharing rules.
. :
k The technically astute reader will see that the concavity of ui is not quite the same
as concavity of the Vi functions, but it quickly jmplies concavity of the V;." If this is
gibberish, don't worry about if.
5.4. Characterizing efficient social outcomes 171
What happens if some of the weights are zero? Suppose o; = 0. Then
we put no weight on the expected utility of consumer 4. And since we
haven't restricted shares to be nonnegative, the solution to the maxi-
mization problem just given is to make Yin extremely large negative, dis-
tributing this tax on i among those consumers that have positive weight.
More precisely, the maximization problem given has no solution at allt
So we can restrict attention to strictly positive weights.
Now let us rewrite the objective function in the maximization problem
by interchanging the order of summations. That is,
TI N N I
> a; > Tnli ow] = > Tn > QU; wo) 3
Til
i=1 n=1 i=l
so we can rewrite the problem above as
N I I
max y Tn > OU; | subject to > yin =Y,, for each n.
n=l i=1 i=1
If you stare hard at this reformulation of the problem, you will see that
we solve it by looking at each state separately; if we solve separately, for
each state n,
1 I
max y at; (yin) subject to > tin = Ya,
i=1 i=1
then we have the solution to the grand problem. Let us record this and
other facts we encounter as we go along:
3
Fact 1. Efficient sharing among members of the syndicate is done on a state-by-
state basis. The probabilities assessed for the various states play no role in this
sharing. All that matters to the sharing rule in a particular state is the total
LIf u; is not defined for negative arguments, then trying to figure out what the maxi-
mization problem means is an interesting mathematical puzzle. We'll avoid this puzzle by
restricting attention to strictly positive weights and by assuming that the problem given has
a solution constrained only by the adding up constraint within the domain of definition of
the u;. . 
 Bven if the weights are all strictly positive, we cannot guarantee that the maximization
problem has a solution, We will proceed assuming that there is a solution, and then, since
we have not constrained the yin , this solution is given by simultaneous solution of the first-
order conditions. But this assumption is unwarranted for some parameterizations, and we
leave it to the careful reader to put in place the necessary caveats.
payoff in that state (and the weights given to the consumers, which are held fixed
in any efficient sharing rule). That is, in an efficient sharing rule, one doesnt
reward Peter in one state and compensate Paul in another.
So how do we share in state s,? Letting yu, be the multiplier on the
adding up constraint for state s,, we get as first-order conditions
oul(yin) = ty fori=1,..., I.
Assume for the time being that each u; is strictly concave (so that ul is a strictly
decreasing function). Then for each fixed value of the multiplier p,, the
equation o;ui(y) = p, has a unique solution in y. Let us write that
solution as a function y;(u,) of the multiplier u,. Because u} is strictly
decreasing, the value of y;(un) is strictly decreasing in u,. Because we
assumed that wu; is continuously differentiable, the solution is continuous
in pr. Hence the function pe yi (ur) is strictly decreasing and continuous
in pn, . At the value of uy, for which the sum equals Y,,, we have the unique
solution to the first-order conditions for state sy.
Fact 2. If all the consumers are strictly risk averse (that is, if all the wu; are
strictly concave), the first-order conditions have a unique solution for each state
of nature. There is a unique efficient sharing rule (for the fixed weights).
Consider next how the shares of consumer i vary across various states..
Consider two states s, and s,- such that Y,, > Y;.. The solution for
state n will be where Y7 (us) = Y5. The solution for state n/ will be
where > Yi{pins) = Yor. Since the functions y;(-) are strictly decreasing,
fin, < fins. Hence the share for each consumer 7 in state n, yi, = v:(un),
will be strictly larger than his share in state n'.
Fact 3. If all the consumers are strictly risk averse, then the share of any consumer
in a state is strictly increasing in the overall payoff in that state.
So far we've considered efficient division when all the consumers are
strictly risk averse. Now let us consider what happens when one of the
consumers is risk neutral and the others are (strictly) risk averse. For our
" The reader who is thinking about how this would change if the consumers assessed
different probabilities for the different states should think hard about this first fact!
9 The weights a; are held fixed throughout this discussion. As they shift, we shift the
point on the Pareto frontier that we are investigating, a comparative statics exercise that is
left for the reader.
 We might get +oo or oo as the solution, and the careful reader can worry about what
happens then.
54. Characterizing efficient social outcomes 173
risk neutral consumer, say consumer number 1, we have uy = for some
constant c. Hence the first-order condition for this consumer in state Sn,
is oc = pn. But the left-hand side of this first-order condition doesnt
depend on mn. So we conclude that the multipliers pu, for the various
states nm must all be the same; they must all be aye. Thus the share
Yin Of consumer i = 2,...,T in state n must be the (unique) solution of
a;ui(y) = aye. Since we have assumed that all the consumers other than
number 1 are strictly risk averse, the equation for 7 has a unique solution.
Thus the shares of consumers other than number 1 are constant; consumer
1 bears all the risk. )
Fact 4. If one consumer is risk neutral and the others are strictly risk averse,
then the consumers who are risk averse receive, in any efficient division, a payoff
that is constant among the various states. The risk neutral consumer bears all
the risk; his payoff in state sy, is Yr, plus or minus some constant (that doesnt
depend on n).
This fact will become important in chapter 16.
Now, just to show how far one could take this sort of thing, we
move to a very specific parameterization. We assume that each con-
sumer is strictly risk averse and has constant absolute risk aversion, or
u;(y) = e~ for some \; > 0. Recall that ); is called consumer i's co-
efficient of (absolute) risk aversion. The reciprocal of A;, which we write
74, is conventionally called is coefficient of risk tolerance; it will be more
convenient to work with risk tolerances than with risk aversions, so we
rewrite u;(y) = e~%/. It is also conventional to refer to Si. Ti as so-
cietys risk tolerance; we will use this term and the symbol T to represent
this sum. We have the following result:
Fact 5. If all the consumers have constant absolute risk tolerance, then the
efficient divisions take the form 
i
Yin = Yn + ki, i=1,...,I
where the constant k; is a constant that depends on all the parameters of the
maximization problem, including the weights (oy).
We leave this for you to prove in problem 6; some hints are given there.
But note how remarkable this is. In this very special case, in any efficient
sharing rule consumer receives a proportional share of the total pie plus
a constant payment (which may well be a tax). The size of his proportional
share is given by the ratio of his risk tolerance to societys risk tolerance.
174 Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
We shift around on the Pareto frontier solely by adjusting the constant
payments; efficient sharing always involves the same risky parts in the
efficient sharing rule.
55. Social choice rules and Arrows possibility theorem
Now we return to the problem of normative social choice. In sec-
tion 5.3, we looked at a single array of consumer preferences, given by
an array of numerical rankings (V)i-1,.,r On the set of social outcomes
X, and we attempted to characterize reasonable social preferences. We
might get further along in the general program of normative social choice
if we expand the scope of our analysis. Specifically, we might consider
a family of possible arrays of consumer preferences and characterize rea-
sonable social preferences for each array in the family. The point is that
this expanded scope allows us to pose conditions concerning how social
preferences respond to changes in the array of consumer preferences.
For example, we might pose the following property:
Positive Social Responsiveness. Suppose that for a given array of consumer
preferences the resulting social preferences rank x as better than x. Suppose that
the array of consumer preferences changes so that = falls in no ones ranking and
rises in no one's ranking. Then the social ranking should continue to rank 
better than x.
We aren't being very precise in this definition because we haven't set a
context for the problem. But the reader can probably glean from this the
spirit of what we will try to do.
We will use the following terminology. A map or function from some
given family of arrays of consumer preferences to resulting social prefer-
ences will be called a social choice rule.
A setting and three examples
We begin by looking at this general program in the following setting.
Assume we are given a finite set X of social outcomes, a finite collection
of consumers indexed by i= 1,...,I, and for each consumer, an asymmet-
ric and negatively transitive strict preference relation >; on X. From >;
we define weak preference >; and indifference ~; in the usual fashion.
We will work directly with the preference relations >i; specific numerical
representations for these preferences will play no role for the time being.
In this setting, an array of consumer preferences is then an I -dimensional
vector of preference orders, (~1,-..,>1), Where each preference order is
5.5. Social choice rules and Arrow's possibility theorem 175
asymmetric and negatively transitive. One might put restrictions on the
possible arrays of consumer preferences under consideration; we, how-
ever, will assume that any vector of asymmetric and negatively transitive
orderings of X is permitted.
A social choice rule takes an array (>~1,..-,>1) as input and produces
social preferences as output; we assume that the output is in the form of
a binary relation >*.?
Consider the following examples of social choice rules in this setting.
Example 1. The Pareto ule. In the Pareto rule, =* ' if and only if 
Pareto dominates =. (Or we could insist on strictly Pareto dominating ' J)
The Pareto rule produces social preferences that are not negatively tran-
sitive. That is, we might find two outcomes z and 2 where z Pareto
dominates =, hence z =* =, yet both = and z' are Pareto incomparable
with a third z, hence neither z * ' nor = * z/'. You can easily
construct specific examples from our discussion of negative transitivity in
chapter 2.
Example 2. Majority rule and variations. For each pair of social outcomes
 and o, let P(z,z') be the number of individuals i who express >;
In simple majority rule, we define = +* = if Plz, z') > 1/2. Variations
include plurality rule, or =* ' if P(z,z')> P(z', x); and c-majority rule,
for a> 1/2, in which = w* z if P(z,2') > al.
We could also have a-plurality rules, and so on. And we could have
weighted majority rules, where different members of society have different
numbers of votes they are allowed to cast.
The problem with majority rule is that preference cycles are possible.
Specifically, imagine that we have three outcomes in X, call them z, y, and
z, and we have three consumers. The first consumer ranks TY > 2-
The second ranks y =z 2 =2 T. The third ranks z >; >3 . Then = -*y
by majority rule. (Consumers 1 and 3 feel this way) And y * z by
majority rule (according to CONSUMES 1 and 2). And z * z by majority
rule (according to consumers 2 and 3). This isnt so good, especially when
it comes to choosing from {z,y, z}.9
Example 3. The Borda rule. Suppose there are N social outcomes. For each
consumer i construct a numerical ranking for the N outcomes from +; as
follows: If there is some single best social outcome x according to ;, let Uy(z) =
N. More generally, suppose i ranks m. social outcomes T1, Ta; Typ AS being
equally good and all better than anything else. Then set U(x) =... = U(x) =
IN+(N =D) +...+ (N m+1)]/m. In general, the nth best social outcome
is given numerical ranking mn, where ties average their rankings. Then define
U*@) = SL, Ue), and define =* to be in accord with U*.
Readers who follow American college sports (and, for all I know, others)
will know something like this system in the rankings of college football
and basketball teams. Sportswriters or coaches rank the top twenty teams,
giving 20 points to the best, 19 to the second best, and so on, and then
these points are summed to get the consensus rankings. (It isn't clear
that the rankers are allowed to express ties, and to be the classic Borda
rule, the rankers would have to rank all the teains.)
What's wrong with the Borda rule? We leave this for you to discover
for homework.
Four properties and Arrow's theorem
Consider the following four properties for a social choice rule in the
setting of the previous subsection.
Property 1. The social choice rule should prescribe an asymmetric and negatively
transitive ordering ~* over social outcomes X for every array of individual
preferences (>).
There are two parts to this property. First, the output of the social choice
rule should itself be an asymmetric and negatively transitive order on the
social outcomes. As we discussed in section 5.3, this is not entirely non-
controversial. Second, the social choice rule is meant to operate no matter
what profile of individual preferences is specified. This is sometimes called
the universal domain property; the domain of definition of the social choice
rule should be all conceivable arrays of individual preferences.
z,y X, let m(z,y) be the number of consumers who strictly prefer y to =. Then given a
set X' from which choice must be made, for each z X, let M(z, X') = maxye xr m(z, y).
The choice out of X is defined to be those = X' that minimize Mz, X'). In words, we
choose outcomes against which there is the least opposition in any pairwise comparison.
For an analysis that begins in roughly this fashion (and for references to antecedents), see
Caplin and Nalebuff (1988).
5.5. Social choice rules and Arrow's possibility theorem 177
Property 2. Pareto efficiency. If ; = for all i, then = =* z'.
This is something like assumption 2 from section 5.3, except that we require
that z strictly Pareto dominate 2 in order to conclude that =* z'.
Properties 1 and 2 concern how the social choice rule works at a
given array of consumer preferences. Properties 3 and 4, on the other
hand, concern the workings of the rule as we vary the array of consumer
preferences.
Property 3. Independence of irrelevant alternatives. Take any two = and =
from X. The social ranking of x and ' does not change with changes in the
array of consumer rankings of other social outcomes. That is, if (>;) and ea]
are arrays of consumer rankings that satisfy =; o' if and only if =| o/ for
all i, then the social ranking of = and x is the same in these two situations.
This property is meant to capture the notion that all that ought to matter in
our social choice rule is the relative rankings of pairs of alternatives: There
are no interpersonal comparisons of intensity of ranking. To get a sense
of this, consider a three-person society with three outcomes. Consider an
array of individual preferences where the first two consumers rank >;
# >; and the third ranks z >; z >; . In this case, it seems natural
to expect that = >* 2. Now consider an array of individual preferences
in which the first two consumers continue to rank z >=; = =; z" and
the third ranks z >; 2 >; . Property 3 would guarantee that society
should still prefer z and /. We argued at the start of section 5.3 this
is no longer so obvious if we think that since z is consumer 3's worst
alternative in the second array we ought to give more consideration to z
as the social choice. But how are we to judge how bad 3's worst outcome
is for him (instead of his best outcome) relative to how good 1's and 2's
first best outcomes are for them (instead of their second bests)? If we
actively forebear from making such comparisons, then property 3 seems
sensible.
Property 4. Absence of a dictator. No single consumer i is a dictator in the
sense that >; a implies =* o' no matter what the preferences of the other
consumers are.
This seems sensible as long as there are more than two consumers; suppose
that one consumer prefers = to z and all the others prefer = to z. We
might be uncomfortable if society then chose = over z. We'd be even
more uncomfortable if society did this for any pair = and z/, for a single
consumer. Note carefully that someone is a dictator even if he doesnt
178 Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
impose his will in matters of indifference. That is, we allow ~; z' and
z * o without disqualifying i as a dictator. (See problem 9.)
And now for the punchline:
Arrow's Possibility Theorem. Suppose there are at least three social outcomes.
Then no social choice rule simultaneously satisfies properties 1,2, 3, and 4.
The theorem stated is Arrows theorem 2 (1963, 97). There are in the lit-
erature many variations on this basic result, in which the four properties
are changed and/or weakened in various ways, sometimes at the cost of
changing the result slightly. (A good example of the latter sort of treatment
is Wilson [1972] who eliminates the Pareto property, but in consequence
replaces the absence of a dictator with something a bit weaker) In all
these variations, the same basic result appears; no social choice rule satis-
fies four properties of roughly the character of the four properties we've
given.
So to keep alive the possibility of a reasonable social choice rule,
some one (or more) of the four properties will have to go. Doing away
with the first part of property 1 removes the whole point of the exercise,
unless we find some reasonable way to weaken this part of property 1
without losing its entire content. Getting rid of Pareto efficiency doesnt
seem appealing (and doesnt really solve anything; see Wilson [1972]). So
we must consider whether we wish to give up having a social choice rule
that gives well-behaved social preferences or give up on the universal -
domain part of property 1, or property 3, or property 4. Since dictators
are somewhat out of fashion, the universal domain part of property 1 and
property 3 get the most attention in the literature. The references listed in
section 5.5 will lead you into this rich literature.
We proceed to sketch the proof of the version of Arrows theorem given
above. (We roughly follow Arrow [1963, 97#f1) Assume we have a social
choice rule that satisfies properties 1, 2, and 3. (We will demonstrate that
there is a dictator.)
Step 1. For any pair of outcomes z and y, all that matters to the social
ranking of z and y for a given array of consumer preferences are the sets of
individuals such that = >; y, T ~i Ys and y >i =. That is, for any two arrays
of consumer preferences that have the same partition of [ into these three
sets, = and y will be ranked similarly socially. This is simply a restatement
of the independence of irrelevant alternatives.
Step 2. For any distinct pair of outcomes z and y, we say that a subset
J C I is decisive for over y if, when z >; y forall i J and y i = for
all i J, >" y. We assert that there exists some pair of outcomes = and y
and some single individual i such that {i} is decisive for = over y.
5.5. Social choice rules and Arrow's possibility theorem 179
The proof of this assertion runs as follows. Look over all pairs of distinct
outcomes z and y and all the sets of consumers that are decisive for over
y. Note that by Pareto efficiency I is decisive for every Over every y, sO
we are looking over a nonempty collection of pairs and sets. Since I is a
finite set, some smallest (measured by number of members) set of consumers
is decisive for some pair = and y. {We are taking the smallest decisive set,
ranging over all pairs and all decisive sets at once.) Let J be this smallest
set. Suppose that J has more than one element. Partition J into any two
nontrivial subsets, called J + and J". Pick any third element z. (There is a
third element by assumption.) Consider any array of social preferences where
z,y, and z are ranked as follows:
ForielJ,zrizmiy
ForicJ', zriy>iz
ForigdJ, yrizi
Since J is decisive for z over y, at this profile = * 3. Since social preference
is negatively transitive, either >" z or z >" y (or both). But if >" z, then
J" is decisive for z over z. And if z=" y, J' is decisive for z over z. In
either case, we have a pair of outcomes and a decisive set for those outcomes
that is strictly smaller than the smallest decisive set, a contradiction. Hence
the smallest decisive set must contain a single element.
Step 3. Let 1 be decisive for some pair and y. Then i is a dictator.
To show this involves looking at numerous cases.
(1) We will show that for any array of consumer preferences where = >: Z,
it follows that = * z. First consider the case where z # y. For any array
where >; z rearrange (using miversal domain) the relative rankings of y
as follows: For 4, rank = >i =i Z/ and for everyone else, rank >; and
y j =. Since y =; = forall j I, y * = by Pareto efficiency. Since is
decisive for z over y, = >" y. Soby transitivity of *, z >" 2. This leaves
the case z = y. But in this case, take any third element w. We just showed
that 4 is decisive for z over w (and more), so repeating the argument above
with y replacing 2 and w replacing y covers z=Y.
(2) We claim that if z >=; y for any z in some array of consumer preferences,
then z >" y. If z# z, construct a preference array that preserves the original
rankings of z and y and that has z wi >i y and, for j#, 2,Y =i 2 By
Pareto efficiency, z >" . Because i is decisive for over y, 2 * y. Hence
z*y. If z =x, take any third element w. What was just shown establishes
that i is decisive for w over y, hence reapplication of the argument leads to
the conclusion that z =" y-
(3) We claim that if z : z for any 2 in some array of consumer preferences,
then z * =. To see this, for any third outcome w # ,y set up an array of
consumer preferences in which w >i =i & and, for j#i y =i @ =i w. BY
Pareto efficiency, y + =. By (2), w* y. Hence i is decisive for w over T
and applying (2) again (with z in place of y) leads to the desired conclusion.
(4) Now suppose we have any two outcomes w and z such that w =i 2. If
w = z, we conclude from (1) that w * z. If z =z, we conclude from (3)
180
Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
that w =" z. While if neither w nor z is z, we can without changing the
relative rankings of w and z, arrange matters so that w >; >; z for 1. By
(M), z=" 2. By 3), w+" z. So by transitivity w >" z.
This finishes step 3 and completes the proof.
Social choice rules with interpersonal
comparisons of intensity of preference
One way to try to avoid the negative conclusion of Arrows theorem
is to get into the business of making interpersonal comparisons concerning
intensity of preference, at least to some degree. One approach fo this con-
cerns what are known as Nash social choice rules, which are adaptations of the
Nash bargaining solution from cooperative game theory (Nash, 1953). We will
not give anything like a complete treatment of this subject here; this is not
mainstream microeconomic theory. But a few remarks on how the problem
is set up may give the diligent reader a sense of at least one direction that
can be taken. What follows is loosely transcribed from the treatment given in
Kaneko and Nakamura (1979).
The setting in this case begins with a finite set X of social outcomes, as
before, and a finite set I of consumers. Three special assumptions are made.
We allow feasible social outcomes to include probability distributions over social
outcomes out of X. That is, if X' enumerates the feasible social outcomes, we
consider choosing a probability distribution with support X'. We use P(X") to
denote the set of probability distributions over X'. ;
Each individual consumer's preferences over P(X) satisfy the von Neumann-Mor-
genstern axioms, and so are represented by expected utility. We let u; denote i's -
von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function on X.
There is a distinguished social outcome, m,, such that every other social outcome is
strictly preferred by every consumer to z,.
You can think of z, as being everyone dies," or no one gets anything to
eat."
. Having von Neumann-Morgenstern preferences and this distinguished
social outcome gives us a scale on which intensity of preferences can be
measured. Suppose one consumer prefers = to y and another y to z, where
neither = nor y is z,. We can think of measuring which of these two likes
their preferred outcome more by asking: For the first consumer, what num-
ber satisfies bz + (1 @)bg, ~ &y; for the second consumer, what number
B satisfies f6y +(1 $)z, ~ 6,7? (Here as in chapter 3, ; means the lottery
that gives prize z with certainty) If > 8, then there is a sense in which it
matters more to the second consumer to have y instead of = than it does to
the first consumer to have z instead of y. In other words, we can use the car-
dinal aspect of von Neumann-Morgenstern preferences and the distinguished
reference point x, to calibrate intensity of preference, at least in some sense.
The domain for a social choice rule can now be taken to be all arrays
of I von Neumann-Morgenstern utility functions (uy,...,us) on X, where
we insist that =, is worst for everyone in every utility function. And we
5.6. Bibliographic notes 181
can then fry to pose properties on a social choice rule with this domain that
makes use of the stucture provided. The interested reader can consult Kaneko
and Nakamura (1979) to see this carried out in at least one fashion. (For the
insatiably curious, they give properties that lead to the conclusion: Social
choice out of P(X) should be that lottery p that maximizes TIL (uilw) -
%i(zo)), where u;(p) is shorthand for the expected utility of p computed with
respect to u;.) All we wish to show here is a way in which interpersonal
comparison of intensity of preference might be incorporated into a theory;
you shouldn't conclude that this is impossible.
The rest of the book
We will not explore abstract social choice theory any further. The
books and articles listed below will give you a good entre into this enor-
mous subject. (We will briefly revisit the subject of social choice in chapter
18 under conditions where we mightnt know the preferences of individ-
uals and so must elicit those preferences.) Instead, the remainder of this
book takes for the most part a very different tack. Rather than thinking
normatively about desirable properties for social choice, we regard social
choice as the product of individuals interacting in various institutional
environments. We describe those institutions and predict the outcome of
individual actions within those institutions. Especially in chapters 6 and
8, we will say a bit in the spirit of this chapter about the efficiency of the
social outcomes that are so selected. But our approach is that of taking.
the institutions as given exogenously and describing (to the best of our
abilities) what social choices will be made.
5.6. Bibliographic notes
The classic reference in the theory of social choice is Arrow (1963).
Many other excellent books on the subject that follow Arrow: you might
in particular wish to consult Sen (1970). To get a taste of more recent de-
velopments, a number of survey articles could be consulted; I recommend
Sen (1986) and for a shorter treatment Sen (1988). Either of the later pieces
by Sen will provide an exhaustive bibliography.
The analysis of syndicate theory, used here to illustrate how to find
the Pareto frontier in applications, is drawn from Wilson (1968), who draws
out many further consequences of the analysis.
References
Arrow, K. 1963. Social Choice and Individual Values, 2d ed. New Haven:
Cowles Foundation.
wo
182 Chapter five: Social choice and efficiency
Caplin, A., and B. Nalebuff. 1988. On 64% Majority Rule." Econometrica
56:787-815.
Kaneko, M., and K. Nakamura. 1979. The Nash Social Welfare Function.
Econometrica 47:423-36.
Nash, J. 1953. Two-person Cooperative Games." Econometrica 21:128-40.
Sen, A. 1970. Collective Choice and Social Welfare. San Francisco: Holden-
Day.
1986. Social Choice Theory." In Handbook of Mathematical Eco-
nomics, vol. 3, K. Arrow and M. Intrilligator, eds. Amsterdam: North
Holland.
1988. Social Choice." Tn The New Palgrave, vol. 4, J. Batwell, M.
Milgate, and P. Newman, eds. London: Macmillan.
Wilson, R. 1968. The Theory of Syndicates. Econometrica 36:119-32.
. 1972. The Game-Theoretic Structure of Arrows General Possi-
bility Theorem. Journal of Economic Theory 5:14-20.
5.7. Problems
a1. Suppose that we have numerical representations (Vi,... , Vp) for the
preferences (3) of our I consumers, and we are using a weighted utili--
tarian social welfare functional for some given collection of weights (c)
to make social choices. Show that we can change to the (equal-weighted)
utilitarian social welfare functional without changing the choices that are
made by changing at the same time the numerical representations of the
preferences (-:)-
2 2. Consider the following social choice problem in the setting of con-
sumption of two goods by two consumers. The two goods are called tillip
and quillip and the two constmers are called 1 and 2. Consumer 1 has
utility function Ut, = 6+ Aln(f) + .6In(g) (where t is the amount of
tillip 1 consumes and is the amount of quillip). Consumer 2 has utility
function Ut, ) = 8+1n@) + In(g). The social endowment consists of 15
units of tillip and 20 units of quillip.
(a) Suppose that a social dictator has social welfare functional of the fol-
lowing form: Social welfare, as a function of (ul,u?) is a weighted sum
with weight 2 on the lesser of u! and vw? and weight 1 on the greater
of the two. What will be the welfare optimum plan chosen by this social
planner?
5.7. Problems 183
(b) What is the set of all feasible, Pareto efficient allocations of the con-
sumption good for this society?
a 3. Prove proposition 54
4. Construct two nonintersecting convex sets in R? such that the only
separating hyperplane between them necessarily intersects each of the sets.
a5. Suppose that in the setting of syndicate theory we have one risk neutral
consumer and I1 who are strictly risk averse. As in the text, let the risk
neutral consumer have index 1. We know (from fact 4) that the risk averse
consumers parts of any efficient sharing rule consist of a constant payment
regardless of the state. The size of these payments depend, of course, on
all the data in the problem; in particular, they depend on the weights
of the consumers in the Bergsonian social welfare functional. Holding
fixed everything else (that is, the utility functions of the consumers and
the payoffs in each state of nature), write yila,--- ay) for the payment
to consumer i (for i > 2) as a function of the vector of weights. What
can you say about how the function y; changes as we change any of the
individual weights?
& 6. Prove the fifth fact from the subsection on syndicate theory. The key
is to find out the right values for the constants k;. The k; are defined so
that the first-order conditions all hold and the adding up condition holds.
There are I +N unknowns (each value of k: and each multiplier pn) and
IN+1 equations (IN first-order conditions and one adding up constraint),
so you can see that some of the equations must be redundant, which is
why this is such a special case.
7. In the context of the fifth fact concerning syndicate theory, suppose
the syndicate has available a number of gambles that it might undertake.
Specifically, for m = 1,...,M the syndicate might undertake a project
whose payoff in state sn is Yun. The syndicate can undertake only one
of these M alternative projects, it must undertake one, and the decision
which to undertake must be made before any uncertainty concerning the
state of nature resolves. In this case, the set of feasible social outcomes
consists of sharing rules (yin) such that for some m = 1,...,M, > Yin =
Yun for all n. What now is the set of efficient sharing rules? (Because
of the discrete nature of the variable m, you seemingly cannot solve this
problem just with calculus techniques. But consider expanding the range
of feasible social outcomes still further to include the possibility that the
choice of gamble to take may be made randomly)
u 8. For each of the three examples of social choice rules given in section
5.4 (that is, the Pareto rule, majority rule, and the Borda rule), which of the
four properties in Arrows theorem does the rule obey, and which does it
violate.
m 9. Suppose that we changed the definition of a dictator in property 4 to
be: i is a dictator (in a given social choice rule) if ;=* for any array
of consumer preferences. That is, we add to the definition: When i is
indifferent, society is indifferent. Prove that if property 4 is changed in
this fashion, it is possible to find a social choice rule that satisfies the four
properties. (If you like a challenge: How precisely can you categorize all
social choice rules that obey the first three properties? We know there must
be a dictator in the sense of the original property 4. But what can you say
about cases in which this dictator is indifferent between two outcomes?)
+ pe ee
part 11
The price mechanism
chapter six
Pure exchange and
general equilibrium
Prologue to part II
Part II of this book concerns the classic models of price-mediated exchange
in markets. We begin in this chapter with situations of pure exchange, where
consumers wish to exchange bundles of goods they hold at the outset for
other bundles they will subsequently consume. We will use tliis setting to
introduce the reader to the theory of price-mediated market transactions and,
more particularly, the theory of general equilibrium, in which all markets in
all goods are considered simultaneously. Then, for the rest of part I, firms
are brought into the story: Chapter 7 will give some of the fundamental
concepts of the classical theory of the firm, which is very much parallel to
the theory of the consumer from chapter 2. Chapter 8 will consider, both
in settings of partial and general equilibrium, models of competitive firms
and markets. In chapter 9 we will introduce monopoly and in chapter 10
oligopoly.
Beyond treating these fundamental pieces of classical IMiCTOECONOIICS,
we will return throughout to a particular message: Price-mediated ex-
change in the marketplace and, in particular, the equilibrium notions that
we use are reduced forms for some unspecified institutional mechanisms
of exchange. Especially as we encounter the models of imperfectly com-
petitive markets in chapters 9 and 10, questions will arise about why (and
whether) these are appropriate reduced forms, questions that seemingly
can be resolved only if we are more specific about the institutional mech-
anisms involved.
6.1. Pure exchange and price equilibrium
The problem
We imagine a world with a finite number I of consumers. The I con-
sumers will be indexed 2=1,..., I. These consumers will all (shortly) sit
188 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
down to a grand feast at which they will do all their consuming. There
are K commodities, indexed by k = 1,..., K, that the consumers might
consume in varying amounts. Thus a consumption bundle for any of the
I consumers is a vector z from R. We will assume that consumers can-
not consume negative amounts of any of the commodities, but they can
consume any nonnegative vector z from RY, so we restrict attention to
consumption bundles from the positive orthant of RY, which we denote
by X. Each of our I consumers has preferences over what she will con-
sume; the preferences of consumer 7 are assumed to be represented (in the
style of chapter 2) by the utility function U; : X R. We assume that the
consumers are all locally insatiable and that none of the goods is noxious,
so that preferences (and the utility functions U;) are nondecreasing. We
assume that each consumer has continuous preferences.
We also imagine that these consumers come with endowments in the
form of a commodity bundle from X. We let ef X represent the en-
dowment of consumer i.
Our consumers could simply sit down and consume their endow-
ments. But one consumer might, for example, be endowed with a lot of
some good that she is not particularly fond of. She may wish to exchange
some of tlrat good for something that she likes more. So we wonder,
Which exchanges will take place? What will each consumer wind up
consuming? 
The problem is one of pure exchange because everything that is eventu- |
ally consumed comes from someone's endowment. If we write e = Le,
then e is the total endowment of all the consumers in this society, and what
consumers wind up consuming cannot exceed e in sum.
In the case of two consumers, we can use an Edgeworth box to depict
the situation. Create an Edgeworth box as in the last chapter, where the
origin of consumer 2's coordinate system is placed at the point e = e! + ?
of consumer 1's coordinate system. If we mark point e! in 1's coordinate
system (which is also point * in 2's coordinate system), we get the pic-
ture in figure 6.1. Note in particular the shaded lens and the heavily
marked portion of the contract curve. The lens represents all reallocations
of the social endowment between the two consumers in a fashion that
leaves them both at least as well off as if they consume their respective
endowments. And the shaded portion of the contract curve represents all
the Pareto efficient points that make one or the other or both better off
than at their respective endowments.
We use a superscript so that we can write things like el for the amount of good &
with which consumer { is endowed.
6.1. Pure exchange and price equilibrium 189
\
_..- Endowment point
Indifference curve of
consumer 1
, Contract curve N
Indifference curve of
consumer 2
~~ -
Figure 6.1. The Edgeworth box with endowments.
We show here an Edgeworth box with the endowment point of the two
consumers marked. The shaded lens gives all reallocations of the social
endowment (that are nonwasteful) that give each consumer at least as
much utility as she obtains at her original endowment. And the heavy
part of the contract curve represents all efficient reallocations with this
property.
We call a collection of the objects above a list of consumption goods,
a list of consumers, and utility functions and endowments for each con-
sumer a pure exchange economy.
Price equilibrium
Now imagine that these goods are traded in markets, where Pi is the
price of good k, and p = (py,..., px) is used to denote the price vector.
Imagine that each of our I consumers is aware of the prices given by p,
and each believes that she cannot by her actions affect any of these prices.
Then consumer i has at her disposal wealth Y* = p. ef. That is, she can
take her endowment to each market and sell it. She will receive pre}, for
her endowment of good k; summing over all the k yields Y*. She can
then spend this wealth buying whatever bundle z* maximizes her utility,
subject to her budget constraint p- zi < Y*. Of course, if she wishes to
save on the number of trips she has to make, she can do the whole thing in
one go-round. Having worked out which bundle she wishes to consume,
she first sells commodities for which her endowment exceeds her desired
consumption and then buys more of the goods for which her endowment
is less than desired.
However we imagine this happening, we have the following problem
of consumer i at prices p:
maximize U;(z) subject toz X and p-z < p- '. CP(i,p)
190 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
Definition. A general equilibrium, also called a Walrasian equilibrium,
for a given pure exchange economy consists of a price vector p and consumption
bundles x* for each consumer such that
(1) at prices p, at solves the problem CP(:, p)
(2) markets clear: ves Tae
The array of final consumption vectors (x*) is referred to as the final consump-
tion allocation in the equilibrium.
Following in the footsteps of generations of classical microeconomists,
we make the rather heroic assertion that in many situations of pure exchange
consumers will wind up at the consumption allocation part of some Walrasian
equilibrium for the economy, and insofar as there are markets in these goods,
prices will correspond to equilibrium prices.
If you weren't before, perhaps you are finally rather impressed with
the chutzpah of generations of microeconomists. If so, understand that
no one is asserting that in every situation of pure exchange the outcome
will resemble constituent pieces of a Walrasian equilibrium. For example,
with two consumers, the case of the Edgeworth box, we might assert (or
at least hope) that the two would find their way to the contract curve,
and we'd be rather surprised if one or the other wound up worse off than
where she had started. But we wouldn't necessarily expect the outcome
to correspond to a Walrasian equilibrium. The sense of most economists -
who believe in Walrasian equilibrium is that it takes many consumers,
no one (or few) of whom hold monopoly positions in one or more of the
goods, to believe that the previously made assertion is apt to be correct,
and it takes an institutional framework in which something like prices
appear something that establishes the rates at which one commodity,
can be exchanged for another.
=e will discuss in the next section (a) reasons to believe this assertion,
(b) reasons given sometimes that do not inspire belief, and (c) some reasons
for doubt. But first, we give a few simple technical notes.
(1) If we multiply all prices in a Walrasian equilibrium by a positive scalar,
the solutions to the consumers problems dont change, and so we still have
an equilibrium. In other words, if (p,(2*)) is a Walrasian equilibrium, so
is (Ap, (z*)), for any (strictly) positive scalar A. Put still differently, what
is important ina Walrasian equilibrium are the relative prices the rates
at which one commodity can be exchanged for another.
(2) We have assumed that consumers preferences are nondecreasing. We
can conclude from this assumption that every price px must be nonneg-
a perce cep tee
6.1. Pure exchange and price equilibrium 191
ative at any equilibrium. This is so because if pp < 0, then a consumer
could buy lots of good k at no decrease in her utility and buying a
good with a negative price means more Tesources to buy other goods. We
assume consumers are locally insatiable, so if some price were negative,
consumers would never find an optimal solution to their consumption
problem, and we certainly wouldn't find markets clearing in this good.*
(3) Since we have assumed that consumers are locally insatiable, they are
sure to spend all their wealth at any solution to CP(i, p); that is, pa = pe.
By summing over all consumers budget constraints, we conclude that
Yee = Dope
Yet we only require that ye shi e!. By virtue of (2) we know that
prices are nonnegative, so we conclude that the only goods k for which
sn, zi, < Di &% is possible are goods whose price px is zero. (Be sure you
see why this follows from (2}.)
(4) We could never have a Walrasian equilibrium where all prices are zero,
as long as consumers (or even just one consumer) are locally insatiable.
(5) While we dont take quite seriously the notion of a Walrasian equi-
librium in a two-person economy, nonetheless it may be instructive to
see what these equilibria look like in an Edgeworth box. Refer to figure
6.2(a). We have put a negatively sloped line through the endowment point;
the slope of this line represents a particular set of relative prices for the
two goods, and the shaded triangle represents the set of budget-feasible
consumption bundles for consumer 1 at these relative prices. Hence con-
sumer 1, solving her problem at these relative prices, would select the
point marked with a star. The crucial thing is that at these relative prices,
the same budget line works for consumer 2 in his coordinate system. It
should take you a moment's reflection to see why this is true. To help you
see this, we have drawn the relative prices in figure 6.2(a,b,c) so that the
price of good 1 is half that of good 2. Hence consumer 2's budget feasible
set is the shaded region in figure 6.2(b), and he chooses the point marked
@ To come to this conclusion it would suffice to have one consumer who is locally insatiable
and has nondeczeasing preferences, since it is implicit in the definition of an equilibrium that
every consumers problem has a finite solution. For some goods, such as pollution, it may
not be sensible to assume that preferences are nondecreasing. To allow for such goods, one
must allow for negative prices and replace the inequality in the markets clear relationship
with an equality. You will find this variation discussed in most books that study general
equilibrium in detail.
with the box. If we superimpose the two, as we do in figure 6.2(c), we
see that we don't have an equilibrium at these relative prices; consumers
1 and 2 together want more of the first good than is available.
In figure 6.2(d) we show what things look like at an equilibrium. At
the relative prices shown there, both consumers choose the point marked
with the star, although this star represents different bundles in the two
different coordinate systems. Note carefully that each consumer's indif-
ference curve through the point * is tangent to the budget line at that
point, and hence the two indifference curves are tangent to each other at x. That
is, the Walrasian equilibrium allocation lies along the contract curve; it is
Pareto efficient. This is a proof in a picture of a very general fact that
we will prove in section 6.3.
y
Good 2 Good 1
Endowment
a . 
Endowment
(@ Good 1 ( ~~ Good2
Good 2 Endowment
Good 1 Pi Equilibrium *
..+-- Endowment - po
Good 1 Good 1
Good 2 Good 2
(c)
Figure 6.2. Walrasian equilibrium and the Edgeworth box.
In (a), we show the demand of consumer 1 at a particular set of relative
prices, and in (b), we see consumer 2's demand at those prices. Super-
imposing the two in (c), we see that these demands are inconsistent; this
is not a Walrasian equilibrium. In (d) we see the picture of a Walrasian
equilibrium, and in particular we see that a Walrasian equilibrium Lies
along the contract curve.
6.2. Why (not) believe in Walrasian equilibrium? 193
6.2. Why (not) believe in Walrasian equilibrium?
Why should anyone believe that the outcome of exchange will look
like a Walrasian equilibrium? Or, rather, in what situations would it be
sensible to believe this assertion? One thinks first of a free-market economy
in which goods do sell at some prices, where consumers know those prices,
and where consumers can buy and sell commodities in whatever quantities
they wish at the prevailing prices. If we ever found consumers in such a
situation, then we would have consumers who are aware of the relative
rates of exchange of each commodity for every other. If all consumers take
these rates of exchange as given, if all consumers face the same rates of
exchange, if all maximize their utility as in chapter 2, and if all consumers
are in the end happy with the exchanges they have made, then we would
necessarily have a Walrasian equilibrium. Let us make a list of some things
this suggests we might worry about.
(1) Each consumer must be aware of all the prices for every good. In
reality, some goods trade at more than one price in different locations.
There are reasons that this could persist which are consistent with every
consumer knowing all the prices at all locations, (such as buying a good
at a particular location bundles together the purchase of the good with
different levels of service, different ambiance, and so on). Buf it seems
unrealistic to suppose that all consumers know all prices in all locations;
anyone Who has ever shopped for a new car (at least, in the United States)
will know this. As soon as consumers face different prices, the assertion is
in trouble (unless we modify the definition to allow for prices that change
with the individual consumer).
Another aspect concerns dynamic choice in an uncertain world. In-
sofar as some of the exchanges made today depend on exchanges the
consumer hopes she will be able to make later, todays choices depend on
forecasts of later prices and market opportunities. (Consider, for example,
buying a particular car based on a hypothesis about the price of gasoline
that will later prevail) Do consumers accurately forecast all subsequent
prices? And what if, a priori, there is uncertai ty about the future that
will later resolve, the resolution of which affects later prices? (For exam-
ple, the price of gasoline three years hence may depend on the political
situation in various parts of the world, oil reserves found or not found
in particular locations, and so on.) Economists adapt the model of Wal-
rasian equilibrium to situations where time and/or uncertainty play a role.
These adaptations will be discussed briefly in section 6.5; until then (and,
perhaps, even after), scepticism about how well the basic assertion will do
when time and/or uncertainty plays a role seems warranted.
194 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
@) Consumers must be able to buy or sell as much or as litle as fey 2
at the going prices. There are (at least) two reasons to doubt this. First,
consumers might wish to transact in such large amounts that they affect
the prices they face. J. D. Rockefeller, seeking to sell all the oil he owned,
would probably have found that an attempt to do so would have changed
the price of oil. The second reason for doubt is at a more pedestrian level.
In many economies rationing and stock-outs are not unknown. In some
economies, a consumer may wish to buy a leg of lamb and may know the
price of lamb that is supposed to be charged, but there is no guarantee
that any lamb will be in stock at the butcher shop.
(3) Consumers may not act rationally; that is, in the fashion of chapter 2.
Little is left to say about this that we haven't already said.
(4) In most economies where we might hope to meet all the conditions
mentioned, the economy is not one where agents simply exchange their
endowments. In most economies production also takes place. If all the
good candidate economies have production, then the foregoing definition,
which involves pure exchange, may be descriptive of almost nothing.
We will introduce production in the context of private enterprise economies
in the next few chapters, but for now let us mention a variation on the basic
definition of a Walrasian equilibrium that will go at least partway toward
meeting this source of worry. We imagine an economy with K commodities,
I consumers, and a productive sector either a sector of firms or a gov-
ernment enterprise sector or SOME mix. We can think of the total effect of this
productive sector as: a certain vector of commodities 2! is bought as input
and another vector 29 is sold as output. Then,
Definition. A Walrasian equilibrium for a given pure exchange economy with
fixed total production input 2 and output zO consists of a price vector p and
consumption bundles z' for each consumer such that the following hold:
(1) for each i, at prices p, < solves the problem CP(i,p) and
(2) markets clear: z +351,%" < L +30 el
In other words, we take the production plans as exogenously given and look
at the consumer exchange part of the economy. In later chapters we will
move the production plans into the category of things endogenously chosen.
But we could, with the definition above, at least study consumer exchange
for each fixed production plan.
rr
b At the risk of being overly pedantic and confusing the reader, a caution should be en-
tered here when you think of the productive sector as a state enterprise. In such cases, some
of the inputs to production may result from taxation of consumers initial endowments, or
from taxes on the sale and purchase of particular items, especially labor services. The con-
sumers problem would have to be changed to reflect any such taxation. :
6.2. Why (not) believe in Walrasian equilibrium? 195
For each of the reasons given above and others besides, you might
not think that the results of trading, even in a well-functioning market
economy, would result in a Walrasian equilibrium. To deal with these
criticisms, many variations on the basic model have been created. For
example, there is an enormous literature (to which you will shortly be
introduced) about price equilibrium in markets where time and/or uncer-
tainty play a role. There are attempts to model equilibrium price disper-
sion (caused by lack of perfect information). There is analysis of situations
where some consumers can change prices with their actions (although it
is far more typical to think that firms have this sort of power; we will see
such models in chapters 9 and 10). There is a literature on equilibrium
where consumers can be rationed. All these are variations on the theme of
Walrasian equilibrium as defined above. So both to understand situations
where these qualifications aren't needed and to set a benchmark against
which such variations can be measured, we proceed with our study of
Walrasian equilibrium.
Mechanisms behind Walrasian equilibrium
While we may look at market economies for cases in which Walrasian
equilibrium is a reasonable solution concept, one thing that the concept of
a Walrasian equilibrium doesnt provide is any sense of how)markets oper-
ate.. There is no model here of who sets prices, or what gets exchanged for
what, when, and where. One thing that we see in most market economies
and that is completely missing from the story is money. (Prices have to be
measured in some numeraire but, as we have already seen, in the theory it
is only relative prices of commodities that matter.) Because of this, a Wal-
rasian equilibrium is a reduced form solution concept; it describes what we
imagine will be the outcome of some underlying and unmodeled process.
Tt seems natural to think that we could increase (or decrease) our faith
in the concept of a Walrasian equilibrium if we had some sense of how
markets really do operate. And economists have studied specific models
of market/ exchange mechanisms, attempting to see whether those mech-
anisms confirm Walrasian equilibrium as an appropriate reduced form
solution concept.
A fairly unrealistic mechanism, which nonetheless populates some of
the literature on general equilibrium, concerns an individual known as
the Walrasian auctioneer. This individual stands up in front of the entire
population of an economy and calls out a price vector p. Every consumer
consults her preferences and determines what she would want to buy
and sell at these prices; we will write Zip) = z*(p) ' for the net trade
that consumer i desires at prices p. Each consumer reports back to the
auctioneer what net trade she wishes, and the auctioneer adds them up;
if >i Zip) < 0, everyone breathes a sigh of relief and the net trades are
executed. But if markets dont clear at prices p, then the auctioneer tries
a different price vector /, and so on. One can Pose various rules that
the auctioneer might employ in detrmining what prices p to quote if p
doesnt work say he raises the price of goods, that are overdemanded
(that is, any good k for which Y7, zi (p) > 0) and lowers the price of those
that are underdemanded. We may wonder whether this scheme of price
adjustment will lead to an equilibrium. You can find discussion of this
in the literature; look for references to the tatonnement adjustment process.
(We won't carry further on this subject because Walrasian auctioneers are
not usually found in real economies.)
A second unrealistic mechanism involves each consumer simply re-_
porting to the central authorities her desired excess. demands. at every price
7. (In cases where at a price vector p the consumer is indifferent between
several excess demand vectors, we will allow her to submit all the alter-
natives she would be happy to take) The authorities (who previously
employed the Walrasian auctioneer) examine all these submissions and
look for one or more prices p where markets clear. (We won't say what
they do if the excess demand functions submitted are not consistent with
market clearing at any price.) -
A major reason why the two_previous mechanisms _seem_unzealis-
He is that they involve equilibration of all markets for all consumers at
once. It is more realistic to think of stitutions and mechanisms where
either each market operates separately or trades are made between pairs of
individuals.
For example, we can imagine consumers wandering around a large
market square, with all their possessions on their backs. They have chance
meetings with each other, and when two consumers meet, they examine
what each has offer, to see if they can arrange a mutually agreeable trade.?
To be very precise, we might imagine that at every chance meeting of this
sort the two flip a coin and depending on the outcome one is allowed
to propose an exchange, which the other must either accept or reject. If
an exchange is made, the two swap goods and wander around in search
of more advantageous trades made at chance meetings. The rule is that
you cant eat until you leave the market square, so consumers wait un-
til they are satisfied with what they possess and then leave to have a
picnic in the adjacent park. In this story, a smart consumer who hates
? For those readers who follow American baseball, think of general managers trading
players, but on a larger scale.
6.2. Why (not) believe in Walrasian equilibrium? 197
apples may nonetheless give up some of her pears for someone else's ap-
ples if the apples are offered on good terms, in the speculative hope that
she will later be able to trade the apples for the cherries that she really
wants.?
Or we can imagine models in which it is imagined that markets in
the varjous goods operate independently. One might imagine a model
with market makers individuals who specialize in a particular com-
modity or related commodities. Over in one corner of the market square
is the cheese vendor who is happy to buy or sell cheese (for money or
for some standard good, such as wheat or gold), in another corner is a
specialist in corn, and so on. We might imagine that the cheese vendor
posts prices at his stall, in which case we might want to have a few cheese
vendors with stalls adjacent to each other to provide some competition,
or we might imagine more traditional bargaining between anyone who
comes up to the cheese stand and the cheese vendor. The point is that all
transactions in cheese go via the cheese vendor; if consumer 1 is endowed
with too much cheese and consumer 2 with too little, consumer 1 sells
her excess cheese to the cheese vendor, who then resells some of this to
consumer 2.
Or we could organize the cheese market without a specialist cheese
vendor. Making, say, wheat the medium of exchange, we might imagine
that at 10:05 A.M, it is time to auction off Stilton cheese. Anyone with
Stilton to sell is allowed to post an asking price; this person will sell
a standardized amount of Stilton for so many bushels of wheat. At the
same time, those interested in buying Stilton are allowed to post bids
 so many bushels of wheat for a piece of Stilton. At any point in time,
a consumer can take any offer that is currently posted: Consumers can
post new offers (on either side of the market), they can improve offers
they already have posted, and they can retract offers they previously have
made. The posting of offers can be done by open outcry or by some fancy
electronic posting service. (Consumers all sit at CRT terminals and can
enter bids or asks; the CRT always displays the current best bids and
asks; and one can take the best posted offer at the touch of a particular key
on the keyboard.) All this takes place from 10:05 until 10:20, after which
it is time for Camembert, and so on.
The exploration of more realistic models of markets is in relative in-
fancy. A large part of this literature appears in the monetary economics
(the economic theory of money) and is concerned first and foremost with
the use of money in these types of markets. The analysis of the random
 Fans of baseball may recall the occasional trade based on this sort of calculation.
198 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
meetings marketplace has been quite popular recently, and the analy-
sis that has been done offers qualified support for the Walrasian equi-
librium notion. Analysis of markets in a single commodity, both of the
market-maker and two-sided auction variety (as well as one-sided auc-
tions) can be found as well, although little of this work has extended from
the case of a single market to issues associated with general equilibrium.
References will be provided in section 6.6, although in general you will
need to get through part III of this book before this literature will be
accessible.
Experimental evidence
If you consult these references, you will find that the analysis is hard
and the conclusions require CONSUMES who are extraordinarily sophisti-
cated. You might worry, in consequence, that the results derived in sup-
port of the concept of Walrasian equilibrium are not very credible. To
assuage these worries, you should consult the literature on experimental
economics. A number of researchers have attempted to see whether mar-
kets perform under controlled conditions in the way economists assume
they do. In the typical experiment, different subjects are induced to have
different valuations for some good, relative to a numeraire good (money).
Some of the subjects who are initially endowed with the good put a rela-
tively low value on it; others sho do not have it put a relatively high value
on it. From the data of the experimental conditions, one can compute what
the equilibrium price for the good should be (if standard microeconomic
theory is correct). The subjects are then put into an exchange environment,
to see whether they make exchanges the way the theory says they will
The CRT-terminal-mediated double oral auction market mechanism is
often used.
The results obtained are usually striking in their support of Walrasian
equilibrium. Subjects are not given the data needed to calculate a priori
what the equilibrium prices ough to be. So the first time the market
operates, some trades are made far from the theoretical equilibrium. But if
the market is repeated (endowments are restored), subjects typically learn
extremely quickly what the market clearing price for the good will be, and
they trade in a way that is quite close to what theory predicts.
These experiments do not quite get to the level of generality of a
Walrasian equilibrium for a general equilibrium with many interdependent
markets. But the repertory of experiments is growing quickly and, except
for a few special cases, those experiments that have been run are consistent
with the notion of Walrasian equilibrium. All in all, they make Walrasian
equilibrium look quite good.
6.3. The efficiency of a general equilibrium 199
6.3. The efficiency of a general equilibrium
We now turn to properties of Walrasian equilibrium. We return to the
setting of section 6.1 with K commodities and I consumers who exchange
those commodities. We suppose that a Walrasian equilibrium is achieved.
And we ask: Is this Walrasian equilibrium a good way to allocate resources
in this economy? Putting it in slightly melodramatic and ideological terms,
can we confiscate everyone's endowment, reallocate goods, and in so doing
obtain an allocation better than that achieved in a Walrasian equilibrium?
Of course, to answer this question we need a sense of what we mean
by better. Following developments from the last chapter, we use the
concept of Pareto efficiency.
The two theorems of welfare economics
Having chosen Pareto efficiency as our criterion, we can recall a re-
mark made in section 6.1 about the Edgeworth box: In a two-person,
two-good economy, the allocation part of a Walrasian equilibrium is Pareto
efficient (that is, lies along the contract curve). This result generalizes very
neatly.
Theorem. The First Theorem of Welfare Economics. A Walrasian equilibrium
always yields a Pareto efficient allocation of the social endowment.*
The proof is quite simple. Suppose that (p, (2%) is a Walrasian equilibrium
and (#) is a Pareto superior allocation of the social endowment. We will
derive a contradiction.
Since (3) is a reallocation of the social endowment e = SI ef, we
have > # < e. Since equilibrium prices are nonnegative, this implies
I
Sp E<pe | 6
i=1
Since preferences are locally insatiable, Walras law holds with equality for
each consumer and summing these equations yields
I
> p-&=p-e (ek)
i=1
4 We maintain here the earlier hypotheses that consumers are all locally insatiable and
have nondecreasing preferences. We wouldn't need to assume nondecreasing preferences if
we posed the markets dear conditions in the definitions of an equilibrium and a feasible
allocation as equalities. )
By assumption, each consumer i likes #' as much as #?, and some
one (or more) consumer likes #* more. Consider consumer i. Since this
consumer at least weakly prefers to #, it must be that p-* > p-2% = pe.
For if p-&* < p-#, then by local insatiability could afford something
strictly better than %* at prices p, which would be strictly better than #7,
which would then contradict the supposed optimality of #* for 4 at prices
p. Similarly (in fact, even more simply), for any consumer 4 such that 3
is strictly better than *, we must have p-# > p-2* = p-e*. This must hold
for at least one consumer since we assume (#?) Pareto dominates (%), and
~ so by summing up these weak and strict inequalities we obtain
I I
> op > pg.
i=1
i=1
Comparing this inequality with (x) and (xx) gives us the desired contra-
diction and completes the proof.
You should now be hearing choirs of angels and choruses of trum-
pets. The. invisible hand of the price mechanism produces equilibria that
cannot be improved upon. ]
Of course, one can wonder whether the price mechanism produces
any equilibrium at all; the result above is predicated on the existence of
a Walrasian equilibrium. We will attend to questions about the existence
of equilibrium in the next section. But granting existence, it should still
be noted that improved upon in the previous paragraph refers to Pareto
improvements. There is no reason to suppose that the equilibrium allo-
cation is not vastly inequitable, giving lots of utility to some consumers
and very little to others. In response to this consideration, we have the
following result.
Theorem. The Second Theorem of Welfare Economics. Assume that prefer-
ences are convex, continuous, nondecreasing, and locally insatiable. Let (3) bea
Pareto efficient allocation of the social endowment that is strictly positive: 2% > 0
for all i and k. Then (3) is the allocation part of a Walrasian equilibrium, if
we first appropriately redistribute endowments among the consumers.
In other words, if one imagines that it would be difficult for a social dictator
to find an equitable and efficient allocation of the social endowment, and
if the economy has well-functioning markets, the dictator might choose
to reallocate initial endowments in an equitable fashion and then let the
market take over. If you wonder how the social dictator could decide a
6.3. The efficiency of a general equilibrium 201
priori on an equitable initial redistribution of the social endowment, see
problem 3 for at least one idea.
Here is a sketch of the proof. Suppose (#) is the Pareto efficient allo-
cation of the social allocation e that we wish to obtain as a Walrasian equi-
Librium. Let & = 2. 8. Note that & < e; a strict inequality is possible for
some Somponents. (We will have to work around this possibility.)
e
X" = {z X : can be allocated among the I
consumers in a way that strictly Pareto dominates #9}.
We assert (and you can prove for homework) that the set X* is convex be-
cause preferences are convex, Let
XM ={ec RX x <).
This is obviously a convex set.
The supposed Pareto efficiency of the hat allocation ensures that X*
and XT do not intersect. Thus there is a separating hyperplane between them
 a nonzero K -dimensional vector p = (p,,.. . px) and a scalar 8 such that
prz<f forall ze xt and pz > g forall z X*, By local insatiability
and continuity, we can show that &, which is in X f, is on the boundary of
X*,and so p-& = pg. We assert that P > 0; the proof is left to you. (Use the
shape of the set X f -) We assert that p.e = B as well; since preferences are
nondecreasing we can take any goods left over from the social endowment in
the allocation (z) and allocate them among the consumers and then repeat
the argument using local insatiability and continuity. Thus we know that if
r < ex for some good k, then pr =0.
Let &' be any allocation of the social endowment such that p-8* = p-3*.
We know that such allocations exist because the goods not fully used up in
the allocation (z*) must have zero price.
We claim that (p, (#%)) is a Walrasian equilibrium for the economy if
consumers start out with the endowments (9). To see this, suppose it is
not a Walrasian equilibrium. Partition the set of consumers into two subsets:
those for whom # is the best they can afford at prices p with endowment
&" and those for whom there is something better they can afford. Since by
assumption (#,(#')) is not a Walrasian equilibrium, the second set in this
partition is nonempty.
_ For each i from the second set in the partition, let = be any bundle
which strictly prefers to # and that is affordable at prices p with endow-
ment &. By continuity of preferences, for some positive scalar o < 1, the
bundle afz* is strictly preferred to 2 and satisfies prazi<p-z' < p-&.c
_
 This implicitly assumes that p-* > 0. But if p- zi = 0, since &' is strictly positive,
p-&=p-& >0. And then p- of <p-&, which is what we really need. 
202 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
Define # = az. Let s = 3p (&' #) where this sum is over the second
set of consumers. By construction s > 0. Using this budget surplus and
the local insatiability of preferences, it is possible to find bundles #* for the
consumers i in the first group such that # is strictly preferred by to #
and such that 3% p-# < 3oi,p-& =p. But since (3) is strictly Pareto
superior to (2), SF eX". Andforall z X*, p- > f. This gives the
desired contradiction, completing the proof.
There are two remarks to make about this theorem and proof. First, the
assumption that (4) is a strictly positive allocation is much too strong. There
are, presumably, goods that one consumer doesr't like at all; these goods dont
lower her utility (we're assuming nondecreasing preferences), but they do
nothing to raise her utility. If these goods are appreciated by others, then strict
positivity of the allocation is inconsistent with Pareto efficiency! To repair this
catastrophe, there are numerous ways to proceed. One of the simplest is to
say that a good is desirable if everyone's preferences are strictly increasing in
that good. Then we could replace the assumption that (&) is strictly positive
with the much less obnoxious assumption that every consumer is given, in
the allocation #Y, a positive amount of at least one desirable good. You are
asked in problem 4(c) to show that this will be enough to get the result of the
second welfare theorem. 
Second, we used a separating hyperplane argument in the previous chap-
ter to prove proposition 5.2, and it may be useful to highlight the differences.
Here, we are separating two convex sets in the space of commodity bundles,
RX . Separating hyperplanes in this space have the right dimensionality to
be prices. In proposition 5.2, we were separating convex sets in the space
of utility imputations, RY, and the hyperplane gave us weights to put on
the utilities of the various consumers. Note also that in proposition 5.2, we
obtained convexity of one of the two separated sets from an assumption that
the utility functions were concave functions. (To be precise, in the proof of
proposition 5.2, we assumed convexity by fiat, by looking at the convex hull
of V(X"). But we justified this approach in proposition 5.3 by assuming that
utility functions were concave.) Here we are making the weaker assumption
that preferences are convex; we dont need to assume that they have a concave
numerical representation.
Externalities
Do you hear the angels and trumpets now? There are good reasons
still not to hear them having to do with all the hidden assumptions made
in the story of Walrasian equilibrium. We will discuss one of these, exter-
nalities, in some detail here.
In the model of an exchange economy posed above, each consumer
is an island given prices. In particular, the utility of each consumer is
unaffected by the consumption decisions of other consumers, if prices are
held fixed.
In reality, matters may be more complex. Consumer i may enjoy
filling his front yard with junk or may wish to add to the traffic of a
6.3. The efficiency of a general equilibrium 203
particular highway, which will depress the utility of neighbor 4 and fellow
driver i. On the other hand, consumer j may take good care of her
garden, which raises the utility level of neighbor j'.
These are simple examples of externalities, situations where the con-
sumption of some good(s) by one consumer affects the utility of another.
In the first two cases, consumer i is generating negative externalities for #
and for 4". In the third case, consumer j is providing positive externalities
for j/. When there are externalities, we cant speak of the utility of con-
sumer i as being represented by a function U; : X R; now the domain
for is utility function will potentially be the entire vector of consumption
z = (@!,2%,...,z0) XT. Following the notation of chapter 5, we will use
V; to represent the preferences of consumer i over entire consumption
allocations.
What do we mean by a Walrasian equilibrium when there are exter-
nalities? To see why there is a question here, imagine that consumer 1
attaches greater value to keeping her yard in good shape if her neigh-
bor, consumer 2, keeps his yard clean. (To be precise, assume that the
marginal utility consumer 1 attaches to keeping her yard neat increases
with increases in the neatness of 2's yard.) Then at any prices, the amount
of money consumer 1 will wish to spend on her yard depends on how
neatly she believes her neighbor will keep his. If she believes that he
will keep his yard in good shape, she will wish to spend more than if
she believes that he will keep his yard in poor shape. We cant tell how
much she will wish to spend if we don't know what he will spend on his
yard. And, assuming the externality works in both directions, we can't
say what he will spend until we know what she is going to spend. There
is a simultaneity problem involving the two utility maximizations.
Tt is typical when modeling general equilibrium with externalities to
come to grips with this by supposing that each consumer chooses her own
consumption levels taking as given the equilibrium consumption levels of
her fellow consumers. We define:
Definition. A Walrasian equilibrium with externalities consists of prices p
and a consumption vector & = (&',..., 3%) such that
(a) For each consumer i, &* is the solution in the variable x to the problem
~
a) a1 ni1 i ai A
maximize Vi@,..., #1 a, #7, 2)
subject toz* X and p-z* <p-".
(b) Markets clear: F, @8 < Tope.
We might wonder whether this is the appropriate definition: Will con-
sumers in an exchange economy in which there are externalities find their
way to a Walrasian equilibrium? Setting that question aside, we can ask
if Walrasian equilibria in this setting will be efficient.
The answer is in general no. If there are externalities, our proof of
the first welfare theorem will not work. Specifically, the proof breaks
down at the step where we say that if (&%) is Pareto superior to (%), then
p-& > p- 2, with strict inequality for some consumers i. Before, (3%)
being Pareto superior to (*) meant that consumer i would be at least
as well off consuming # as &, no matter what her fellow consumers did,
because her utility only depended on her own consumption. But to say
that (2%) is better for 4 than () does not imply that
a Adel wi adsl ~T al nie] af Afsl Al
Vi@,..., 570 8,24, 3D) > vi@,L LL JEL ELL ah.
That is, consumer cannot necessarily do better (staying within her budget
set) by changing only her own level of consumption. The components of
(*) might all be affordable, and (%) might be Pareto superior, and still the
components of (*) might solve the individual consumers maximization
problems given other consumers are choosing their parts of (37).
Establishing that the proof breaks down is not the same thing as show-
ing that equilibrium allocations will be inefficient. We will offer a loose
argument in a particular setting that every equilibrium allocation will be
inefficient owing to externalities. Since this argument applies to every
equilibrium allocation, it shows that both the first and second theorems
aren't valid when there are externalities. (The loose argument that follows
requires that you have at least a sense of Taylor series expansions. If this
sort of thing is entirely foreign to you, then skip the next paragraph.)
Imagine a three-person economy in which the first commodity is gar-
dening services, the consumption of which makes one's yard more beau-
tiful. Imagine that two of the consumers in this society live in adjacent
houses, while the third lives on the other side of a particularly large moun-
tain. Consumption by the third consumer of gardening services generates
no externality for the other consumers, but each of the others generates
5 Thinking ahead to part Il of the book, we can suggest why they might not, at least
in some cases. Suppose that in equilibrium i and i spend very little on their respective
yards, and suppose each would happily spend more if the other spent more. Then we might
imagine a neighborhood conference where each promises to spend more on condition that
the other spends more. We have to worry about how this would be enforced; but in chapter
14 we will see one quite natural enforcement mechanism for this sort of agreement.
In problem 5 you are asked to provide a precise example to go with this argument, and
in problem 6 you are given another concrete example to work through.
6.4. Existence and the number of equilibria 205
a positive externality for her neighbor through the consumption of gar-
dening services. At any prices p, each consumer chooses the level of
gardening services to consume in a way that equates the ratio of marginal
utilities of gardening services to the marginal utility of consumption of
other goods to the ratio of their prices. That is, each sets
eyic _m
oxi) 85: p,
where gz} is the level of consumption of gardening services by i, and zi
is i's level of consumption of some other good that doesnt generate any
externalities. Thus if we increase the amount of gardening services that,
say, consumer 1 consumes by some small amount and lower the amount
of good 2 that she consumes by (p;/p,), the marginal impact on her utility
is approximately
Similarly, if we simultaneously decrease the amount of gardening services
that consumer 3 consumes by and raise the amount of good 2 that he
consumes by (p;/p,), the impact on his utility is approximately zero. So
this small reallocation doesnt change the utilities of either consumer 1
or consumer 3. But because of the positive externality that raising the
level of gardening services consumed by consumer 1 has on the utility
of consumer 2, this small reallocation improves the utility of consumer 2.
Thus this small reallocation is Pareto improving, showing that a Walrasian
equilibrium will not be Pareto efficient.
We will return to externalities in chapter 8; there are other interesting
examples to discuss, but they require an economy with a productive sector.
For now, we simply note that externalities give one reason to doubt that
markets lead to efficient allocations. There are other reasons to doubt the
conclusions of the two theorems; we put off discussion of one of them
(taxes) also to chapter 8.
6.4. Existence and the number of equilibria
We turn next to a brief discussion of two highly mathematical points
concerning Walrasian equilibrium. Because the second point especially is
very important to one of the central messages of the book, I urge you to
pay attention at least to the discussion in regular-sized type.
206 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
Existence
So far, we have discussed properties of Walrasian equilibria for ex-
change economies under the supposition that at least one equilibrium ex-
ists. It is, of course, interesting to know whether these results have any
relevance: For a given exchange economy, are there Walrasian equilibria?
In general the answer will be no, so the question really becomes: Under
what conditions on an exchange econonty car we guarantee the existence of at
least one Walrasian equilibrium?
To see ways to answer this question, consider an economy with two
goods. We continue to maintain all assumptions made earlier: Consumers
preferences are continuous, locally insatiable and nondecreasing. For a
two-good economy, this means we can draw some very simple pictures,
constructed from the following considerations:
(1) We already know that if (pr, p) is an equilibrium price vector, sO
is (py, App) for any positive constant \. Since preferences are nonde-
creasing, we know that equilibrium prices will be nonnegative, and since
equilibrium prices are certainly nonzero, we know that at any equilib-
fum p; + p, > 0. Putting these facts together, if (p, py) are equilib-
rium prices, so are p; = o,/(, + py) and pp, = 7,/@, + py), and of course
py +p, = 1.-In other words, we can restrict attention to prices (p1,p2) such
that py +p2= 1. .
(2) Fix prices p and p= 1-p1 such that p, > 0. Suppose that for a given.
consumer 1%, z; is part of a solution to the consumer's utility maximization
problem at these prices. Since local insatiability implies that the consumer
satisfies her budget constraint with equality at any solution, we know that
the corresponding j must be
i; DIE + Pag iT
oh =
D2
(3) Continue to hold fixed a pair of prices p; and p,=1-p1 > 0. Suppose
that for each consumer 1, zt is part of a solution to consumer i's utility
maximization problem at these prices and suppose that markets clear in
good 1 precisely: SI ai= ST et. We assert that this guarantees that we
dy you pay attention to the more technical material, you know that in the proof of the
second theorem of welfare economics we established that Walrasian equilibria exist for at
Jeast some initial allocations of the social endowment. For comparison with later discussion
in this section, note that this theorem assumed that all consumers have convex preferences.
6.4. Existence and the number of equilibria 207
have an equilibrium. All that is missing is knowledge that the market in
good 2 clears. But
I I s , .
i Die} + Pag; 1%]
PE
i=1 i=1 Pz
1 I I 1 I I
Las en ed] pad] 2
P2 i= i=1 i=1 i=1
The key equality in this string is the next to last, where we use the fact
that markets clear in good 1.
We are ready to draw pictures when we make one more assumption:
Assumption 1. For every pair of strictly positive prices py and pz, and for each
consumer i, the consumer's utility maximization problem has a unique solution.
There are two parts to this assumption. First, this assumption entails the
existence of a solution to each consumer's utility maximization problem for
every set of strictly positive prices. If you look back to proposition 2.11(a)
(and we assume that endowments are nonnegative), you will see that we
already have made enough assumptions for this. The second part of the
assumption is that the solution is unique. This is more problematic, but
proposition 2.11(c) tells us that this is guaranteed if we add strict convexity
to our assumptions about the consumer's preferences.
With this assumption, we can write zi(p,) for the first-commodity part
of the unique solution to i's utility maximization problem at prices p; and
py =1p such that 0 < p; <1. Note carefully that we only make p; an
argument of this function, since, by (1), we can restrict attention to prices
that sum to one. Also, zi(p) explicitly gives demand for the first com-
modity only; but the demand for the second commodity is implicit, by (2).
Now let Xi(p) = Sn, zi(p). This gives the aggregate demand for the
first commodity at prices p; (and p, =1- py). This is what we graph;
in figure 6.3, you see the function p; Xi(p:) graphed for arguments
p, between zero and one. Also in figure 6.3, you see in each picture a
horizontal line drawn at the height e; = SI ef, that is, at the level of the
social endowment in good 1. By virtue of (3), at any price p1 <1 such that
X.(py) =e, we have a Walrasian equilibrium.
Suppose the following two assumptions hold:
Assumption 2. For some (small) value of pr > 0, X:(p1) > e;, and for some
(large) value of pr <1, Xa(py) < x.
208 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
Good 1 Social endowment Good1 Social endowment
7 of good 1
, of good 1
 Demand for
good 1
0 Price of good 1 1 0 Price of good 1 1
(a) {b)
Figure 6.3. Existence of Walrasian equilibrium for the case of two goods.
We have a Walrasian equilibrium at any price p: between zero and one
(and p; = 1 p;) where Xi(p1) = e;; that is, where markets clear in
good 1 and hence clear in good 2. In (a), we see a case where there is a
Walrasian equilibrium, while in (b) we see a case without. Note that, in
accordance with assumption 2, we draw in each case aggregate demand
that satisfies Xi(p:) > e; for sufficiently small p; > 0 and Xp) <a
for sufficiently large p; < 1.
Assumption 3. The function Xy(p;) is continuous in p, for 0 <p, < 1.
Under these two assumptions, the intermediate value theorem of calculus
would guarantee the existence of a Walrasian equilibrium; a continuous
function cant get from a level above e; to a level below e; without at
some point being precisely equal to e;.
So are these two assumptions sensible? Begin with the first part of
assumption 2. We would like to conclude that for small p; the demand for
good 1'is no smaller than the social endowment. Consider the indifference
curve diagrams in figure 6.4. In (a), we have a consumer with the usual
sort of indifference curves. We see there that for low enough prices of the
first good a typical such budget line is sketched in the consumer
will necessarily choose to consume no less than her endowment in the
first good. This is clearly the case because all the points that give her
at least as much utility as her endowment and that are affordable (the
shaded half-lens area) lie to the right of her endowment. If we had this
sort of picture for every consumer, then every consumer (for low enough
p1) would demand at least her endowment in the first good, justifying the
assumption that X;(p,) > e;.
But what if the picture for one of the consumers was as in figure 6.4(b).
This consumers indifference curve through her endowment has slope zero
at the endowment point. (If you find this an odd case, try drawing the
6.4. Existence and the number of equilibria 209
picture for a consumer whose endowment of the second good is zero.) For
this consumer, we wouldn't know that z*(p;) > ! for all sufficiently small
pi, and so we wouldn't necessarily have the first part of assumption 2. In
essence, the first part of assumption 2 rules out this sort of picture holding
for all the consumers; if the price of good 1 gets low enough, someone likes
it sufficiently to want (and can afford) enough so that aggregate demand
exceeds the social endowment.
For the other half of assumption 2, we consider budget lines that
have very steep slope, corresponding to prices p; close to one (and hence
po close to zero). You may draw the pictures; the basic intuition is the
same.
As for assumption 3, if preferences are continuous and demand is
single valued (assumption 1), then using techniques similar to the. proof
of proposition 2.13(b), you can show that demand will be continuous for
strictly positive prices. So this assumption is entailed by earlier assump-
tions we made.
To generalize this result, there are essentially three things to think
about. First, assumption 1 is too strong. We want to weaken this, but in
a way that preserves the sense of assumption 3. Second, assumption 2,
which can be paraphrased aggregate demand is well behaved at extreme
prices requires attention. Third, it is clearly desirable to extend beyond
the case of only two goods: We'll have to do with something other than
the intermediate value theorem.
We will not persevere in detail on this subject but instead offer a quick
.
Good 2 Good 2
, Consumer's endowment
Consumer s endowment \
Good 1 Good 1
(6)
Figure 6.4. Justifying assumption 2.
 The more mathematically inclined reader can give this a shot, if you didn't already dc
so when challenged in chapter 2. Or wait a bit for proposition 6.1, where we will generalize
this result a step further.
mm
210 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
executive summary. In the references given below and elsewhere, the
following happens:
(1) Assumption 1 is simply dropped. Consumers are allowed to have
preferences that admit more than one solution at given prices. We redefine
X,(py) to be the set of all possible aggregate demands for the first good
as a function of p; (and, implicitly, p, = 1 py); that is, = Xp) if
z= sh zi where =z is the first component of some solution of i's utility
maximization problem at prices (p;, 1py). A function that takes on values
that are sets is generally called a correspondence; when you hear economic
theorists chattering about the aggregate demand correspondence, this is what
they have in mind.
Not every aggregate demand correspondence will give equilibria. Once
we give up uniqueness of the solution to the consumers problems, we
give up automatic continuity, and we need something in place of assump-
tion 3. To see that this is needed, consider first figure 6.5(a). Here we show
a consumer's problem where at the prices shown there will be precisely
two solutions. It isnt hard to imagine filling in indifference curves so that
at other prices, there are unique solutions to the consumer's problem and
so that, moreover, demand for good 1 is (except at these relative prices)
decreasing in the relative price for good 1. This sort of demand by the
individual will lead to aggregate demand as in figure 6.5(b); think of this
as aggregate demand for three consumers whose indifference curves look
like those in 6.5(a), but with relative prices at which we have two solu-
tions different for the three. With such aggregate demand, there will be
no guarantee of an equilibrium, just as depicted in figure 6.5(b).
It turns out that in place of a continuous aggregate demand function
we need aggregate demand that is upper semi-continuous and convex valued.
Moreover, we have the following proposition:
Proposition 6.1. If consumer preferences are continuous, aggregate demand is
upper semi-continuous. If consumer preferences are convex, aggregate demand is
convex valued.?
fa correspondence X (py) is upper semi-continuous if the graph of the correspondence
 the set of all points (pi, =) such that z X(py) is a closed set. The term upper hemi-
continuous is sometimes used instead, reserving semi- for functions. And the correspondence
is convex valued if for every p; the set X(p:) is convex.
9 Both assertions are for strictly positive prices, since we dont know that aggregate de-
mand is well defined for zero prices. For more mathematically inclined readers, this propo-
sition is a useful result to try to prove.
6.4. Existence and the number of equilibria 211
Good 2 Good 1 Social endowment
of good 1
Thee Demand for
Ni, good
"Good 1 Price of good 1
(a) (b)
Figure 6.5. Nonexistence of Walrasian equilibrium
with demand correspondences. .
In (a), we show a consumer whose demand for good 1 takes on tw
values at a critical price. This can lead to the sorts of discontinuities in
aggregate demand shown in (b), which in turn can imply that there is
no equilibrium. 
So in many general treatments of the existence question, one finds an
assumption that preferences are continuous and convex.
(2) The problem of well-behaved aggregate demand for extreme prices (or
as prices become extreme) is handled in a number of ways. These problems
become a bit more involved when there are more than two goods, because
then we need to worry about demand when one good has a zero price,
when two have zero price, and so on, up to one less than the total number
of goods. This matter gets fairly technical fairly quickly, so we leave it for
you to read about elsewhere.
(3) When there are more than two commodities, we won't be able to em-
ploy the intermediate value theorem so neatly. What then? The mathe-
matical hammer that is used in place of the intermediate value theorem is
a fixed point theorem. (If you dont persevere through the small type, then
at least you should know that when economic theorists are discussing
fixed point theorems, the odds are good that they are discussing general
equilibrium existence results.)
h In the higher Teaches of mathematical economics, you will find ways even to dispense
with convexity of consumer preferences. Without going into detail, the idea is that what we
require is aggregate demand that is upper semi-continuous and convex valued. We can get
the convex-valued property for aggregate demand even if individual demand is not convex
valued, if we have many consumers of like characteristics.
212
Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
There are many fixed point theorems. For our purposes, the two relevant
ones are
Brouwer's Fixed Point Theorem. Two things are given: a nonempty, compact,
convex set Z (a subset of some Euclidean space, say), and a continuous
function : Z Z. In this setting the theorem asserts that the function has
a fixed point; there is a point z Z such that (z) = z.
Kakutanis Fixed Point Theorem. The function in Brouwers theorem is
replaced by a correspondence that associates to each point z Z a nonempty
subset (z) C Z. This theorem asserts that if is upper semi-continuous and
convex valued, then has a fixed point a point z for which z (2).
These are fairly heavy mathematical results, but if you know some mathe-
matical programming, some very beautiful algorithmic proofs can be given;
see Scarf. (1973).
Of what use are these? Suppose there are K commodities. Let II
be the space of all nonnegative price vectors in RX that sum to one: p =
(p1y..-,pr) II if > pr = 1. Let us retreat to the world of assumption 1;
the solution of each consumers problem at any set of prices is unique. In
fact, since this is just an executive briefing, we'll assume this is true for all
nonnegative, nonzero prices. (This is clearly a noxious assumption, since one
might expect that as the price of some good goes to zero, demand for that
good rises to infinity. But this is only an executive briefing.) We can therefore
write for each consumer i and commodity k, ko) for the demand for good
k by consumer at prices p. Write Xx(p) = Sr The) for the aggregate.
demand for good k.
Assume that Xx (p) is continuous for each k. (Let us say again that this
is now for all price vectors, including those where some of the goods have
zero price, so this is an overly strong assumption, made only for purposes of
illustration.) Consider the following vector function = (,...,x) from II
into II:
px + max(0, Xx(p) ex)
(= .
Plo wrap + max(0, Xr (p) e)]
Don't panic this isnt as bad as it looks. Take the numerator first. We add
to the old price pr a positive amount if there is excess demand for good at
prices p. (That makes sense; raise the prices of goods for which there is too
much demand.) Then the denominator takes these new relative prices and
rescales them so they sum to one again.
This is clearly a function from II to II. And we claim that if each Xx (p)
is continuous, then so is each x, hence so'is . This takes a bit of a proof,
but readers with mathematical background shouldn't have a problem with it.
Hence by Brouwers fixed point theorem, this function has a fixed point.
6.4. Existence and the number of equilibria 213
We claim that if p is a fixed point of , then p gives Walrasian prices.
To see this, note that at a fixed point of ,
pi + max(0, Xi(p) ex)
x [pr + max(0, Xr (p) ep)
Pr =
Note that pI pi = 1, so if we multiply on both sides of the equation by
the denominator, we get
K
pr (1+) max(0, Xu (p) ep) | = pi +max(0, Xx(p) ex).
kf=1
Cancel the common term px from both sides, and you get
K
PE >" max(0, Xx (p) eps) = max(0, Xr (p) ex),
ki=1
for each k. Multiply both sides of this equation by Xi(p) ex and sum over
K, and we get
K K
Sn 0) > max(0, Xz: (p) err)
k=1 kf=1
= > (Xn ~ ex) max(0, Xx (p) ex).
Eel
Since Walras' law holds with equality for every consumer, it holds with equal-
ity for aggregate demand, which means that the left-hand side of this equation
must be zero. Each term in the sum on the right-hand side is nonnegative, so
the only way that sum could be zero is if each term is zero, which can only
be true if X3(p) < ex for each k, which is the condition for an equilibrium.
Dont be too taken with this general proof. We are back to assuming
that the consumers maximization problems have unique solutions; the proof
would be better if we dealt in demand correspondences (which is where Kaku-
tanis fixed point theorem comes in). And, more importantly, our assumption
that Xi(p) is well defined and continuous around the edges of II is really
quite outrageous; a better general proof would work quite hard to avoid this.
Nonetheless, the style of the proof should be clear. We create a map
from the set of prices into itself such that any fixed points are Walrasian
equilibria, and then we make assumptions sufficient to guarantee that the
map has a fixed point, enlisting a general fixed point theorem along the way.
214 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
Finiteness and local uniqueness
So now we know that a Walrasian equilibrium will exist for well-
behaved exchange economies. We worry next about the other extreme
possibility; for a given economy there are so many equilibria that we learn
little (except that the equilibrium allocation is Pareto efficient) about what
is the outcome of the market process. Have a look at the Edgeworth box
in figure 6.6, for example. We've drawn things so that three equilibria
are shown, and nothing prevents us from continuing to draw indifference
curves shaped so that every point along the contract curve between the
points marked z and z' are Walrasian equilibrium allocations for the initial
endowment shown. ~
But, if we did that, it would only be for this endowment point that
we have so many equilibria. For any other endowment point (nearby this
endowment point), there would be only a single equilibrium. (Convince
yourself of this on the drawing before reading on.) So, in some sense, it
would be quite a remarkable coincidence if there were so many equi-
libria for a given exchange economy with a randomly selected initial
endowment.
This picture is suggestive of some very deep results about the number
of equilibria that a randomly selected exchange economy may have. One
must define what it means for an economy to be randomly selected (and
Equilibrium allocations
xX J x t
- Endowment point
Figure 6.6. Too many equilibria.
From the endowment point marked, three equilibria are shown. We
could continue to draw in indifference curves so that from this endow-
ment point, every point along the confract curve between z and = is
a Walrasian equilibrium allocation. Note that if we do this, then for
any other point close to the marked endowment point, there is only a
single Walrasian equilibrium.
6.4. Existence and the number of equilibria 215
the mathematical methods for doing this are themselves very advanced),
but this can be done. And then it is possible to obtain results along the
following lines:
Theorem. A randomly selected exchange economy will have a finite, and indeed
odd, number of equilibria.
To prove this takes methods of differential topology; we won't even {ry
to explain how this is done here. But we will try to say why this sort of
result is of economic (as opposed to mathematical) interest.
Ideally, we would like each exchange economy with which we deal to
have a unique Walrasian equilibrium. If this were true, then the theory that
a Walrasian equilibrium obtains would make a very definite and precise
prediction; we would have enormous scope for testing the theory empiri-
cally. We might even be able to go on to economy-wide comparative statics
exercises for example, how does a single consumers consumption of a
given good change if we increase that consumers endowment of the good,
or if we increase some other consumers endowment of the good? If we
could trace how a change in endowment translates into changes in unique
equilibrium prices and allocations, it would be possible (potentially) to
answer this question. :
On the other hand, if economies generally have infinite numbers of
equilibria, the proposition that an equilibrium will be attained would help
us very little. At some given endowment, we might find ourselves at a par-
ticular equilibrium. But then if we perturb that endowment, say by giving
a fixed consumer more of a particular good, we would have little no-
tion concerning which new equilibrium would pertain. At least, knowing
that some equilibrium will pertain would not help us much in predicting
how this individual's consumption would react to this perturbation in her
endowment. 
The point is that for the sake of definite predictions, having a single
equilibrium for every set of initial data is ideal and having an infinite
number of equilibria for each set of initial data is terrible.
Unhappily, it is simply unreasonable to suppose that there will be a
unique Walrasian equilibrium for a general exchange economy. Conditions
on the economy can be given that guarantee uniqueness, but they are very
strong. What the theorem outlined above says is that while the ideal
of a unique equilibrium may be unreasonable, we have the next best
situation of a finite number of equilibria. Moreover, the theorem sketched
7 1f you go looking for such results, the key words are gross substituses.
216 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
can be extended as follows: For most economies, picking any one of its
(finitely many) Walrasian equilibria, as we perturb slightly the data of the
economy one and only one equilibrium for the perturbed economy will
be close to the originally selected equilibrium. If we believe that small
perturbations of the data of the economy will be met (if possible) by small
shifts in the equilibrium, then we can still do local comparative statics for
randomly selected economies.
To understand this probably takes a more complete discussion than
we have given. But an important point is buried here that will return in
chapter 14 and at the end of the book in the criticisms that will be given
to the application of game theoretic methods. If the preceding discussion
is somewhat opaque now, don't worry; you will be returning to this sub-
section after a while, at which point (I hope and expect) this will make a
lot more sense.
6.5. Time, uncertainty, and general equilibrium
As we have already noted, the model of general equilibrium is not
clearly relevant to situations where choices will be made through time
and under Conditions of uncertainty. What does the theory of general
equilibrium tell us about choice in a dynamic and uncertain environ-
ment?
One approach works within the limited context of choices that are
made at any single point in time.
This isn't to say that the future doesnt matter to such choices. The
value to the consumer of some of the commodities that are bought or
sold at a given point in time is strongly connected to anticipated future
prices. For example, preferences over engine size in cars presumably relate
to expectations about future gasoline prices. Indeed, some current com-
modities derive value entirely from future considerations. For example,
any form of savings or financial investinent gives utility only because of
the presumed value those savings or investments will have later.
Even so, consumer preferences at a single point in time over current
commodities, including financial securities and consumer durables such
as cars, can be assumed to conform to the basic models of chapters 2 and
3. If the currently traded commodities have prices, nothing prevents us
from analyzing choice in currently open markets according to the methods
discussed above.?
 There are a few differences: One can borrow money or, in some cases, short sell secu-
tities. This would be modeled formally as consumption of a negative amount of those
6.5. Time, uncertainty, and general equilibrium 217
This approach is taken in some of the literature of microeconomics.
Work along these lines tends to take a bit more out of the structure of
financial assets and the like to put a bit more into the model about prefer-
ences for these things. And it tends to work not simply with choice at one
point in time, but with choices made serially, where each choice is of the
sort analyzed in this chapter, focusing on the connections between choices
made at one date and choices made at others. But the basic model of mar-
ket choice at any single time is just what we have above, where durable
and financial assets are treated as commodities. This line of research goes
by the general rubric of temporary general equilibrium.
But in line with the general tendency to regard dynamic choice as
the static choice of an overall strategy, the temporary general equilibrium
approach is followed much less frequently than approaches that look at
all market choices at once.
Arrow-Debreu contingent claims markets
The easiest way to think of looking at all market choices at once is
to imagine that all market choices are in fact made at once. A fictional
marketplace, known as the market in Arrow-Debreu contingent claims, is
the central modeling device used here.
We begin by setting the stage. We imagine a finite list of KX com-
modities, each of which can be consumed at any one of a finite number of
dates, indexed by =0,1,...,T. Moreover, we imagine that there is un-
certainty, which will resolve as time passes. Before consumption at date T
takes place, consumers will know which state s from a finite state space
S prevails. Between time 0 and time T, uncertainty about the true state
s may resolve. This is modeled by a sequence of nondecreasingly finer
partitions of , denoted Fy, Fi,..., Fr, where Fy = {S} and Fi is the fine
partition, where each state is in a set by itself. :
For the reader who is unused to the mathematical terminology, a par-
tition of is a set of subsets of S with the properties that each s S is
in one and only one of the subsets. The members of a given partition are
called the cells of the partition. A sequence of partitions is nondecreasingly
finer if for any two consecutive dates and t+ 1, if f is a cell for date
t+1 (that is, if f Fy), then for some date t cell f/ Fy, FC fF.
The interpretation is as follows. At date , consumers all know that
one of the cells in F; prevails, and no one knows anything more. An
commodities. Hence we would have to work in a setting that allowed for negative levels
of consumption of some goods. This can pose a number of special problems, especially for
questions of the existence of equilibrium.
218 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
example may help. Suppose that S has five elements, {si,...,5s}. Sup-
pose that T'= 3. Then we can imagine that
Fy = {{51,52, 53,58, 55} };
Fy = {{s1,82}, {53:5 ss}};
Fy = {{s1,52}, {ss}, {ss, 55}}; and
B={{s} {s2}, {ss}, {ss}, {ss}}-
This means at date zero, consumers have no idea which state prevails. At
date one, they learn that either the state is one of the first two or one of
the last three. At date two, if the state is one of the first two, they learn
nothing new. And if the state is one of the last three, they learn that either
the state is s; or one of the last two. Finally, at date three consumers learn
whatever is left to learn about which state prevails.
We could depict this example (and any example of this type) with a
tree diagram, as in figure 6.7. Time moves from left to right, and at each
date, the tree branches reflect information accumulated to that point. So,
for example, at the level of the tree corresponding to date 2, the tree has
split already into three pieces, one of which (at the next date) branches
into s; or s,, the second of which leads to ss, and the third of which
branches (at the next date) into s, and ss.
We stress that we are assuming that at each date , all consumers
have access to precisely the same information. This model does not allow
one consumer to have better information about the state of nature than
another. Extensions of this basic model do permit consumers to have
Date: 0 1 2 3
Figure 6.7. Depicting the resolution of uncertainty with a tree.
6.5. Time, uncertainty, and general equilibrium 219
private information (extensions we won't get to in this book), but the basic
model forbids this. 
We now add a bit of notation and terminology. For a given date and
a cell f Fy, we refer to the pair (,f) as a date-event pair. The set of all
date-event pairs for date , which is just {t} x F; is denoted &;. And the
union over all the dates t= 1,...,T of all the date-event pairs is denoted
, which is just UL, &. Dont be put off by the formalisms here; in our
example, & has one element, & has two, & has three, and & has five,
so has eleven elements corresponding to the eleven heavy dots in the
tree shown in figure 6.7.
With all this, the consumption space for consumers is the space of all
vectors z in the positive orthant X of (R). This may look horrible but
it isn't. The idea is that the consumer consumes at each date , and the
consumer can change what she consumes according to information she
has received at that time. Hence at date 0, she consumes some vector
in RX: this follows from the fact that F, contains a single element. At
date 1, she consumes some vector in RX contingent upon which of the
two cells in F} prevails; this is a vector in the space (REY, and so on. A
full consumption vector for her is a listing of what she consumes in every
date-event pair that she may find herself in, which is (R).
For example, suppose in the example there are two goods. Then a
consumption bundle for the consumer says how much of each she con-
sumes at date zero, how much she consumes at date 1 if one of the first two
states prevails, how much she consumes at date 1 if one of the last three
states prevails, and so on. Since there are eleven-date-event pairs in the
tree in figure 6.7, a consumption bundle for a consumer in this economy
would be a point in the positive orthant of RZ (or (ROM).
We assume that each consumer has the usual sort of preferences over
X so defined. Tt is entirely natural to think that since there is uncertainty
in this story, we might be able to use the methods of chapter 3 to pin down
the nature of the consumers preferences somewhat. And this is done in
most applications. But we will proceed assuming that the consumer has
general preferences over X given by a utility function U; : X R.
Finally we come to the most heroic assumption of all. Imagine that
prior to date zero consumption there are markets in every good deliver-
able at every date in every recognizable contingency. That is, suppose
in our example the two goods are artichokes and broccoli. Then prior to
date zero consumption, a consumer can buy or sell artichokes and broc-
coli for immediate delivery. (The term spot market is used for markets in
immediately delivered commodities.) But the consumer can buy and sell
much more. The consumer can buy and sell, for example, broccoli to be
220 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
delivered at date 2 in the event {s;,s,}. This good, which is called an
Arrow-Debreu contingent claim to broccoli, should be regarded with care.
The story is that if you buy ten units of these, when date 2 rolls around,
if the state is one of the first two, someone will hand you ten units of
broccoli. But if one of the other three states prevails, this claim entitles
you to nothing. If you sell one of these claims, you must make it good at
date 2 if the state is one of the first two.
Note that we dont imagine markets in date 2-state s; broccoli. When
date 2 rolls around, consumers are assumed to be unable to tell whether
the prevailing state is s; or s,. Hence we couldn't know whether to make
good on a claim against date 2 broccoli contingent on the state being s;.
You may recall that way back at the start of choice and demand the-
ory, you were warned that eventually you would be asked to consider
commodities of the form a pint of beer three years from today if the
temperature next July 4 is more than ten degrees (Farenheit) hotter than
the temperature the following June 30. This commodity is just a bundle
of Arrow-Debreu contingent claims. It's a bundle because it isn't contin-
gent on all the uncertainty that will resolve between now and three years
hence. But it is a claim to future consumption contingent on some of the
uncertainty that will resolve.
That, essentially, is it. If we imagine that there-are, at the outset,
markets in every Arrow-Debreu contingent claim, and if preferences are
defined on the space X (and endowments lie in the space X), then the.
theory described early in this chapter can be applied without problem. In
earlier developments, we never said what the character of a commodity
had to be; so we just apply the theory to the case where commodities
include all manner of these contingent claims. Time and uncertainty are
fully handled within general equilibrium theory!
Securities and spot markets
Nonsense, you are probably saying. All this is based on the pre-
sumption that, before any consumption takes place, there is a complete
set of Arrow-Debreu contingent claims markets. Now there are, in the
real world, some futures markets where you can contract to receive (or
sell) pork bellies or iced broilers at a fixed later date. But you can't buy a
pork belly for delivery a year hence contingent on the weather in August.
And even the number of futures markets is somewhat limited. There is
no futures market whatsoever in broccoli.
General equilibrium theorists have a neat response to this. Suppose
that, in our example, the prices of artichokes and broccoli were denom-
inated in dollars. (What's a dollar? Where did this money come from?
6.5. Time, uncertainty, and general equilibrium 221
These are nontrivial questions that arise in this theory, and I will simply
shrug them off here. This isn tlto say that these aren't questions that are
crucial to this entire story. They are crucial. But this is only going to be
an introduction to the subject.) | And suppose that, at date zero, there are
both spot markets in artichokes and broccoli and markets in claims to $1
in each date-event pair in the tree. That is, at date zero, for a given price,
you can purchase a claim to $1 in, say, date 2 if the state is either s, or
57. Note that there are ten date-event pairs other than the date zero pair,
s0 this means twelve markets are open two spot and ten financial.
Suppose that, moreover, there will be spot markets in the two vegetables
at every date, whatever the contingency.
If the assumptions made so far aren't heroic enough, we offer a really
big one next: Suppose that, sitting back at time zero, each consumer can
precisely and accurately forecast what will be the Prices of artichokes and
broccoli in their spot markets for each date-event pair. To take an example,
suppose consumers know that| at date 2 in the event {s,s,} the spot
price of broccoli will be $.75 per unit. Suppose as well that at time zero,
the price of a claim to $1 at date 2 contingent on the event {s;,s,} is
$.40. Then if a consumer wishes to purchase at time zero a unit of date
2-event {s,s} broccoli, she can do so by implementing the following
plan: Buy three-quarters of a $1 date 2-event {s;, s,} financial contingent
claim, which costs $.30. If at date 2 the event realized is {51,5,}, this
provides her with $.75. And with this $.75 she buys her unit of broccoli in
the spot market. On the other hand, if she is well endowed with broccoli in
this date-event pair and wishes to sell some of it, she can sell date 2-event
{s1,s;} financial contingent claims at date zero, and if at date 2 this event
rolls around, she can sell off broccoli to meet her financial obligations.
The point is that if consumers know in advance all the future spot
market prices, and if there is a: full array of financial contingent claims,
consumers can trade from any endowment point e X to any desired
(and affordable) consumption point z X by designing an appropriate
dynamic strategy. Money is transferred between date-event pairs using
the financial contingent claims, and that money is allocated between con-
sumption goods subsequently iri the spot markets. This then implies that
all the methods of general equilibrium discussed earlier apply.
Note how strongly we use the assumption that consumers accurately
anticipate all future spot market prices. And we assume that consumers
follow the standard pattern of chapter 4 in reducing a dynamic choice
problem to a static problem of choosing an optimal strategy for dynamic
action. In other words, we assume consumers are hyperrational, both in
their predictive powers and in their planning abilities. These are very
222 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
strong assumptions. You will have to judge for yourself whether these
assumptions are too strong. (Wait to see applications, which we dont
provide here, before making this judgment. These are strong assumptions,
but depending on how they influence the conclusions that are drawn in a
particular application, you might find them palatable.)
You may still object that even granting hyperrational agents this isn't a
realistic model, because these financial contingent claims dont exist. (Where
can you buy a claim to $1 next August, payable only if the amount of rain
in July in New York exceeds the amount of rain in Philadelphia by less than
one inch?)
We dont need to have all the financial contingent claims traded at the
outset. Suppose, in our example, at date zero a pair of financial contingent
claims are traded, one that pays $1 at date one in the event {s1,5.} and a
second that pays $1 at date one in the event {53,54,55}. In date 1-event
{51,5}, there is a market in a contingent financial claim that pays $1 at date
2; and in date 1-event {s3, 54,55}, there are two financial claims, one that
pays $1 at date 2 in the contingency {ss}, and the other paying $1 at date 2
in the contingency {ss, ss}, and so on. The idea is that at each date in each
contingency for that date, there are claims that pay at the next date in every
possible following contingency.
Suppose as well that consumers at the outset know what will be the
equilibrium prices of these claims as well as the equilibrium prices of spot
vegetables. Then a consumer, could do just as well as if there were a full array
of contingent claims markets. For example, suppose that
At date zero, a claim paying $1 at date 1 in event {s3, 54,85} costs $.50.
At date 1 in event {ss,ss, 55}, a claim paying $1 at date 2 in event {54,85}
will cost $.60.
At date 2 in event {s4, ss}, a claim paying $1 at date 3 in event {ss} will cost
$.40.
Broccoli at date zero costs $2.00 per unit.
Artichokes at date 3 in event {s;} will cost $2 per unit.
Then a consumer, knowing all this, can trade date zero broccoli for date
3-event {ss} artichokes as follows: For every unit of date zero broccoli sold
(realizing $2), he buys four claims to date 1-event {s3, 84,55} dollars. At date
1, if the event is {ss, ss, 5s}, he plans to use the $4 to buy 62 claims for $1
at date 2 in event {ss, ss}. At date 2, if the event is {ss, ss}, he plans to use
the $62 to buy 16% claims for $1 at date 3 in event {54}. And if at date 3
the event is {ss}, he plans to use the $163 to buy 25 units of artichoke. That
is, the consumer, by buying and selling, can exchange immediate broccoli for
date 3-event {ss} artichokes at a ratio of 1:25. If we gave all the prices for
all the marketed goods (both vegetable and financial), you (and, presumably,
our very smart consumers) could work out the exchange rates for vegetables
6.6. Bibliographic notes 223
in any two date-event pairs. (See problem 9 for a harder example than the
one above.)
So all we need are spot markets in vegetables and in financial claims for
contingent money at the next date and in every possible next contingency.
(We also need very smart consumers.)
You may still be dissatisfied. There are no financial claims around of
the type described that pay $1 in one event and nothing at any other time.
There are plenty of financial claims being traded: equity in companies, debt
instruments, options on common stock, and so on. But none of it has this
simple form. The avid general equilibrium theorist responds to this objection
with a still further elaboration: In some (not all) cases, by trading cleverly
in the sort of financial instruments just listed, a consumer can manufacture
the types of financial claims assumed two paragraphs ago. What is required
is that consumers know what prices existing financial instruments will com-
mand in every date-event pair, and that there are enough of those financial
instruments. (The meaning of enough is made precise in the literature.)
We will leave you here, with further readings suggested in the bibli-
ographic notes. The basic message to be taken away is that by means of
increasingly elaborate constructions, economic theorists extend the reach
of the basic model of general equilibrium to cases where time and un-
certainty play a part. But often this involves consumers who are both
extremely knowledgeable about the future and who are extremely good at
planning.
6.6. Bibliographic notes
The classic treatments of general equilibrium theory are Debreu (1959)
and Arrow and Hahn (1971). Debreus monograph gives the essential
details, while Arrow and Hahn give a more complete treatment of many
of the issues touched on here (and other issues not mentioned here at all).
Scarf (1973) presents algorithms for computing Walrasian equilibria, and
Scarf and Shoven (1984) show how these computational techniques can
be applied. For treatment of issues such as local uniqueness of equilibria
for randomly selected economies, Mas Colell (1985), can be consulted
by the reader who is very well trained mathematically. (The key tools
come from differential topology.) Work on general equilibrium theory is
ongoing, for example dealing with economies that have infinitely many
commodities and/or infinitely many consumers; a recent state of the art
treatment of the case of infinitely many commodities is Aliprantis, Brown
and Burkinshaw (1989).
Theoretical work on the institutional foundations of general equilib-
rium belongs for the most part to the journal literature, hence references
224 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
given here are apt to be superseded rather quickly. With this in mind, I
would recommend Osborne and Rubinstein (forthcoming) for bargaining
theoretic foundations.
Experimental work that supports, in limited contexts, the notion of
a Walrasian equilibrium is also scattered among the journals. A good
starting point is the review article by Plott (1986).
Extending the notions of general equilibrium to models where time
and uncertainty play a role takes place in the literatures of both microeco-
nomics and theoretical finance. The notion of a contingent claim is due to
Arrow and to Debreu (hence the name Arrow-Debreu contingent claim);
some exposition can be found in both Debreu (1959) and Arrow and Hahn
(1971). The use of financial claims and planning originated in an article
by Arrow that is published in English as Arrow (1964). The use of general
financial claims and the basic equilibrium concept is formalized in Rad-
ner (1972). Since Arrows and Radners seminal contributions, there has
been a very large literature on the subject; Huang and Litzenberger (1988,
chaps. 7, 8) is an accessible introduction. This sort of model becomes es-
pedally powerful when trading in securities can take place continuously
in time. The theory requires substantial mathematical sophistication, but
the reader can get a taste of what goes on in Kreps (1982) and a systematic
exposition iit Duffie (1988). .
-
References
Aliprantis, C., D. Brown, and O. Burkinshaw. 1989. Existence and Optimal-
ity of Competitive Equilibria. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Arrow, K. 1964. The Role of Securities in the Optimal Allocation of Risk-
Bearing. Quarterly Journal of Economics 31:91-96.
Arrow, K., and E Hahn. 1971. General Competitive Analysis. San Francisco:
Holden-Day.
Debreu, G. 1959. Theory of Value. New Haven: Cowles Foundation.
Duffie, D. 1988. Securities Markets: Stochastic Models. Boston: Academic
Press.
Huang, C.,, and R. Litzenberger. 1988. Foundations for Financial Economics.
Amsterdam: North Holland.
Kreps, D. 1982. Multiperiod Securities and the Efficient Allocation of
Risk: A Comment on the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model. In
The Economics of Information and Uncertainty, J. McCall, ed. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. Pp.203-32.
Mas Colell, A. 1985. The Theory of General Equilibrium; A Differentiable
Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
6.7. Problems 225
Osborne, M., and A. Rubinstein. Forthcoming. Bargaining and Markets.
Boston: Academic Press.
Plott, C. 1986. Rational Choice in Experimental Markets. Journal of Busi-
ness 59:5301-27.
Radner, R. 1972. Existence of Equilibrium of Plans, Prices, and Price
Expectations. Econometrica 40:289-303.
Scarf, H. (in collaboration with T. Hansen). 1973. The Computation of Eco-
nomic Equilibrium. New Haven: Cowles Foundation.
Scarf, H., and J. Shoven. 1984. Applied General Equilibrium Analysis. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
6.7. Problems
= 1. Return to the picture of price equilibrium in the two-consumer, two-
good case. For each set of relative prices, we can mark the point that
consumer 1 would demand. (Assume that consumers have strictly convex
preferences so their maximization problems always have unique solutions.)
As we vary the relative prices of the goods, we trace out a curve the
so-called offer curve of consumer 1. This is shown for you in figure 6.8.
We can create a similar offer curve for consumer 2, and rotating the picture
for consumer 2 by 180 degrees and putting his origin at the location of the
social endowment in her (consumer 1's) coordinate system, we get the
Edgeworth box with two offer curves. Consider the assertion: Walrasian
equilibrium allocations correspond to points where the two offer curves intersect.
This is not quite correct as it stands. Why not? If you see why not, try to
repair the assertion.
= 2. Consider the following exchange economy. There are two goods and
two consumers. The two goods are called tillip and quillip and the two
_..- Offer curve
_. Indifference curves
(a
Good 2 N
Seat
Good 1
Figure 6.8. The offer curve of a consumer in a two-commodity world.
226 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
consumers are called 1 and 2. Consumer 1 has utility function Ut, =
4In() + .6In(g) (where t is the amount of tillip 1 consumes, and is the
amount of quillip). Consumer 2 has utility function Up(, g) = 5n() +
5In(g). Consumer 1 is endowed with 10 units each of quillip and tillip.
Consumer 2 is endowed with 10 units of quillip and 5 units of tillip.
(a) What is the Walrasian equilibrium of this economy? (If there is more
than one equilibrium, give them all.)
(b) Suppose a social dictator wished to implement an allocation that makes
Uy(t,q) + Un(t, @) as large as possible at the equilibrium. Give all the pos-
sible reallocations of the endowment that give the dictator's optimal en-
dowment as a Walrasian equilibrium.
m3. A particular social planner I know is very big on mellow consumers.
Specifically, she hopes to prevent her consumers from envying each other.
To this end, she defines an envy-free allocation of resources as one in which
no consumer would rather have the consumption bundle assigned to an-
other consumer instead of his or her own. Our social planner wishes to
implement an envy-free allocation. She also wishes the allocation to be
efficient. :
This social planner is also lazy. She isn't willing to figure out the utility
functions of her consumers. (She does have a good list of all their endow-
ments.) She is blessed with an economy that functions well as an exchange
economy; however she reassigns endowments, the economy finds a Wal-
rasian equilibrium.
Can you help out this social planner? Specifically, describe how to reallo-
cate endowments and shares so that the resulting Walrasian equilibrium
is guaranteed to be both efficient and envy free. (Hint: the trick is to
find some way to redistribute endowments and shareholdings so that, at
every set of prices, consumers all begin with the same level of wealth to
spend on consumption. There is a way to redistribute endowments and
shareholdings so this is true: What is it?)
a 4. (a) In the proof of the second theorem of welfare economics, it is
claimed that the set
X*= {z X : z can be allocated among the I
consumers in a way that strictly Pareto dominates (#}
is convex if preferences are convex. Prove this.
6.7. Problems 227
(b) Later in that proof it is asserted that the separating hyperplane vector
p is nonnegative. Provide a proof of this assertion.
(c) The remarks after the proof assert that we can replace the assumption
that the allocation (&%) is strictly positive with an assumption that each
consumer is given a positive amount of at least one desirable good. Show
that this assumption will suffice. (Hint: First show that the price of any
desirable good must be strictly positive. Although it isnt necessary, to
carry out this step you may assume that there is at least one more good
and it is in positive supply in the social endowment.)
a 5. Imagine a three-person economy in which the first commodity is
gardening services, the consumption of which makes ones yard more
beautiful, and the second good is food. Imagine that two of the consumers
in this society live in adjacent houses, while the third lives on the other
side of a particularly large mountain. Consumption by the third consumer
of gardening services generates no externality for the other consumers,
but each of the others generates a positive externality for her neighbor
through the consumption of gardening services. To be precise, imagine
that consumers 1 and 2 have utility functions of the form
Vie) = wizl) + w(zd) +
where w : [0,00) R is a strictly increasing, strictly concave, and dif-
ferentiable function. Note well that consumers 1 and 2 get just as much
utility out of their neighbor's yard as they do out of their own, and their
utility for food is linear. (You were warned that this is a very special
setting.) Also imagine that consumer 3 has a utility function of the form
V3(z) = w(z?) +23. There is a social endowment of gardening services and
food.
(a) Suppose the social endowment is initially allocated evenly among the
three consumers. What will be the corresponding Walrasian equilibrium
(with externalities)?
(b) Characterize the set of Pareto efficient allocations of the social endow-
ment. Is the equilibrium allocation in (a) Pareto efficient?
m 6. In a two-person, two-commodity economy, the two commodities are
labeled 7 and y and the two consumers are called A and B. Let z4, for
example, denote the amount of consumption of good z by person A. Each
228 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
of the two individuals has initial endowments of one unit of each good
apiece. The preferences of a are given by the utility function
1 2
ual(za,y4) = 3 logza + 3 logya.
The preferences of B are a bit stranger than this. They are given by
up(zB,YB,54) =logzp +logyp + log(2 x).
That is, B gets disutility out of A's consumption of the first good. You
may assume throughout that both individuals are locally insatiable (and
indeed they are), and you can assume that any solution of first-order con-
ditions and complementary slackness is a global maximium.
(a) What is the Walrasian equilibrium (or equilibria) for this economy?
(This is an economy with externalities, so use the definition given in the
section on externalities.) You will find that matters are fairly simple if you
normalize the prices of the two goods so that they sum to one. Let p be
the price of good z so 1 p is the price of good y.
(b) Is the equilibrium allocation in part (a) Pareto optimal? If so, why?
(That is, how do you know that it is?) If it is not, how do you know that?
(c) Whether the equilibrium allocation in part (a) is Pareto optimal or not, -
Mr. B registers the complaint that Ms. A is consuming all too much z
for his tastes. Accordingly, a social planner named Lindahl proposes to
change the economy as follows. Instead of two prices (for z and y), there
will be-six. These will be p and 1 p as before, and also ga, gg, 74
and rp. These last four are transfer prices; for every unit of z that A
consumes, she must transfer g4 units of account (money) to B. For every
unit of z that B consumes, he must transfer gg units of account to A. If
A consumes y4 units of good y, she must transfer rays to B, and rg
gives the transfer price from B to A for B's consumption of y. The prices
g4,98,74, and rp may be positive, zero, or even negative.
Now the economy works as follows. Taking prices p,1p,q4,q8,74, and
rp as given (the usual price-taking assumption), A chooses a complete
allocation (z4,y4,z5,ys) for the economy, subject to a single constraint:
The net inflow of units of account to A should equal or exceed the net
outflow of units from her. That is,
pTa+(1plya+qazs+raya <pl+ (1 p)l+gpzp +78Y5.
6.7. Problems 229
(Recall that As endowment is one unit of each of the two goods apiece.
This explains the two ones on the right-hand side.) Ms. A chooses the com-
plete allocation to maximize her utility subject only to this constraint; she
is under no obligation to make her chosen allocation feasible. Mr. B also
chooses a complete allocation, subject to the analogous constraint for him.
An equilibrium for the economy is a set of six prices and a single social
allocation such that (1) both consumers faced with those prices indepen-
dently choose that allocation, and (2) the allocation is socially feasible. In
cases where one consumer is indifferent among many different levels in
the optimization problem and the second consumer strictly prefers one of
those levels, we count this as an agreement in terms of requirement (1).
Find an equilibrium of this economy, for the sort of equilibrium defined
above,
(d) Is the equilibrium you computed in part (c) Pareto efficient? If so, how
do you know this? If not, how do you know this?
(e) How do the utilities of Ms. A compare in the two equilibria, one from
part (a) and one from part ()? If Ms. A complains to Mr. Lindahl that
she, A, is being treated unfairly in this new form of economy, what could
Mr. Lindahl do to rectify matters?
(f) If we let Mr. Lindahl loose on the economy of problem 5, what would
happen?
w 7. Parts of this problem may not make sense until chapter 8 is completed.
Grapple Synthetics of Boonton (GSB), Inc., has a problem concerning its
computer facilities. Its computer facility services 600 identical users with
two computers, one of which has a bit more software support than the
other, but is more liable to congestion. Specifically, if one of the users
uses the first computer and the total number of users of that computer is
n, the individual user is able to increase her productivity by an amount
$30 n/10). And if one of the users uses the second computer and the
total number of users of that computer is m, the user increases her daily
productivity by the amount $(10 m/30). Assume throughout that these
600 users are all there are; no new ones will appear. The marginal cost
of servicing a user is zero. And dont worry if your answers don't come
out in even integers; fractional users will be okay, for purposes of this
problem.
(a) Until now, GSB has not tried at all to regulate use of its computers.
Each user has allocated herself to one of the two computers, choosing
~= 
Sart ret res it wr
230 Chapter six: Pure exchange and general equilibrium
so as to maximize her individual productivity gain from the computer
under the assumption that other users will stick with the computers they
have chosen. Assuming that this is 50, what is the equilibrium allocation
of users to the two computers? How many are using computer 1; How
many are using computer 2; and How many are using neither?
(b) The head of the computer center at GSB is concerned that the current,
unregulated method of allocating individuals to computers is not maxi-
mizing the total contribution possible for GSB. He suggests the following
scheme of transfer prices: A price per day will be named for the services
of the computers, and users should be told to make use of either computer
only if the productivity gain they attain in so doing exceeds this trans-
fer price. What (single) price per day should GSB name, assuming that
its computer users will honestly allocate themselves between computers
(or no use) to maximize individual productivity gain less transfer price?
What will be the resulting usage for the two computers? (Hint: If you
have trouble getting started, try to discover what would happen if the
single price of $5 per day were charged [for each computer].)
() The head of the accounting department at GSB thinks that this transfer
price scheme is a good idea, but she suggests a more complex scheme
in which a different price per day will be charged for each of the two
computers. What is the optimal scheme of this sort? What is the resulting
pattern of usage for the two computers?
(d) The head of the economic analysis department at GSB is quite con-
fused by the answers you obtained in parts (b) and (c). He says that he
recalls from his old days as a microeconomist something called the sec-
ond theorem of welfare economics, in which it was claimed that efficient
allocations of resources should follow the dictates of a (Walrasian) market
mechanism. He points out that if the computer services were served by
competitive outside vendors (that is, users would actually pay a market
price for the services they used), then the competitive price would equal
marginal cost, which is zero. Thus zero transfer price should lead to an
efficient solution. He suggests that you recheck your algebra in part b)
and (). In no more than 200 words, explain to this individual why he
should, instead, check his economics textbook.
= 8. With regard to proposition 6.1:
(a) Prove that if consumer preferences are convex, aggregate demand is
convex valued. This should be rather easy.
(b) Prove that if consumer preferences are continuous, aggregate demand
6.7. Problems 231
is upper semi-continuous. This is done by mimicking the argument made
for proposition 2.13(b).
 Use (b) to give a fast proof that if consumer preferences are continuous
and single-valued, aggregate demand is given by a continuous function.
nl parts of this problem, we are dealing with strictly positive prices
only.
a 9. Consider the set of date-event pairs depicted in figure 6.7. Recall the
following data given before:
At date zero, a claim paying $1 at date 1 in event {s3,84, ss}
costs $.50
At date 1 in event {ss, 54,55}, a claim paying $1 at date 2 in
event {s., ss} will cost $.60
At date 2 in event {s,,55}, a claim paying $1 at date 3 in
event {s,} will cost $.40
Broccoli at date zero costs $2.00 per unit
Artichokes at date 3 in event {s,} will cost $.67 per unit
Add to this the following addition data:
At date zero, a claim paying $1 at date 1 in event {s;,s:}
costs $.40
At date 1 in event {s;,5,}, a claim paying $1 at date 2 in
event {s;, sz} will cost $.90
At date 2 in event {s,s;}, a claim paying $1 at date 3 in
event {s;} will cost $.40 ,
At date 3 in event {s,}, artichokes will cost $1.33
Suppose a consumer wished to sell some date 3-event {s;} artichokes
with which she is endowed and use the proceeds to buy date 3-event {ss}
artichokes. For every unit of date 3event {s,} artichokes she sells, how
many units of date 3-event {s,} artichokes can she purchase? What is
the strategy she follows for affecting such a trade? (This strategy should
involve changing her position in vegetables at these two date-event pairs
only. The key is the first step. She sells date 1-event {s1,5,} dollars and
uses the proceeds from that sale to buy date 1-event {s3, 54,55} dollars.)
chapter seven
The neoclassical firm
In neoclassical economic theory, the firm is an entity, just like the con-
sumer. The consumer has an objective function, utility, that is maximized
subject to a budget constraint and any constraints on feasible consump-
tion. The firm has an objective function, profit, that it maximizes subject
to constraints imposed by its technological capabilities.
In chapter 2 we spent a lot of time on the consumers objective func-
tion, talking about preferences, choices, and finally utility functions. The
budget set constraint was not discussed much. For the neoclassical firm,
the reverse is typically true. There is a lot of discussion about how to rep-
resent the technological capabilities of the firm and very little about profit
maximization.
For the time being, we will keep to this tradition. In this chapter we
will describe ways to model the firms technological capabilities (section
7.1), and then we will discuss the firms behavior, assuming it chooses
inputs and outputs to maximize its profits (sections 7.2 and 7.3). We dont
try to explain or justify profit maximization; that discussion is left to much
later in the book (chapter 19) on the grounds that we will have little good
to say about profit maximization, and only then will we be in a position
to give alternatives.
The reader may justifiably wonder, If bad things will be said about
profit maximization later in the book, why spend so much time now (and
for the next three chapters) using that assumption? There are two reasons:
First, this is the traditional model of the firm in microeconomic theory,
and more modern developments can best be understood if you understand
these classical antecedents. Second, our objections to profit maximization
will be on theoretical grounds that is, we dont see a good argument
that firms necessarily will or ought to maximize their profits. But that
doesnt mean that profit maximization isnt a good positive model. Only
the data can speak to that, and then only after we see the implications of
profit maximization for observable behavior.
234 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
7.1. Models of the firm's technological capabilities
The production possibility set
Firms are presumed to possess productive capabilities. That is, firms
are able to transform arrays of commodities into different arrays.
The standard general model is set as usual in a world where there
are KX commodities. Some of these commodities may be inputs to the
firm, some may be outputs of the firm, and some may be either inputs
or outputs. Still others may have nothing at all to do with the firm. The
firm's productive capabilities are modeled by a set of netput vectors in RX.
The term netput is used as a generalization of input and output: For each
commodity, we record the firm's production or usage of this commodity,
using negative numbers for net inputs and positive numbers for net out-
puts. For xample, suppose there are five commodities: labor (number
1), steel wire (number 2), straight pins (number 3), safety pins (number
4), and wheat (number 5). A typical netput vector for a firm (that makes
two types of pins) would be (5,8,10,3,0). Interpret this: This firm
can take 5 units of labor (say, hours of work), and 8 units (feet?) of steel
wire, and make of them 10 units of straight pins and 3 units of safety pins.
Another feasible netput vector for this firm might be (=79, 120,200,0,0);
with 79 unifs of labor and 120 units of steel wire, it can make 200 straight
pins and no safety pins. Or suppose we had a firm that used inputs one
and two to make intermediate product three, and then used more input
one and intermediate product three to make product four. In this case,
its netput vectors could be either (,,,+,0) or (,,+,+,0). The first
would be appropriate if, in addition to the amount of intermediate good
it produced, the firm bought more from the outside. Then it would be a
net consumer of the intermediate product, and we would record its net
consumption as a negative number. If, however, it sold some of the inter-
mediate good, it would be a net supplier, and the second set of signs
would be correct. Of course, if it used precisely the amount of the in-
termediate product that it produced, its netput vector would look like
(-,,0,+0).
The firm's technological capabilities are, then, the set of all the netput
vectors of which it is capable. We denote this set of all feasible netput
vectors for a firm by Z, a subset of RK. The set Z is called the production
possibility set or the technology set for the firm. Elements z Z are called
netput vectors or production plans.
When K =2, we can draw pictures. Suppose this firm has one input,
 (the abscissa component) and one output, (the ordinate). The picture
for Z would be as in figure 7.1.
JR
rarer
7.1. Models of the firm's technological capabilities 235
y output
x input
Figure 7.1. A typical production possibilities set.
We sometimes think of the firm's capabilities as varying with the
amount of time over which the firm is operating. It is typically assumed
that the firm has greater flexibility in what it can do in the long run, so
some netput vectors are feasible in the long run but not in the short run,
When we wish to make such a distinction, we write Z' for the firms
long-run production possibility set and Z* for its short-run production
possibilities; the assumption that the firm can do more in the long run
than in the short is then written as Z C Z'.
Among the properties that a production set Z might have are:
Convexity: If z and 2 are both possible for the firm, then so is az+{1a)2 for
each o between zero and one. It is often hard to believe that this assumption is
realistic (see nonincreasing returns below), but it is a standard assumption
in economics.
Free disposal: If z Z and z' < z, then 2 Z. This is a dumpster
theory of production; the firm can always throw out stuff it doesnt want.
If one of the outputs of the firm were an effluent, we might doubt this
assumption. But as long as more of a commodity is better for someone,
better enough so that this someone will come and haul the stuff away, it
isnt so bad.
The ability to shut down: 0 Z, where 0 means the commodity vector of
all zeros. This seems reasonable if we are thinking of Z as a long-run
production possibility set and is less reasonable in the short run. (In the
short run, the firm may have contractual obligations to buy inputs, for
example.)
Nonincreasing returns to scale: If z Zand 0<a<l, then aze Z. In
words, if U.S. Steel can make steel in a big blast furnace, it can do so as well
in scaled-down blast furnaces. This assumption is implied by convexity
236 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
and 0 Z, since it consists of taking a convex combination of z and 0.!
The name might seem a bit hard to put with the property; it might better
be called nondecreasing returns to scaling down. (The name will make
more sense when we get to production functions.) People will sometimes
say decreasing returns to scale and mean nonincreasing returns. Since a
minimum efficient scale in blast furnace technology exists (a blast furnace
with the capacity for making one pound of steel per day is not likely to
be very efficient), this seems a dubious assumption. Nonetheless, it is
typically assumed.
Nondecreasing returns to scale: If z Z and oo > 1, then az Z. Or,
if U.S. Steel can run a big blast furnace, they can run two, or three, or
five and a quarter of them. This property is sometimes called increasing
returns to scale.
Constant returns to scale: If z Z and a > 0, then az Z. This is just a
conjunction of the previous two properties.
For the one-input, one-output case, the appropriate pictures of increasing,
decreasing, and constant returns to scale are easy to draw. If the pictures
don't appear instantly in your head, draw them.
Other assumptions are usually added to this list assumptions of
a technical nature that guarantee that the firm's maximization problem
(soon to be posed) has a solution. We will wait until such assumptions
are necessary before giving the one we will use. :
Inputs and outputs: Input requirement sets and iso-quants
In many applications, the commodities that are inputs to the firm are
clearly divided from those that are potential outputs. Suppose that we in-
dex the K commodities so that commodities 1 through N are inputs, N+1
through N+M are outputs, and N+M+1 through K have nothing what-
soever to do with the firm. In terms of the firm's production possibility
set Z, this division of commodities translates into: If z = (zy,..., 2x) Z,
then zz =0 for k=N+M+1,...,K,and z <0 for k=1,...,N. Note
that we dont preclude the possibility that the firm has a negative level of
its outputs; it could buy some of its potential outputs and throw them
away or, more realistically, outputs could be potential inputs to later stages
of production. This division, then, really binds only on inputs and no-
puts. We might wish to add one further assumption: If z; > 0 for some
kE=N+1,...,N+M, then z <0 for at least one k between 1 and N.
!Butis it equivalent to the two? Draw a picture to see that the answer is no.
7.1. Models of the firm's technological capabilities 237
Input #2
Input #1
Figure 7.2. A typical input requirement set.
That is, a positive level of any of the outputs requires some nonzero
amount of inputs.
When commodities are divided in this fashion into inputs, outputs,
and no-puts, we will change notation slightly. We'll write = = (zy,...,zn)
for the input vector, where now the levels of the inputs are recorded as
positive numbers, and y = (y,..., yn) for the levels of the outputs. That
is, (z,y) RN*M is a feasible input-output combination for the firm if .
z=(Z1,...,~ZN, P10, 0,-..,0) Z.
For a fixed level y = (y1,...,yn) Of outputs, we can ask if y is a
feasible level of outputs for the firm: Is there some feasible netput vector
z Z that gives this vector of outputs? That is, is there some vector of
inputs z such that z = (~z,y,0) Z? If so, we can go on to ask which
vectors of input z satisfy (=z,y,0) Z. Call the set of such z RY
the input requirement set for making the output vector y and denote it by
Viy).?
For the case of two inputs, a typical input requirement set is depicted
in figure 7.2. It is typical because it satisfies the following two properties:
Comprehensive Upwards: This is a fancy way to say that if z V(y) and
z' > x, then V(y). This is something like the free disposal assumption
on Z, but it is a bit weaker. (Can you draw a picture to show that this is
a weaker assumption?)
2 Formally, V(y) = {z RV : (~z,y,0) Z}, with V(y) = 0 if it is infeasible for the firm
to produce output vector y.
See =.
238 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
Convex: This is the obvious property. Convexity of each V(y) is implied
by, but does not imply, convexity of Z. (Can you provide a proof?)
This all concerns the input requirement set for one vector y of outputs.
We may want to discuss the input requirements for several levels at once,
in which case it is natural to suppose (and free disposal guarantees) a
nesting property: If y > , then V(y) C Vy); ie., it takes more to make
more. (Ff all input requirement sets are comprehensive upwards, and if
they nest in this sense, is free disposal implied?)
When we have this nesting property, the frontier of the input re-
quirement set is called the y-output iso-quant. In intermediate textbooks,
production possibility sets are often depicted by the iso-quants, which look
rather a lot like indifference curves.
The case of one output: Production functions
We can specialize still further in the case where the firm has a sin-
gle output, or M = 1. (Some of what follows will work for more than
one output, but it is rather a mess to draw and explain, so we'll restrict
attention to one-output firms.)
In this case, it is natural to suppose that from a given selection of
inputs z = (zy,...,zn) the firm will make as much output y as it can.
Hence we have what is called the production function, f (z), which gives
this greatest amount. Formally, f(z) = max{y: z V(y)}. Properties of Z
translate into properties of f as follows:
Free disposal implies that f is nondecreasing; you can make as much if you
have more.
Convexity of Z implies that f is quasi-concave; with a convex combination
of inputs, you can make (at least) the lesser of the two levels of output.
Alternatively, if each V(y) is convex and if the V(y) nest, then f is quasi-
concave. (We'll often go whole hog and assume that f is concave.)
Nondecreasing returns to scale in Z is the same as faz) > af(z) for a > 1.
If an author is fairly careful, the term increasing returns to scale will
mean that flax) > af(z) for a > 1. But some authors will be sloppy and
say increasing returns to scale when they mean only a weak inequality.
Nonincreasing returns to scale in Z is the same as flax) < af(z) for a > 1.
(Equivalently, we could say f(Bz) > Bf(x) for 0 < Bf <1. And remarks
@ Being very formal, this frontier is the set vi Uyrsy Vy").
7.2. The profit function 239
similar to those in the preceding property apply to the term decreasing
returns.)
Constant returns to scale in Z is the same as faz) = af(z), or fis homo-
geneous of degree 1.
7.2. The profit function
Profits and competitive firms
Having described the firm's technological capabilities, we ask which
production plan the firm will adopt. As noted previously, we conform
for now to the standard assumption that the firm seeks to maximize its
profits.
How do we formulate this objective? Begin with the general model
of a firm characterized by the production possibility set Z. We might be
very general about things and write II(z) for some function IT : Z R
as the profits accrued at production plan z. But we can be more specific:
Profits are revenues less the costs. If the prices of the K goods are given
by the vector p = (p1,---, Px), then the firm's profits at netput vector 2
are pl \DrZK =P 2: Note that the sign convention in a netput vector is
correct for this formula. Inputs are recorded as negative components in
z; if k is an input, 50 that z, < 0, the contribution to profits przx is
negative (assuming prices are positive).
Writing profits as II(z) = p- 2 involves an implicit assumption: The
firm, by its choice of activities, doesnt change the prices that it faces. We
made a similar assumption when we analyzed the consumer, namely that
a consumer's choice of consumption bundle didn't change the prices she
faced. Our excuse was that, excluding individuals such as J. D. Rockefeller,
it is unlikely that any single consumer can change the price of a good by
anything worth caring about simply by changing her own demand. Here
that excuse doesnt work quite as well. General Motors certainly changes
the price of Chevrolets when it changes the number of Chevrolets that it
produces. And it probably buys enough steel to have a noticeable effect
on the price of steel when it changes its production levels. So for large
firms that do affect the prices they face, we might write px(z) for the price
of commodity k as a function of the production plan the firm selects, and
so write the firm's profits as II(2) = Sr, pe(2)zx = pl2) - 2.
We will rarely be quite this general. We will want, in some places, to
consider cases where the firm does change prices of commodities by what
it does. But we will almost always be concerned with cases in which the
firm's effect on the price of commodity k depends only on the firm's level
240 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
of input or output of commodity k. That is, we will suppose that px(z)
can be written as pr (2), so that II(z) = Se, pez) zs.
We will use the following terminology. When the firm's level of ac-
tivities has no effect on the price of commodity k, we will say that the
firm is a price taker for commodity k, or that the firm is competitive in the
market for commodity k. When a firm is a price taker in all markets (so
that its profits are written very simply as p- z for the market prices p), we
will say that the firm is competitive.
Pictures from intermediate micro
In general, then, the firm solves the following problem:
Maximize p(z)} - z subject to z Z.
We can depict this problem rather easily.
Consider first the case where the firm is competitive, so that the firm's
problem simplifies to max.z p-z for some fixed p. Figure 7.3(a) gives the
usual picture for the one-input, one-output case. Iso-profit lines are given:
lines of the form p - z equal to some constant. Profits increase up and
to the right, and the firm picks the point in Z that is furthest up on this
scale. This looks quite similar to the consumers problem except that for
the consumer the feasibility st had a simple shape (it was a budget set,
with a flat surface), and the iso-objective curves, which are straight lines .
here, were iso-utility curves, which are typically curved.
Output Output
_.- Profit . Profit
maximizing ~~" maximizing
point point
psi Iso-profit -- Iso-profit
lines curves
Input Input
(a) - 
Figure 7.3. The firm's profit-maximization
problem for the one-input, one-output case,
In (a), we have a firm with no market power, whereas (b) gives the
picture for a firm with market power.
7.2. The profit function 241
The picture for the firm is a bit more complex if the firm isn't a price
taker. Now prices p will depend (by assumption) on the level of the firm's
activities z. Iso-profit lines become iso-profit curves curves along which
(2) - z is constant. In figure 7.3(b) we've drawn the typical picture. Note
the convexity of the iso-profit curves. This can be justified by various
assumptions about the firm's market power, to which you will not be sub-
jected here. Now the firm looks more complex than the consumer; both
the feasible set and the iso-objective curves are curved. But if we con-
sidered a consumer who had market power, this consumer would have
a convex budget set (under the right assumptions), and the two sorts of
problems would be identical mathematically.? The point is that at this
level the mathematics of the firm's and the consumers problems are ex-
traordinarily similar.
Analysis from intermediate micro
Besides drawing pictures, intermediate microeconomics texts (or, at
least, those that use calculus) carry on with some basic analysis of the
firm's problem, at least for the case of a firm that produces a single output
and so is described by a production function f. Given a production func-
tion f and assuming that the firm is competitive, we can write the firm's
problem as
N
TD] yr TN) DD pf) - > Wnt,
7=1
where p is the price of the output good and wy, is the price of input factor
n. Assuming f is differentiable and the solution is at an interior point?
the first-order condition for factor n is
of
Pox, = Wp.
This, in turn, is read according to the verbal formula: The value of the
marginal product of factor n should equal the price of that factor.
Suppose the firm is competitive in its factor markets but not in its
product market. For simplicity, assume that the price of the firm's output
b Except that in the case of the firm we have to worry whether its set of feasible plans is
sufficiently compact to guarantee the existence of a solution, something we dont need to
worry about in the analysis of the consumer. See also the discussion following the proof of
Shephards lemma.
3 Supply the changes required if one or more of the nonnegativity constraints is binding.
-
242 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
depends only on the level of that output and not (otherwise) on the levels
of inputs chosen, so we can write p(f (z)) for the price of the output good.
The firm's problem becomes
N
max p(fE)f@) =D wasn,
Z=(T1 ey TNS el
which (assuming p is differentiable and we have an interior maximum)
gives us the first-order condition (for =, x
(FN f@) + pF] (2) wn.
This is turned into the verbal formula: The price of each factor should equal
the marginal revenue product of the factor.
We could go on to cases where the firm has market power in some of
the factor markets. If we assume that the price of factor n depends only
on the amount of factor n used by the firm, so we can write w,{z,), the
firm's problem is
N .
eea20 (f(x) fz) 3 un(@n)an
and the first-order condition for factor n (at an interior solution) is
0 F@)f@) + pF] (2) = 0 (5) + Wn (En).
Tn
We can- call the right-hand side of this equation the marginal factor cost
of factor n, and then the first-order condition is verbally rendered: The
marginal factor cost of each factor should equal the marginal revenue product of
the factor.
The profit function for a competitive firm
Suppose we are given a competitive firm, described by a production
possibility set Z. At prices (which by assumption do not depend on the
# chosen by the firm) given by p, the firm is assumed to pick z to solve
the problem
maximize p - z subject to z Z. FP(p)
7.2. The profit function 243
When this problem has a solution for given prices p, we write w(p) for the
value of the objective function. This function 7 is called the profit function
of the firm.
Does the problem FP(p) have a solution for every vector of prices p,
or even for every strictly positive vector of prices? The answer is 10, in
general. If, for example, a firm has a constant returns to scale technology,
where it can convert n units of a single input (commodity k) into an units
of a single output (commodity K') for any n, and if px < (1 /a)py, then
our fortunate firm can make infinite profits. Our first order of business,
then, is to provide conditions under which we are assured that FP(p) has
a solution.
We make a very strong {and inelegant) assumption. For any two sets A
and B in RY, when we write A+ B we mean the set
{ce RX :z=a+bforsomea Aand be B}.
We write RY for the negative orthant in BR; that is, the set of points z RX
all of whose components are nonpositive.
Assumption. There is a compact set 7! such that Z' CZ C Z'+ RE.
Note that if Z itself is compact, it meets this assumption. On the other hand,
it is quite possible for Z to have the free disposal property and meet this
assumption. But increasing or constant returns to scale (for any nontrivial set
7) would violate the assumption. This is not unexpected; we just saw an
example where constant returns led to difficulties.
This assumption gets the result we want, which we state somewhat more
generally than we need.
Proposition 7.1. Suppose that 7 satisfies the assumption just given, and that
II: Z R is a continuous and nondecreasing function. (Nondecreasing means
that II(z) > II(z") if z > 2'.) Then the problem
r
maximize II(z) subject to z Z
has a solution, and (moreover) solutions may be found in Z'. In particular, if
II(z) = p- z for some nonnegative price vector p, then II is continuous and
nondecreasing, hence FP(p) has a solution.
The proof is rather easy if you know the relevant mathematics, so easy that
we dont even bother to give it as a problem.
This is not the weakest assumption possible to arrive at the desired con-
clusions. You will find other, weaker assumptions in the literature. Some of
J
 Please note that we use II for profits as a function of the production plan z, whereas
= gives maximal profits as a function of (parametric) prices. Do not confuse the two.
244 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
the development to follow can be extended to give partial results if no assump-
tion of the form above is made; instead the statements of subsequent results
are qualified with clumsy formulae such as: If FP(p) has a solution...; or
...for prices where 7m is defined. You are invited to provide such extensions.
If you skipped the technical excursions, we just guaranteed that FP(p)
has a solution for all nonnegative prices p. And with this we can proceed
to some results:
Proposition 7.2. Properties of the profit function.
(a) The profit function is homogeneous of degree one in prices.
(b) The profit function is continuous in p.
(c) The profit function is convex in p.
Part (a) is proved fairly easily. Suppose that z* solves FP(p). Then at
prices Ap for \ a positive scalar, z* gives profits \p- 2* = Ar(p), hence
a(Ap) > Aw(p). And if zt solves FP( Ap), then at prices p, zt gives profits
p- zl, so that m(p) > p- zt = (1/d)dpzt = (1/da(p), or Aap) > wp).
Combining.these two inequalities does it.
The proof of part (b) isa little bit technical. Let p" p. Let z be
a solution of FP(p") so that 7(p") = p* -z. By proposition 7.1 we can
assume that 2 is drawn from the compact set Z, hence any subsequence 
of {z"} has a convergent subsubsequence with limit in Z. Look along a
subsequence n in n such that lim, x(p) = lim sup,, 7(p"). Then looking
along a subsubsequence n of the subsequence n' where 2 converges to
some z Z, we have by continuity of the dot product that lim sup, w(p") =
lim, rp) = lima pr ot pz < x(p). Conversely, if z solves FP(p),
then. liminf, w(p") > lim, p -z = p-z = 7(p). That does it.
The proof of (c) is quite simple. Take any two prices p and p, and
any scalar a [0,1], and let p = ap+(1a)p. Let z Z solve FP(p"),
so that z(p) =p. z. Of course, since z remains feasible at prices p and
p, Wp) >p-z and x(p') > p'-z. Hence
mp") =p". z= (ap+(1a)p')-z
=ap-z+(1a)p'-z < an(p)+ (1 adap).
We go on to properties of solutions of FP(p):
7.2. The profit function 245
$ MDE, os Pleas Pr Peete ++ + PR)
a
Prep + Leta
pe Pe
Figure 7.4, Proving Hotellings lemma.
Proposition 7.3. (a) If z* is a solution of FP(p), then for any positive scalar X,
z* is a solution of FP(Ap).
(b) If Z is convex, the set of solutions of FP(p) is convex for each p.
Both of these are left for you as easy exercises.4
Finally, we have a result that has a name. In fact, it has two names:
Proposition 7.4. The Derivative Property, or Hotellings Lemma. Suppose
that the profit function a is continuously differentiable at price vector p*. Let
z* be any solution of FP(p*). Then for every k=1,...,K,
Oni, a
pk |p ke
If you think about this for a moment, you'll see that this implies that if +
is continuously differentiable at p, then FP(p) has a unique solution.
The proof can be provided by a simple picture. (if you remember
our proof that the derivatives of the expenditure function equal Hicksian
demands, you should have no trouble doing this without reading any
further.) If z* is a solution to FP(p*), then p* - z* = a(p*). Since z* is
feasible at any prices p, p-z* < m(p). Fix k. In figure 7.4 we graph the
functions
Pk api, +++; Diet Phe Phesta s+ Px) and Pr > Deri, +) pizk.
ifk
tif you are mathemcatically inclined, you may wish to continue with more properties of
solutions of FP(p). In particular, we will later wonder what ensures that FP(p) has a unique
solution. See problems 4 and 5.
 Math whizzes: Is the converse true?
246 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
We have seen that the second of these functions, which is linear, is every-
where below or touching the first, and it touches at px = p;. By assump-
tion, 7 is differentiable at p*, so the derivatives of the two functions must
be equal. And the derivative of the linear function is zg.
Or, in words, suppose the price of commodity k changes. We expect
that the firm will adjust its production plans. But if the change is small,
the difference (beginning from a profit-maximizing position) of staying at
the plan z* or moving to the new optimum is of second order relative to
the change in profits overall
You can also proof this result algebraically, using first-order conditions
from the firm's profit-maximization problem.
Of what use is this? Combining this result with the earlier result on
the convexity of = gives us some comparative statics results similar to
those in chapter 2. To begin, we record a mathematical fact.
Fact. If : RX R is a convex function and is twice continuously dif-
ferentable at the argument z* , then the K x K matrix of second partial derivatives
of , whose (kth element is [0/(zx0z;)|o~ is positive semi-definite; if
M(z*) is this matrix, then cM(z*)z > 0 forall x R. In particular, the
diagonal terms of this matrix are nonnegative. Of course, this matrix is also
symmetric. |
Corollary. Suppose a firm's profit function w is differentiable at prices p*.
Suppose as well that, for all points p in a neighborhood of p*, FP(p) has a ~
unique solution z*(p) which, moreover, is continuously differentiable in p. Then
the K x K matrix whose (k, j)th element is Oz} [py is symmetric and positive
semi-definite. In particular:
(a) 82} [8px = Bz}; /Op; for all j and k; and
(b) 8z}; [0px 2 0 for all k.
If you followed developments in chapter 2, you should have no trou-
ble seeing how this follows immediately. Parts (a) and (b) deserve verbal
restatements. Part (a) is a bit surprising; it says that the firm's reaction
to a penny change in the price of in terms of netput level z; equals its
reaction in z to a penny change in the price of j. You can consider cases
where both k and j are inputs, or where both are outputs, but it may
be most instructive to think through the case where k is an output and j
an input. If the price of output good k rises by a penny, we expect the
firm to increase its output and, therefore, to increase the level of its inputs.
Increasing the level of input j means that z; will become more negative,
50 in this case we expect 8z}/8px < 0. And if the price of input j rises by
7.2. The profit function 247
a penny, we expect the firm to cut its output; this is the straightforward
dz; /8p; < 0. Of course, (a) says more than this; it not only says that
the signs of the two partial derivatives agree, but also that the two agree
precisely in level. (This part is surprising.)
Part (b) is fairly clear. If k is an output and its price rises, we expect
the firm will increase its level of that output. Whereas if k is an input
and its price rises, we expect that the firm will decrease the amount that it
uses of that input, which means that zx (which is negative) will get closer
to zero, which is again a positive partial derivative.
You may rightfully wonder about the status of our assumption that
FP(p) has a unique and continuously differentiable solution in a neighbor-
hood of p*. We will not attempt to justify the differentiability part. But
for continuity and uniqueness of the solution, see problems 4 and 5.
Testable restrictions
In our study of the theory of the consumer, we posed the question:
What conditions on a finite set of demand data are implied by the model of
the consumer as a utility maximizer? We can ask a similar question here.
Suppose we see a finite amount of data about the production decisions of
a firm. These data are assumed to take the form: At prices p*, the firm's
netput vector is 2%, for i=1,...,1. When are these data consistent with
our model?
The answer is very simple to give if we maintain the hypothesis that
the firm is competitive and that its production possibility set Z hasn't
changed over the time frame for which we've gathered these data. Sup-
pose piz* > pi? for some j #1. Then we have a problem. We know that
4 is feasible for the firm. And from the given inequality, we know that,
at prices pf, 2 gives higher profits than 27. So why was 27 chosen when
prices were p? :
This consideration gives all the restrictions of the model:
Proposition 7.5. Suppose you are given a finite set of data of the form: At prices
pt, the firm chose netput vector 2, for i=1,... I. These data are consistent with
the profit-maximizing model of a competitive firm (whose production possibility
set isn't changing) if and only if for no pair i,j is it the case that p2* > pa.
ee 
T If the firm isw't competitive, the exercise gets quite complicated. Who is setting the
prices we observe, and with what objective? After chapters 9 and 10, you could take a run
at this sort of analysis with firms that aren't competitive. If we think that the firm's produc-
tion capabilities may be changing with changing prices or over the time that the data are
observed, then there is little we can say. But see problem 6.
248 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
The proof is trivial. If there are no obvious violations of profit maximiza-~
tion in the sense of the proposition, then one can take Z = {2',...,2}.
That is, the firm is capable of precisely the I observed netput vectors and
no more. (Why does this prove the proposition?) Of course, this is a very
odd looking production possibilities set, but we can fill in all the holes.
If we take Z to be the convex hull of the observed netput vectors, or
Z to be all netput vectors that are less or equal to points in the convex
hull (assuming all prices are nonnegative), we have Zs consistent with
the data. In fact, we might ask what is the largest candidate Z consistent
with the data? This is easy to give. For each i, let H; be the half-plane
{z RX : p* -. 2 < p*- 2'}. Then any Z that contains all the observed z
and that is contained within (1, H; is consistent with the observations.
It may help to give an example for the two-commodity case and draw
some pictures. Suppose the first commodity is the firms input, and the
second is its output. Suppose that
(a) At prices (1,1), the firm's netput vector is (3,5)
(b) At prices (1,2), the firm's netput vector is (6,7)
(c) At prices (2,1), the firm's netput vector is (0,0)
First check that these data are consistent with the model. At prices (1,1),
the firm chooses a netput vector that yields profits 2; the other two netputs
we know to be feasible give (at these prices) profits 1 and 0. So far, so -
good. At prices (1,2), the firm chooses (6,7), which gives profits 8; the
other two netputs we know to be feasible give profits 7 and 0. Okay again.
And at prices (2,1), the firm chooses a production plan that gives profits
0; at these prices the other two known-to-be-feasible production plans give
losses of 1 and 5, respectively. So these data are consistent with the model.
Now we draw pictures. Consider the first piece of data. In figure
7.5(a), we put in the point (3,5) (as a heavy dot) and through it we drew
the iso-profit line corresponding to prices (1,1). We also put in the two
other production plans we saw from the firm as open dots. It is important
that they lie below and to the left of the iso-profit line drawn in. We also
put in (as dashed lines) the iso-profit lines corresponding to prices (2,1)
and (1,2) through the production plans selected at those prices. Note once
again that in each case the other two points lie below and to the left of
the iso-profit lines.
What can we say about the production possibility set consistent with
these three pieces of data and the model? The set Z must, of course, con-
tain the three production plans that we observed. If Z is convex, it must
contain all the points in the heavily shaded region in figure 7.5(b) the
7.2. The profit function 249
@ : 
(
Figure 7.5. Testable restrictions in the model of the firm.
In (a), we show three pieces of data consistent with the standard model
of the firm. Each piece of data consists of a production plan and prices
at which that plan was chosen. Those prices are used to create iso-profit
lines for the plan chosen at those prices. And the data are consistent with
the model because all points chosen at some set of prices lie on or below
the iso-profit lines so created. In (b), we show the minimal possible Z
consistent with the model and these three data points if Z is convex
(the heavier shading) and Z is convex and has free disposal (the lighter
shading). In (c) we show the largest Z consistent with the model and
these three data points: Z must be contained within the intersection of
the half-planes lying below and to the left of the iso-profit lines drawn
in (a).
convex hull of the three points. If Z is convex and has free disposal, it
must contain all the points in the lightly shaded region in figure 7.5(b).
And in figure 7.5(c) we show the greatest possible extent of this pro-
duction possibility set, consistent with the data and the model. If any point
in Z lies above one of the three iso-profit lines through the respective se-
lected plans, that point would have been selected by a profit-maximizing
firm instead of the plan supposedly selected. Hence points in Z must lie
250 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
below these three iso-profit lines. The shaded region in 7.5(c) is just the
intersection of the half-planes referred to previously.
7.3. Conditional factor demands and cost functions
We turn next to the model of the firm with N identified inputs and
M outputs. We use the notation developed in section 7.1: The vector z
will denote an input vector; y will denote an output vector; Vy) will
denote the input requirement set for obtaining outputs at the levels given
by y; and, assuming the firm is competitive in factor markets (which we
do throughout this section), w = (wi,..-,ww) R will denote the prices
of the various inputs or factors of production.
Suppose the firm, for whatever reason, fixes on the idea that it must
produce outputs at levels y. It still will pick inputs in order to minimize
its costs of production; that is, it will solve
minimize w - x subject to x V(y). FCMP(w, y)
Here, FCMP are the initials of the firms cost-minimization problem.
We have fewer worries about the problem than we do about FP(p). In-
particular, existence of a solution is much less a problem. Assuming V{y) is
nonempty and closed, if the factor prices w are strictly positive, then we are
guaranteed a solution: Take any point = Vy). Since x is one feasible way
to produce y, costing w-, the optimal solution costs no more. That is, the
optimal solution must come from the set {e! EVy): ws Sw-a;2' > Of.
If V(y) is closed, this set is compact, ensuring the existence of a solution.
We write c(w, y) for the value of this cost-minimization problem, as a
function of the two sets of parameters, prices w and output level desired y.
This function c is called the cost function.
For the case of two inputs, we can give a very revealing depiction
of FCMP(w,y). (if you have taken a course in intermediate micro, you
are sure to have seen this picture.) In figure 7.6, iso-cost lines are parallel
straight lines, and the firm will select that point in V(y) that is as far
down in terms of cost as possible. This picture should remind you of
figure 2.4, the picture for the Dual Consumption Problem that defines the
expenditure function and Hicksian demand. Instead of a production iso-
quant for a given level of production, we had there an indifference curve
for a given level of utility. Instead of minimizing cost, we were minimizing
7.3. Conditional factor demands and cost functions 251
_ Cost minimizing point
Input #2
Iso-cost lines
Input #1
Figure 7.6. Finding the cost function in the two-input case.
expenditure. But the pictures are the same, and so, it turns out, are the
mathematics.
Proposition 7.6. Properties of the cost function.
(a) The cost function is homogeneous of degree one in w for each fixed y.
(b) The cost function is nondecreasing in w for each fixed y.
(c) The cost function is concave in w for each fixed y.
Parts (a) and (b) are left for you to prove. The proof of (c) should be old
hat by now, but Jet us give it a final time. Choose any two factor price
vectors w and w and some a [0, 1], and let w =aw+(1- aw. Let
z be any solution of FCMP(w",y). Then Vy), and x could be used
to produce y at prices w and at prices w. Of course, at these two sets of
factor prices something might be better than x, so that clw)y) <w-s and
c(w', y) < w'-x. And thus actw, y)+(1a)ew,y) aw-ct+(1a)w'-2=
wa =clw",y).
Solutions of FCMP(w,y) are called conditional factor demands, where
conditional refers to the fact that the output vector y is fixed.
Proposition 7.7. Properties of solutions of FCMP( w,y)-
(a) If x solves FCMP(w, y), then x solves FCMP(Xw, y) for all strictly positive
scalars X.
(b) If Vy) is convex, then the set of solutions of FCMP(w, y) is convex.9
ee ee
9 See problems 4 and 5 for more and, in particular, for conditions sufficient to guarantee
252 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
The proofs are left to you. You should have no problems by now.
Proposition 7.8. Shephard's Lemma. Suppose that c(w,y) is continuously
differentiable in w (for fixed y) at price vector w. Let z* be any solution of
FCMP(w*,y). Then
dclw,y)
Own,
3
=,.
wy)
As noted immediately following Hotellings lemma, this implies that if
clw,y) is continuously differentiable in w at w*, then FCMP(w*,y) nec-
essarily has a unique solution.
This should be compared to proposition 2.15. It is essentially the same
result, although we're a bit fancier here by noting that FCMP(w*,y) must
have a unique solution if is continuously differentiable in w rather than
assuming uniqueness of the solution. In any event, the proof is precisely
the same; use the same picture as figure 2.6, although the names of the
various objects change.
Tifne for a really technical aside. We have four applications of the en-
velope theorem, namely proposition 2.15, Roy's identity (proposition 2.16),
Hotellings lemma (proposition 7.4), and now Shephards lemma. Of the four,
all but Roy's identity were extremely easy, whereas Roys identity was only
easy. A difference between Roy's identity and the other three explains why
the three were easier. In proposition 2.15, Hotellings lemma, and Shephards
lemma, prices, as they change, change the objective function in the optimiza-
tion problem being studied. But the feasible set stays the same. In Roy's
identity, as prices change, the objective furiction (utility) stays and the feasi-
ble set (the consumer's budget set) changes. The latter is simply a bit harder.
You can't just sit at the old optimal solution and see what its value is at the
new prices; to remain feasible you have to move a bit from the old optimal
solution. If you can make sense of all this, think through: What would be the
analogous result for the following (quite daft) problem for a firm with one
output? Given a fixed budget to be spent on inputs, maximize the amount of
output you can produce, as parameterized by the prices of the inputs.
Suppose that for fixed output y, FCMP(w,y) has a unique solution
for each w in some neighborhood, and suppose, moreover, that these solu-
tions, viewed as a function w x (w,y), are continuously differentiable.
By virtue of proposition 7.6(c) and 7.8, we can now start developing results
of the usual sort based on the observation that the N x N matrix whose
that FCMP(w, y) has a unique solution.
h Same challenge as before: What is the status of the converse?
7.4. From profit or cost functions to technology sets 253
(,n)th term is 9z}/0w, is a symmetric, negative semi-definite matrix.
You ought to be capable of discerning the implications of this by now.
7.4. From profit or cost functions to technology sets
(This entire section is in small type for the technical reader.) In chapter
2, we posed the question: Given a set of alleged Marshallian demand func-
tions, are the given functions in fact demand functions for some consumer
conforming to the standard model? The reason for asking this question, we
said, was to build tractable models. It is hard to get closed form demand
functions from utility functions that give the sorts of parametric flexibility we
might like. But if we have an answer to the question, then we can start with
demand functions that have the desired parametric features and check that
they are in keeping with the standard model. .
For the same reason, we wish to be able to answer the question: Given
a profit function #, or given a cost function , under what conditions are
we certain that these arise from profit-maximizing behavior by a competitive
firm? We are interested in these questions because it might be convenient to
start with a profit function or a cost function instead of with a production
possibility set or a collection of input requirement sets.
We could, as well, put the question: Are given conditional demand func-
tions z* (whose arguments are pairs (w,y)) consistent with profit maximiza-
tion by a competitive firm? And although we didnt introduce the terminol-
ogy previously, we can ask: Suppose we are given supply/demand functions
2" (with domain the space of prices RX and range the space of netputs RX)
that are alleged solutions of FP(p) for some competitive firm. Are they in fact
consistent with the standard model?
We will give answers here for the profit and supply/demand functions.
We will assume that these given functions are smooth; the profit function
Gf that is what we are given) is twice continuously differentiable, and the
supply/demand functions (if that is what we are given) are continuously dif-
ferentiable. You may wish to adapt our results and analysis to cost functions
and conditional factor demand functions and (what is harder) to less smooth
candidate profit and supply/demand functions.
Proposition 7.9. (a) If a candidate profit function n is homogeneous of degree
one and convex, and if we define supply/demand functions 2* from = by z}(p) =
On /Opk, then these supply/demand functions are homogeneous of degree zero, and
the K x K matrix of terms 82} [8px for j,k =1,...,K is symmetric and positive
semi-definite.
(b) If candidate supply/demand functions z* are homogeneous of degree zero, and
the K x I matrix of terms 8z} [Opy. for j,k=1,...,K is symmetric and positive
semi-definite, then the profit function w defined by m(p) = p- 2*(p) is homogeneous
of degree one and convex.
(c) In either case (a) or (b), if we define from w the set Z given by
Z={zR":p.-z< nlp) forall p >0},
254
Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
then and z* correspond to a competitive firm that has production possibility set Zz.
To prove this we need to know:
(1) Euler's law: If : RE R is a differentiable function that is homogenous of
degree one, then (x) = x zx (B/Bzk).
(2) If is homogeneous of degree one, the functions 8 [8x are all homogeneous
of degree zero.
(3) If is homogeneous of degree Zero, wE zk(0/8zx) = 0.
These are easy to prove: Differentiate the identity (Az) = Ad(z) first with re-
spect to A for (1) and then with respect to = for (2). And for (3), differentiate
the identity (Az) = (z) with respect to A.
Thus if 7 is homogeneous of degree one, the supply/demand functions
defined in (a) are homogeneous of degree Zero. And the convexity of gives
the corresponding properties on the matrix of mixed partials of z*. This is
a).
 Conversely, if we have supply/ demand functions that are homogeneous
of degree zero, defining = from them as in (b) clearly gives us a function
homogeneous of degree one. For this =,
8 x 8z}
vw * kt
 Po = + 
Er zi{p) > pw Er
r ki=1
. K
Oz} .
=zx(p) + )_ Px! = z;(p),
2 Opi
where the next to last equality follows from the presumed symmetry, and the
last equality follows from (3). And then the positive semi-definiteness of the
matrix of mixed partials of z* implies that 7 is convex. This gives (b)-
Finally, for (c), we need to show that for every p, z*(p) is the solution
to the profit-maximization problem at prices p where choice is out of Z as
defined. Tt is immediately clear that no alternative production plan from Z
will give higher profits than 2*(p), since Z is defined precisely so this is
so. The key is to show that z*(p) is in Z as defined, which means that
op - 2*(p) < w(p)) for all p' > 0. This can be shown as follows: Since = is
convex, we can show that
wp) > (&' p)- Dr(p) + n(p) =p - Dp) p- Dlp) + mp),
where Dr(p) = (87/8ps,.-.,07/ 8pk)|p- (Consult a good book about convex
functions for this result) But by (1), p - Dw(p) = m{p), so this inequality
simplifies to #(p") 2 7 - Dap). And Dn(p) = 2"(p), 50 the inequality is
wp) > p' - 2*(p), which is just what we want.
Besides giving us useful test conditions for when a profit function or set
of supply/demand functions corresponds to a competitive profit-maximizing
7.5. Cost functions and -runs 255
firm, this result, or rather its proof, illustrates how one recovers the relevant
technology of a firm from profit functions and/or supply/demand functions.
The definition of Z given in the proposition is the key. Recall that in the
subsection on testable restrictions, we said that the largest possible production
possibility set consistent with a given set of data was the intersection of half-
planes given by those data. If you look at the definition of Z that is given,
you will see that it is nothing more than the intersection of the infinitely
many half-planes given to us by the supply/demand function! And then the
real magic in the proof is the demonstration that z*(p) for each p is in that
intersection, which is where the convexity of 7 comes in.
7.5. Cost functions and -runs
In section 7.3, we investigated properties of the cost function in factor
prices for fixed output level y. Now we suppose that w is fixed (as a
function of z) and look at the cost function as a function of output levels
y. We will deal throughout with the case of a one-output firm. *
Assume we have a one-output firm, and assume the technology of
the firm is described by the production function f(z). Fix factor prices w,
which we will allow to depend on the levels of the factor inputs. Define,
for each production level y,
TC(y) = min{w(z) - z: y = f(@)}
That is, TC(y) gives the cost of the least-cost combination of factor inputs
from which y can be produced. TC stands for total cost; we append the
T because we will shortly deal with other modifiers (average, marginal).
Note that we do not require that the firm is competitive in factor markets;
compare with our treatment of cost functions in section 7.3.
Assuming we have the cost function TC, the firms problem is to
maximize p(y)yTC(y). The first-order condition is oy +ply) = TC (y),
or marginal revenue equals marginal cost. The term e(y) = ply) /yp'(y) is called
(for various reasons) the elasticity of demand facing the firm; with this
definition, we can rewrite this first-order condition as
1 7
p(y) 1 + =) =TC'(y).
 Everything that follows concerning total and marginal costs would work easily for mul-
tiproduct firms. But what we will say about average costs doesn't extend at all easily; if you
have ever been involved in the allocation of joint costs among several products, you will see
why immediately.
256 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
TC.- $/y
Point of
minimum
ia
Output
Figure 7.7. Total cost, average cost, and marginal cost curves.
If the firm has no market power in the product market, so that p(y) = 0
and 1/e(y) =0 (the firm faces a perfectly elastic demand curve), the first-
order condition simplifies to p(y) = TC'(y), or price equals marginal cost.*
As for the geometry of the cost function, it is typical to define the
average cost function by AC(y) = TC(y)/y and marginal cost by M Cl) =
TC'(y), obtaining the picture in figure 7.7. Average costs always will be
falling whn marginal cost is less than average cost, and average costs
are rising when marginal cost is greater than average cost: To see this
differentiate AC(y) to get AC'(y) = TC'(y)/y TCy)/y* = (1/y)IMC(y) 
AC(y)]. Hence whenever MC(y) = AC(y), we are at a local minimum or
maximum (or, if we want to list all the cases, some other critical point)
of AC.
Suppose our technology exhibits increasing returns to scale over some
region. Then AC will be falling (or, at least, not rising), hence MC < AC.
This takes a proof, which you are asked to supply in problem 10. You
are also asked in problem 10 to show that the converse is not necessarily
correct. But when there are constant returns to scale, AC will be flat,
which means that AC = MC.
Fixed and variable costs as long- and short-run costs
In a number of models, the distinction between what a firm can do
in the long and short runs is modeled by supposing that there are certain
inputs whose levels cannot be shifted at all in the short run but that are
freely variable in the long run. In terms of the general formulation in
which a firm's technology is described by Z, we would begin with a
41f the equation 1/ = 0 when = k/0 bothers you, just use the first-order condition
p(y + p(y) = TC'(y).
7.5. Cost functions and -runs 257
long-run production possibility set Z!; there would be commodities, say
k=1,...,K, which are fixed in the short run, and for levels (31,-.., 2g) of
those short-run fixed levels of netput, the short-run production possibility
set of the firm would be
ZP={zeZ ig =tfork=1,...,K'}.
Note that we should index this set Z by (%,...,2%); as those levels
change, so does Z. Note also that this accommodates short-run fixed
levels of factor inputs and short-run fixed levels of required outputs. This
isnt entirely general: If the firm has short-run commitments that it must
meet but can exceed (say, it must supply 2x of good K), then it would
make more sense to define Z where the restriction on the level of zx is
ZK > 2 K -
Now consider the special case of a one-output firm whose technology
is given by a production function formulation and that is competitive in
its factor markets. The short-run restrictions are that levels of some of the
factor inputs are set. As usual, we index factor inputs by 1,2,...,N, and
welet 1,..., N' index those that are fixed in the short run, and N'+1,...,N
index those that are freely variable in the short run. In the short run,
then, we are stuck at some level of factor inputs (2;,...,%xy/), paying a
bill > 1 Wns for them. If we wish to produce y units of output, we
minimize short-run costs by solving
Tat e19 EN
Ns11
n=N+1
N
min { 3 n= i) (x)
The cost of the fixed factors, pu 1 Wnn, is called the fixed cost, or FC. The
minimum cost of the variable factors, given by (x), is called the (short-run,
total) variable costs, or TV C(y). (Implicitly, this function depends on the
levels of the fixed factors.) Of course, only TVC depends on y. Finally,
total costs are TC(y) = FC + TV C(y).
At this point, we can define average variable costs, average fixed costs,
average fixed-plus-variable costs, and marginal costs. The pictures are as
in figure 7.8. Since the variable costs, average variable costs, average total
5 For the remainder of this section, we will assume that the firm is a price taker in its
factor markets. You might ponder what changes if (1) wy, is a function of , or (2) wy isa
function of the entire vector z. In (2), consider in particular what happens if w,, for some
n < N' depends on z, for some n' > N'. .
258 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
$/ :
$ TC = SRTC N\ ac MC
AVC
TVC
Output level Output level
Figure 7.8. Short-run cost curves.
$/y
Output level Output level
Figure 7.9. Short- and long-run cost curves.
(fixed-plus-variable) costs, and marginal costs all are based on the short~
run consideration that some of the factors cant be varied, they are also
sometimes called short-run variable, short-run average variable, short-run
average fixed-plus-variable, and short-run marginal costs.
And, to conclude, we can in the long run vary all the factor inputs
to give us long-run total, average, and marginal costs. As we change the
quantities of the fixed factors, we trace out all the possible short-run cost
curves. Long-run cost curves (of the total and average variety) are the
lower envelopes of the various short-run cost curves. See figure 7.9. Note
that, in figure 7.9, some short-run average cost curves lie everywhere above
the long-run average cost curve. A SRAC curve is tangent to the LRAC curve
only if the fixed amounts of the short-run fixed factors are optimum overall for
some level of output. If (because, e.g., factor prices changed unexpectedly)
the firm is stuck with fixed factor amounts that are not optimal for any
long-run level of production, then the firm will have SRTC and SRAC
curves that are everywhere strictly above the LRTC and LRAC curves.
7.7. Problems 259
7.6. Bibliographic notes
Varian (1984) covers a number of topics not covered here, including
remarks on the geometry of cost functions, conditional factor demand func-
tions, and input requirement sets. (If an iso-quant is flat, what does that
mean for conditional factor demands? If an iso-quant is kinked, what are
the implications?) He also introduces the problems of empirical estimation
of production and cost functions.
We have been very loose in our treatment of technical issues such as
differentiability of demand /supply ard conditional factor demand func-
tions. All this can be done rigorously; see Sonnenschein (1987) for the
gory details.
References
Sonnenschein, FL. 1987. Lecture Notes in Microeconomic Theory. Princeton
University. Mimeo. 
Varian, H. 1984. Microeconomic Analysis, 2d ed. New York: W. W. Norton.
7.7. Problems
un 1. Below are six production functions for a firm that turns two variable
factors of production, capital k and labor [, into a single output y. Labor
is freely variable in the short and the long run. Capital is fixed in the short
run, but can be varied in the long run. Assume that the firm is a price
taker in the factor markets, that the price of capital is r, and the price of
labor is w. For each of these six production functions, what is the firm's
long-run total (variable) cost function? What is the firm's short-run total
(variable) cost function (given a level k of capital)? In the short and in the
long rum, does the firm exhibit increasing, decreasing, or constant returns
to scale?
@ fk,1)=k*IF for a>0,6>0,and a+f <1.
(b) Same as part (a), but a+ =1.
(c) How about a+ 8 > 17?
(d) fk, = (min [k/e,1/8])7, where @>0, f>0,and 0 <y <1.
(e) Same as (d), but y= 1.
@ fe,D=ck+{1~o)l.
260 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
2. (a) Show that if, for a given firm, Z has free disposal, then V(y) is
comprehensive upwards for every y. (Assume the firm has N inputs and
M outputs.) Show by example that the converse is false. If each V(y) is
comprehensive upwards and the nesting property holds (if y > 3, then
V(y) Vy), does the corresponding set Z have free disposal?
(b) Show that if Z is convex, then each V(y) is convex. Show by example
that the converse is false.
3. Suppose a one-output firm is described by a production function f(z).
Show that if the firm has free disposal, then f is nondecreasing. Show that
convexity of Z implies that f is quasi-concave. Show that nondecreasing
returns to scale in Z implies f(az) > af(z) for a > 1. Is the converse
true?
m4. Let Z*(p) be the set of all solutions of FP(p) for a firm whose produc-
tion possibility set Z is closed. Show that the correspondence p Z*(p)
is upper semi-continuous. Show that if FP(p) has a unique solution for
all prices in some region, then the function z*(p) defined over that region
is continuous. State and prove parallel results for the correspondence
p X*(p),of solutions of FCMP(w,y).
u5. Fora given production possibility set Z, we say that z Z is efficient
if there isno 2 Z such that 2 > z and 2 # z. Suppose that Z is convex
and has the property thatif z and 2 arebothin Z and a (0,1), then az+ -
(1 a)z' is not efficient. Show that this implies that, for a competitive firm
facing strictly positive prices p, the solution to FP(p) is unique. Construct
a parallel definition for input requirement sets V(y) and give a parallel
result concerning the uniqueness of solutions for FCMP(w, y).
m 6. Suppose that we have obtained a sequence of observations of the
production plans adopted by a firm for a sequence of prices. Specifically,
we observe at one time that, at prices p!, the firm chooses production
plan 2'; at a later time, at prices p?, the firm chooses plan 2%; and so
on, with the last observation being that at prices p the firm chooses
plan 2. The model we have is that the firm is competitive and chooses a
profit-maximizing plan from its production possibility set at each point in
time, but that the production possibility set may, because of technological
advances, be growing through time. That is, at the time of the first choice,
the firm has production possibility set Z?; at the second time, the firm has
a production possibility set Z? with Z' C Z?, and so on. In the spirit of
proposition 7.5, give necessary and sufficient conditions on the sequence
of observations being consistent with this sort of model.
7.7. Problems 261
m7. Suppose that for some reason we were interested in studying solutions
to the following problem: A firm produces a single output y from N
inputs z = (z,...,zx). The firm is given a certain budget that it can
spend on inputs, and the firm produces as much output as it can given
that budget. Letting B be the budget and supposing the firm is described
by a production function f(z) and that the firm is competitive and faces
factor prices w, we can define
yy (w, B) = max{flz) :w-z < B}.
Devise a theory concerning this problem in the spirit of the results we have
given concerning partial derivatives of y* and solutions to the problem
just posed.
u 8. Carry out the proofs of (1), (2), and (3) that are used in the proof of
proposition 7.9.
n 9. Give results in the spirit of proposition 7.9 for the cost and condi-
tional factor demand functions. If it makes things easier, you may restrict
attention to the case of a single output. (If you can do this, you may
want the further challenge of giving a proof of the integrability result
for Marshallian demand.)
= 10. Show that if the technology of a one-output firm has nondecreasing
returns to scale, then average costs for the firm (as a function of the amount
of output) will be nonincreasing. Show that if the technology has constant
returns to scale, then average costs are constant. Show by example that
the technology of a one-output firm may have nonincreasing returns to
scale and yet average costs for the firm fall with scale of the output, at
least for some levels of output. (All of these are for fixed factor prices and
a competitive firm.)
= 11. Consider the model of the competitive firm with NV inputs, one
output, and production function f. We say that the firm has homothetic
conditional factor demands if, for fixed factor prices w, the optimal condi-
tional factor demands do not change proportions as we change the scale
of output; that is, if z* solves FCMP(w, 1), then for every y > 0 there is
an oy) > 0 such that a(y)z* is a solution of FCMP(w, y).
(a) Show that the firm has homothetic conditional factor demands if f(z)
takes the form @(F(z)) for a function F : RY s R that is homogeneous
of degree one and : R R is strictly increasing.
262 Chapter seven: The neoclassical firm
(b) Which of the production functions in problem 1 give homothetic con-
ditional factor demands?
(c) If a firm has homothetic conditional factor demands and nonincreasing
returns to scale, what can you say about the behavior of average costs as
scale increases (for fixed factor prices)?
(d) Give an example of a firm without homothetic conditional factor de-
mands.
chapter eight
The competitive firm and
perfect competition
Now that we have a way to model firms, we can include them in models
of price-mediated, market equilibrium. In this chapter we will consider
market equilibria for competitive firms, firms that act as price takers.
We move immediately to a caveat: In all the models of this chapter,
there will be a finite number of firms and (at least implicitly) a finite num-
ber of consumers. Prices will change if there are changes in the aggregate
supply and demand decisions of firms and consumers, sO it cannot be cor-
rect that all firms and all consumers do not affect prices by their actions. If
there are many firms and consumers, each individual firm and consumer
may have very small effect on prices, but the effect is not zero. The theory
we develop is not based on a hypothesis that firms and consumers have
no effect on prices. Instead it is based on the hypothesis that they act as if
they have no effect; consumers choose what to consume and firms choose
their production plans in the belief that the prices they see are unaffected
by their decisions. Consumers and firms, then, act on an incorrect sup-
position. But if, the story is meant to go, there are many consumers and
firms, and if no single consumer is a J. D. Rockefeller and no firm is a
General Motors, then these suppositions are only a little incorrect.
There are two ways to proceed in the theory. We could continue
analysis of general equilibrium in the style of chapter 6, but with firms
added to the story. Or we can undertake partial equilibrium analysis 
analysis of the market in a single good (or in a few related goods), holding
fixed what goes on outside our limited frame of view. We will do both
of these, and in doing so we begin an important transition in the style
of this book. After the general equilibrium parts of this chapter, we will
generally tend to look at quite small pieces of a larger economic picture;
our attention hereafter will usually be very focused.
This is not to say that general equilibrium is completely broad and all-
encompassing. Even if we have a model that incorporates all markets, mar-
ket behavior is still embedded in a larger social and political environment,
264 Chapter eight: The competitive firm and perfect competition
which general equilibrium takes as given. The difference between our
partial equilibrium analyses and general equilibrium analyses is one of
degree and not of type. But, as you will see, the difference in degree is
substantial.
We begin with the classic partial equilibrium analysis of perfect com-
petition. We then develop an example that shows how a partial equilib-
rium perspective can be misleading, and with that as stimulus, we briefly
discuss general equilibrium with firms.
8.1. A perfectly competitive market
In the standard partial equilibrium analysis of perfect competition, we
imagine a number of firms, all of whom can produce a single good, which
is sold to comsumers in exchange for some numeraire good, money. The
market operates under the following qualitative conditions.
(a) The consumers of the good in question are happy to have the good from
any of the many producers/ vendors of the good. No vendor of the good
has any particular advantage in selling to any consumer; no consumer
would kndwingly pay a higher price to one vendor if the good can be had
from another vendor at a lower price. In jargon, the good is undifferentiated
and/or is a commodity.
(b) The consumers have perfect information about the prices being charged"
by the various vendors of the good.
(0) Vendors of the good are willing to sell to any buyer, and they wish
to get as high a price as they can. They have perfect information about
prices being paid by consumers elsewhere, and they have the ability to
undercut competitors if it is worth their while.
(d) Resale of the good in question cannot be controlled, and both sale and
resale are costless.
These four conditions are taken to imply that all exchanges will take
place at some single price for the good. These conditions are also taken to
imply that prices are linear; there is a single unit price for the good, and if a
consumer wishes to purchase n units of the good, he or she pays n. times whatever
unit price the good commands.
To justify formally that there will be a single price and prices will be
linear, we would need to flesh out a precise model of the market insti-
tutions. We would have to say what the forum for these exchanges is,
how prices are set, and so on. In the theory of perfect competition, this
8.1. A perfectly competitive market 265
specification is not done. Rather, the italicized conclusions just given are
really the assumptions of the theory, and the four things listed as con-
ditions are our excuses for these real assumptions. It is held that in real
markets where the four conditions and the others that follow hold to some
degree of approximation, the conclusions listed above and others that fol-
low will be borne out. This, of course, is an empirical question. For some
industries this is true, and for others it is not.!
We could alternatively imagine that the good in question can be sold at
nonlinear prices, in the sense that quantity discounts or premia can be charged
to individual consumers and consumers shop for the best price schedule. For
this sort of thing to work, it must be possible to control resale of the good.
A possible example of this would be telephone services in the United States,
where phone services are not offered by a (government or other) monopoly;
AT&T, MCI, Sprint, etc, might offer quantity discounts, where resale of
phone services is not possible if the service is tied to a particular phone in a
particular location. Even if resale is not possible, if there is really very good
information about the prices the various carriers charge and if consumers
dont mind from which carrier they buy phone services, then we can imagine
perfect competition in this industry without linear prices. But we won't try
that on a first pass through the subject.
To continue with informal conditions:
(e) Each individual consumer takes price as given. No consumer believes
that he or she could in any way change the price paid per item by changing
his or her level of demand for the item.
() The producers/vendors of the item in question (which will hereafter
be called the firms) also take as given the market price for the good in
question. They believe that they can sell as much of the item as they wish
at the going price, and they can sell none at all at a higher price.
So we are led to the following:
Definition. Equilibrium in a perfectly competitive market is given by a
price p for the good, an amount purchased by each consumer, and an amount
supplied by each firm, such that at the given price each consumer is purchasing
1 If you wish to see an industry where the assumptions and predictions of perfect compe-
tition can be tested, read about the Oil Tanker Shipping Industry, as described in the Harvard
Business School Case #9-384-034. (This case is reprinted in Porter [1983], which contains
a number of other cases that provide interesting illustrations of concepts discussed in this
book.) If you do this, be forewarned that this is an industry in which the model of perfect
competition both works and doesnt work. We'll say a bit more about this epigram in a later
footnote.
266 Chapter eight: The competitive firm and perfect competition
her preferred amount and each producer is maximizing profits, and the sum of
the amounts purchased equals the sum of the amounts supplied.
The reader is more than entitled to some befuddlement at this definition.
How can we say what a consumer will demand as a function of the price
of this one good? How can we say what a firm will supply? Presumably
we will use the model of the consumer from chapter 2, but then we need
to know what the other prices are and what form the consumers wealth
takes: perhaps an amount of the numeraire good, as in the stories of Mar-
shallian demand in chapter 2; or some endowment bundle, as in chapter 6.
As for firms, presumably they will all be described by one of the methods
explored in the last chapter. But we will need to say something about the
entire array of prices they face.
The consumer side: Demand curves
In most treatments of partial equilibrium analysis, the consumer side
of the market is pretty much ignored. In the back of our minds are con-
sumers as in chapter 2 and an assumption that prices of other goods that
the consumers might consume are fixed? And so in the back of our
minds is gn assumption that we can write, for each price p that the good
in question might command, the total amount the consumer side of the
market will demand, denoted D(p). All these things stay in the back of
our minds, and we simply take as given a demand curve D(p). Moreover,
it is typically assumed that this demand curve is downward sloping 
more is demanded the lower the price of the good.
Nothing stops us from bringing all this up to the front of our minds.
We could present a detailed model of the consumer side of the market.
Later, when we look at competitive markets in which the goods aren't
quite commodities and we become interested in the shape and character
of aggregate demand, we will do just this. And we will do this when, for
various reasons, we become interested in a more detailed look at market
institutions. 
But the focus in the classic partial equilibrium analysis of perfect com-~
petition is on firm behavior, so it is typical to simplify the consumer side
and simply posit the existence of a downward sloping demand function.
2 But see section 8.3.
 If you wish to see a bit of this, look ahead to problem 3 in chapter 10. The issue there is
one of rationing a limited supply among a aumber of consumers. Specifically, we ask how
the rationing scheme employed for one good affects demand for a second good. Since ra-
tioning schemes work at the level of individual consumers, we have to disaggregate market
demand and consider the preferences of individual consumers and how those preferences
and different rationing schemes lead to amounts demanded for the second good.
8.2. Perfect competition and -runs 267
this chapter.
Firms: The supply function
We attend to firms in greater detail. We will assume that each firm
produces only the good in question from some array of factors of pro-
duction. There will be J firms, indexed j = 1,...,J, and firm j il be
described for now by a total cost function T'C;(y). Since firm j acts com-
petitively in the product market, if the equilibrium price of the good is
firm j supplies the amount y;(p) that solves 
MC;(y;(p)) =p.
And total supply at price p is S(p) = po yi).
It is typical to assume that total costs are convex, so that marginal
costs are nondecreasing and the first-order condition M Cyt) = p gives
an optimal level of production. If total costs are strictly convex marginal
costs are strictly increasing, and the supply of the firm at price y;(p) is
uniquely defined and increasing in p. PoE
If this holds for all firms, S(p), hereafter called industry supply, is
strictly increasing. And now putting together the unmodeled demand
side of the market specified by the demand function D(p) and the slight}
modeled supply side characterized by the supply function S(p), we Save
an equilibrium at the price p where D(p) = S(p). One has the standard pic-
tures from intermediate and even principles textbooks shown in figure 8.1
Note well one graphical characterization developed there: The industry
suppl . . os , .
PPY curve is the horizontal sum of individual firms marginal cost
8.2. Perfect competition and -runs
The short and intermediate runs
If the story stopped there, we wouldn't hav
3 e much of a story.
proceed to elaborate the supply side story. 2 story Se we
(1) We imagine that the firms are characterized by production functions
plus a fixed cost. If firm j is in the business of producing this good, it
must pay a fixed cost K;. It must pay this cost even if chooses to produce
zero output; this cost is avoided only if the firm leaves the industry, an
option firms will not be given for now. And if the firm is in business
it produces output from various combinations of N factor inputs, where
1
268 Chapter eight: The competitive firm and perfect competition
D(p)
@
8
 E
Be g
~ =
Quantity (a) Quantity (b)
Supply from:
ppl rom )
Firm 2. g
 Dl
= +
Quantity (d) yi(p) Quantity (c)
D(p)
@
. 2 Sp)
. =
Quantity (e)
Figure 8.1. Equilibrium in a perfectly competitive market.
Demand is given in the form of a downward sloping demand curve, as
depicted in (a). Each firm has a total cost curve as in ) and a corre-
sponding marginal cost curve as in (c). At each price ? firm j supplies
the amount y;(p) that equates marginal cost with price (shown in [cD
Industry supply is obtained as the horizontal sum of individual firms
supply functions, which is just the horizontal sum of individual firms
marginal cost functions (shown in [d}). Equilibrium is where supply
(computed in [d]) intersects demand (given in [a]). Superimposing (a)
and (d), we get () and the equilibrium price and quantity.
fi{z1,..., zn) denotes the production function, the amount of output de-
rived from factor inputs (z1,...,zn). Note well: The total costs of firm 3g
if 7 uses the factor inputs (z1,...,zy) is the sum of costs of those inputs
plus the fixed cost Kj.
(2) We imagine that the firms are price takers not only in the market for
8.2. Perfect competition and runs 269
their output but also in the factor markets, and we let w = (wy,..., wy) be
the vector of factor prices, which is taken as fixed throughout our analysis.
(3) We imagine that firms begin with some initial levels of the factor inputs,
some of which can be adjusted in the short run, while others can only
be adjusted in the intermediate run. :
Breaking time in this fashion, into a short run and an intermediate
run and then partitioning the factor inputs into those that are short-run
adjustable and others that are intermediate-run adjustable is hardly real-
istic. It would be more realistic to suppose that some of the firms can
change the levels of all their factor inputs quickly, while others may be
able to change very little until a lot of time has elapsed. Still, we explore
what will happen in this market in the short and in the intermediate run,
assuming that these time frames are meaningful and apply to all firms in
the industry, and assuming that what is fixed in the short run for one firm
is fixed in the short run for all.
We assume that factor inputs n=1,..., N' are fixed in the short run
and variable in the intermediate run, and factor inputs n= N +1,...,N
are variable in both the short and the intermediate run. We also assume
that the industry starts off at a point where firm j has been using factor
inputs at the levels (#, een ER).
What, then, does industry supply look like in the short run? In the
short run, the total variable cost function of firm J, written SRTVC;(y) is
N .
min { > n= he Sg).
(ET pt419en END) Barri
and the short-run total cost function is
NY
SRTC;(y) = SRTVC;() + y wad, + Kj.
i=l
The short-run marginal cost of firm j is the derivative of the short-run total
cost (which is the same as the derivative of the short-run total variable
cost), and short-run industry supply is the horizontal sum of the firms
short-run marginal cost curves, just as in the previous section.
What does it take for SRT'C to be strictly convex?
Proposition 8.1. If the production function f is strictly concave, then the total
cost function (for fixed factor prices, for any run as long as some of the factors
are variable) is strictly convex.
270 Chapter eight: The competitive firm and perfect competition
This is left for homework.
In the intermediate run, the total variable cost function of firm jis
N
IRTCi(y) = in {nen cy = fila, - + Kj.
19
This gives intermediate-run marginal cost curves, and the intermediate-
run industry supply curve is the horizontal sum of these marginal cost
curves.
How will short-run and intermediate-run supply curves compare?
The easiest way to think about this is to begin with the relevant short-
and intermediate-run total cost curves. In the short run, where the firm
can adjust only variable factors of production, the total cost of production
will be everywhere at least as much as intermediate-Tun total cost. As
long as the short-run fixed factors of production are at an optimal level
for some level of output, the two total cost curves will touch at that level
of output. We're assuming rising marginal costs, 80 total costs are CONVEX;
the picture is as in figure 82(a). And now marginal cost is the slope
$=TC , $/y=MC
1G)
Figure 8.2. Short and intermediate-run total
cost curves and marginal cost Curves.
8.2. Perfect competition and -runs 271
of total cost, so that the two marginal cost curves are as in figure 8.2(b).
Note well: This has been drawn so that short-run marginal cost is lower
than intermediate-run marginal cost for all low levels of output and higher
for all high levels of output. But this particular drawing of the two isn't
necessarily implied by figure 8.2(a). In figures 8.2(c) and (d) another case
is given. What is implied in general is that short-run marginal cost is
lower than intermediate-run marginal cost for quantities just below the
point where the two total costs are tangent and is higher at quantities just
above.? .
This tells us how supply changes from the short to the intermediate
run. What about demand? There are certainly good reasons to think
that demand in the short-run will be different from demand in a longer
intermediate-run time frame. If, to take one case, the good in question is
a variable factor of production in some downstream production process,
then short-run demand for it will be based on calculations that do not
allow producers to substitute it for (or substitute for it) more-fixed factors
in downstream production. In the intermediate run, substitution of/for
more fixed factors may come into play. We'd expect demand to shift
according to the run in such cases. Even if the good in question is a final
consumption good, we can think of reasons that short- and intermediate-
run demand will be different. If the good is somewhat durable, then a
price shift, say a rise, will likely reduce demand more in the short run
than it will in the longer run. (Why?) If the good is an addictive good, the
reverse is true. (Why?) Despite these examples, it is typical in the theory
to work with the case where market demand doesnt change with changes
in the me frame, and we will henceforth make that assumption.
The long run
We continue to elaborate the theory by adding a long-run time frame.
We begin with J firms producing the good in question. But we imagine
that these J firms are not committed forever to continue producing the
good, and we imagine that there are many potential producers of the good
in question. In the long run, firms can enter and/or leave this industry:
Firms that are in the industry are assumed to depart if at equilibrium
prices they are sustaining losses. And firms will enter the industry if at
equilibrium prices they can make strictly positive profits.
3 Can you prove this?
4 Admittedly, this is cheating a bit, since we didnt mention in our discussion of the
demand side of the market the possibility that demanders are other firms. But there are
certainly markets in which this case would pertain.
Note well: Firms that can at best make zero profits are just on the
cusp of the entry/exit decision. A firm that is producing and makes zero
profits will be willing to remain, whereas a firm that is not producing and
would make zero profits at the going equilibrium price is assumed to stay
out.
We formalize this elaboration as follows. We imagine that many firms
could be in this business, indexed by j = 1,...,J* for a very large J*.
Each firm is characterized by a production function f; and a fixed cost
K;, as stated. Then,
Definition. A long-run equilibrium in a perfectly competitive market con-
sists of (a) a price p for the good, (b) a list of active firms taken from the list of
all potentially active firms, and (c) for each active firm, a production plan such
that
(d) Each active firm is maximizing its profits, taking prices as given, at the
production plan prescribed in (c)
(e) Each active firm is making nonnegative profits with its production plan
(f) Each inactive firm would make nonpositive profits at best, taking prices as
given, if it became active
(3) The total supply from the active firms, gotten by summing their output levels
as specified by their production plans, equals market demand at the equilibrium
price p
Note that this is just a specialization of our general definition of equilib-
rium in a perfectly competitive market, if we think that the long-run total
costs for each firm are zero at zero level of production and rise to Kj if
any production at all is undertaken.
It does seem rather a mess, but we make a fair bit of progress in
clearing up this mess if we add one final assumption.
Assumption *. For every firm that is potentially active in this business, there
are many other potentially active firms that have precisely the same production
function and fixed costs.
b Recall the earlier epigrammatic comment about the model of perfect competition hold-
ing and not holding in the oil tanker shipping industry. With regard to this, rote that firms
might behave in the way the theory says they do in the short and intermediate run, and at
the same time behave quite crazily from the perspective of the theory in the long run. Then
short- and intermediate-run predictions of the theory could be borne out, while long-run
predictions, which we are about to develop, would fail.
8.2. Perfect competition and -runs 273
Informal Proposition. If assumption * holds, then in any long-run equilibrium,
all active firms make precisely zero profits.
We call this an informal proposition because it is based on the very infor-
mal many in the assumption. The logic runs as follows: For any active
firm in a long-run equilibrium let 7 be its level of profits. If there are
many firms like this one, some of those will be inactive. This is the sense
of many; it must be that for vety active firm at least one firm identical to it
is inactive. In a long-run equilibrium, all inactive firms must be capable of
making zero profits at best. Since there is an inactive firm identical to our
active firm, it could (if it entered) make profits =. So 7 must be nonnega-
tive, if the active firm is to stay active. And 7 must be nonpositive, if the
inactive firm is to remain inactive, which implies that = must be zero.
Suppose that an active firm is, in fact, making zero profits at the equi~
librium price p. Consider where it is producing along its long-run average
cost curve. It must be producing at its point of minimum long-run average cost,
and this minimum level of long-run average cost must be the equilibrium price,
To see this, first note the accounting identity
Profit = [Price LRAC(Quantity)] x Quantity,
where LRAC is the long-run average cost function. Now if price exceeds
the minimum level of LRAC, the firm, by producing at the level of min-
imum LRAC, would make positive profits. If price is less than the min-
imum level of long-run average costs, the firm cannot make nonnegative
profits at any level of output. The only way that a profit-maximizing,
competitive firm can make zero profits is if price equals minimum LRAC.
And the firm thenl makes zero profits only by producing at a quantity that
minimizes LRAC.
This discussion leads immediately to the following corollary to the
informal proposition.
Informal corollary. If assumption + holds, then in any long-run equilibrium
every firm is producing at efficient scale, where efficient scale is any scale that
minimizes the average. costs of the firm. :
Assumption + is often made part of the defining characteristics of a per-
fectly competitive industry. The justification for it is that in a competitive
industry, no firm has a technological advantage over any other what-
ever technologies there are will be freely available to anyone who cares
to use them. Hence we always will have potential entrants identical to
anyone who is active in the business.
274 Chapter eight: The competitive firm and perfect competition
And once we have assumption *, we arrive at the conclusion: In
a long-run equilibrium, firms make zero profits and produce at efficient
scale.
Of course, the rest of the assumptions of the theory hang together
very nicely if we dont make assumption *. Think, for example, of the
wheat farming industry. We might well consider wheat to be a commodity
good with a single, well-known price, which all wheat farmers and wheat
buyers take as given. Still, some wheat farmers are lucky enough to own
Jand that is especially good for growing wheat; these farmer-firms have
a technology that is superior to the technology owned by farmer-firms
who farm less fertile land. So we expect those farmers to make strictly
positive profits.
When we dont make assumption *, 50 it is possible that firms can
make positive profits in a long-run equilibrium, we also dont expect those
firms to be producing at efficient scale. In fact, they won't do so; these
firms will always produce at larger-than-efficient scale. You are asked to
prove this in problem 2.
In such cases, one can (and some authors do) define things so that,
even though assumption is not made, profits still equal zero in a long-run
equilibriuth. This is done by saying that what a firm with a productive
advantage earns are not profits, but rather rents to its advantaged pro-
duction capabilities. These rents come off the top as costs to be paid for
the advantaged technology, sO that the firm is back to making zero profits.
(If you like this sort of proof-by-definition, consider why this means that
the firm now is producing at the point of minimal LRAC)
An example
To clarify some of the points made, consider the following simple
example. The numbers in this example are selected because they give
relatively clean and simple answers; they are not meant to be at all realistic.
In a particular economy, a product called pfillip, which is a nonnar-
cotic stimulant, is produced by a competitive industry. Each firm in this
competitive industry has the same production technology, given by the
production function
y= Ee,
where y is the amount of pfillip produced, k is the amount of kapitose
(a specialty chemical) used in production, and [ is the amount of legume
(a common vegetable) used in production. Firms also incur fixed costs
of $1/6.
8.2. Perfect competition and -runs 275
Legumes are traded in a competitive market, and the price of a unit
of legume is a fixed $1, regardless of the amount of legume demanded
for the production of pfillip. The level of legume can be freely varied in
the short run. Kapitose is traded in a competitive market, at price $1 /2.
The amount of kapitose used by any firm in production cannot be varied
in the short run but can be adjusted in the intermediate run.
Many firms could enter this industry in the long run, and firms are
free to depart. All firms, both those in the industry and potential entrants,
have the technology and cost structure just described.
Demand is given by the demand function D(p) = 400 100p, where
p is the price of pfillip and D(p) is the amount demanded at this price.
What is the long-run equilibrium in this perfectly competitive market?
As a first step, let us compute the total cost function of each firm in
this industry, where we assume that the firm can vary both its level of
kapitose and legume inputs.
The cost-minimizing way to produce y units of output is the solu-
tion of
k
5 : 1/671/3
min 5 +1, subject to k '>uy.
It is clear that the solution will have the constraint binding. (We should
put in nonnegativity constraints, although they will not bind and so we've
left them out.) Since the constraint will bind, we can solve for k in terms
of I to obtain k = y*/I?, and so the problem becomes
6
Y
min 5 + 1
The first-order condition is
yt
7=5h or l=vy* and k=9
eee eee
5 We will use models with linear demand throughout this book, and it should always be
understood that demand is nonnegative; that is, D(p) is really max{400 100p,0} in this
example. We also should be careful about demand at a price of zero; what is important is
that revenue at a price of zero is zero.
so that the long-run total cost for producing y is
3, 1
TC =3y tz
From this we can easily find the long-run equilibrium price: It must be
the minimum value of average cost. Average costs are given by AC(y) =
(3/2)y + 1/(6y), which is minimized at 3/2 = 1/(6y%), or y = 1/3. That
is, producing 1/3 of a unit is the efficient scale for firms in this industry.
And when firms produce 1/3 of a unit, they have average costs of $1. So
the long-run equilibrium price is $1.
At this price, demand is 400 100(1) = 300, so total industry demand
is 300. And since each firm will be producing 1/3 of a unit, there will
have to be 900 active firms.
To summarize, at a long-run equilibrium 900 firms will be active, each producing
1/3 of a unit, for a total industry supply of 300 units. The equilibrium price will
be $1, and each firm will be making zero profits. Each of the 900 firms will be
utilizing 1/9 unit each of legume and kapitose.
Now suppose the demand curve suddenly shifts, becoming D(p) = 750 
150p. What will be the industry response in the short run, in the long run, and
in the intermediate run?
We will take the short run first. In the short run, there are 900 firms,
each of whom is fixed at 1/9 units of kapitose. If any of these firms wishes
to have output level y, they must employ enough legume [ so that
(1/9813 = y or (1/9 = y or | = 3.
This gives total variable costs of 3y*. Hence the short-run marginal cost
function of the firm is MC(y) = 9y*. And so, at price p, a single firm
supplies the amount y(p) that solves 9y(p)* = p or y(p) = /p/3. Since
there are 900 identical firms, industry supply at price p is 900 times this,
or S(p) = 300,/p. The short-run equilibrium price is where short-run
supply equals demand:
300,/F = 750 150p.
If you solve this equation for p, you get (approximately) p = 2.1.
8.2. Perfect competition and -runs 277
The short-run equilibrium price is $2.10. At this price, total industry demand is
750150(2.1) = 435, which is divided among the 900 firms so that each firm pro-
duces approximately 483 units. This requires each firm to employ approximately
338 units of legume. Each firm must also pay the cost of the fixed 1/9 unit of
kapitose and the 1/6 fixed cost, for total costs of 338 + (1/9)X1/2) +1/6 = 56
against which each firm makes revenue of (2.1)(.483) = 1.014, for a profit per
firm of 454.
Moving to the intermediate run, we still have 900 firms active, but now
each has total cost function (3/2)? + 1/6, or marginal costs MC(y) = 3y.
Hence at price p, each firm supplies (in the intermediate run) 2/3 units,
and the intermediate-run industry supply curve is 300p. Intermediate-
run equilibrium is where 300p = 750 150p or p = 5/3 = 1.667. So we
conclude:
The intermediate-run equilibrium price is $1.667. At this price, total industry
demand and supply equal 500 units, and each firm produces 5/9 of a unit. This
costs the firm (3/2)(5/9)*+1/6 = 34/54, against revenues of 5/3)(5/9) = 25/27,
for a net profit of 16/54 = $.296. (We leave it to you to work out kapitose
and legume utilization per firm.)
And the long run is easiest of all. We already know that at the long-
run equilibrium price must be $1 and each firm must produce 1/3 of a
unit. So,
The long-run equilibrium price is $1, which means that industry demand is for
600 units. Each firm produces 1/3 of a unit, so the number of firms doubles to
1,800. Each firm makes zero profits, and each firm utilizes 1/9 unit each of legume
and kapitose.
We draw these dynamics in figure 8.3. We show there the original
demand curve and the long-run supply curve in solid lines. Note that
the long-run supply curve is horizontal as it must be in this sort of in-
dustry. The short-run and intermediate-run supply curves beginning from
the initial equilibrium position are drawn in as dashed lines; note that the
short-run supply curve has the steepest slope. We also draw in the new
demand curve as a dashed line, and we mark the stages of industry re-
sponse to the shift in demand: (1) marks the original equilibrium, (2) the
new short-run equilibrium, (3) the new intermediate-run equilibrium, and
(4) the new long-run equilibrium. Note that equilibrium quantities rise
at each stage, and prices jump way up and then move down. Also note
(not from the picture) the pattern of kapitose and legume usage by one of
the originally active 900 firms. In the short run legume usage rises, then
New demand Short-run supply
8 HLL@) _Intermediate-run supply
~ Ae @
$1 ET Long-run supply
Old
demand
300 600 Quantity
Figure 8.3. Equilibrium dynamics for a perfectly competitive industry.
it falls in the intermediate and long runs. Kapitose usage per firm stays
constant in the short run (as it is constrained to do), then rises, and then
falls.
The qualitative features of this simple example generalize substan-
tially: In an industry where assumption * Concerning potential entrants
holds (and factor prices dont change with the scale of industry output;
cf. the next section), long-run supply will necessarily be perfectly elastic
(flat), so shifts in demand will not change the long-run equilibrium price
for the godd. Moreover, as asserted in section 8.2, short-run supply will
generally be more inelastic than intermediate-run supply, at least for small
changes in quantity, for a fixed number of firms. Hence the qualitative
features of figure 8.3 can be expected to hold generally (if the story about -
all these runs is correct); an upwards shift in demand will be met in the
short run by a small increase in quantity and a large increase in price, in
the intermediate run by a further increase in quantity and a decrease in
price (still above the original level), and in the long run with price retreat-
ing to the original level and output (and the number of firms) expanded
to meet. this increased demand.
Other changes can lead to other dynamics. For example, in problem 6
you are asked to sketch out what happens if one of the factor prices sud-
denly changes. Those dynamics can also be generalized beyond simple
parametric examples, at least in cases where cost and demand curves are
assumed to be typical.
Such exercises illustrate the formidable power of partial equilibrium
analysis in general and partial equilibrium analysis of perfect competition
in particular. If cost and demand curves are typical, which is to say de-
mand is downward sloping and supply is nondecreasing, then the theory
predicts a unique equilibrium. (Compare with general equilibrium. And,
when we get to it, compare this with the predictions made using the meth-
ods of part IL) Insofar as we can empirically estimate demand functions
8.3. What's wrong with partial equilibrium analysis? 279
and cost functions, we can construct the theoretical industry supply curve
and get very good tests of the theory. Moreover, this runs version of the
theory makes very definite predictions about how equilibrium prices and
quantities will respond dynamically to shifts in parameters of the model,
again giving us a lot of empirical leverage. While our example is only an
example, it indicates how powerful the theory can be.
8.3. What's wrong with partial equilibrium analysis?
At the same time, the theory is predicated on a number of assumptions
that may not prove true, particularly assumptions that are required by the
narrow focus of a partial equilibrium model.
For example, in a partial equilibrium analysis of the sort we have
been conducting, we hold fixed various things left out of the model. Tt
is typical in a partial equilibrium analysis of the market in a single product
to say that one is holding fixed the prices of all commodities not in the
market. For example, if we were more explicit about the demand side of
our markets, we would look at consumer demand functions in the spirit
of chapter 2. And it would be typical to analyze how demand for the com-~
modity in question changes, holding fixed the price of other commodities
and holding fixed the incomes the consumers have to spend. Rendered
in symbols, if z};(p1,..- px,Y?) is the demand function of consumer % for
good k as a function of all prices and the consumer's income Y*#, the usual
practice is to think of the industry demand curve as arising from fixing
all prices except pk, say at levels pyr, fixing all the Y#, and then, for each
price pi for good k, saying that
I .
DR) = Thr, 2 Brmts Pos Dron, 5 PR Yi
i=1
where i =1,...,I in the sum indexes the set of consumers.
In many applications, this would be the wrong thing to do, if you
were really interested in industry demand. Suppose the commodity being
considered is wheat. Of course, the demand for wheat depends on other
factors, such as the price of corn. Should we write down the demand
curve for wheat, holding fixed the price of corn? This is what is typically
done and what the scheme above advises. But is it the right thing to do?
As the price of wheat changes, the level of demand for corn will change. It
is natural to expect that demand for corn rises as the price of wheat rises.
Unless the supply of corn is perfectly elastic (is perfectly flat), the price of
corn shifts. And this then will change how much wheat will be demanded.
In the short run at least, it makes little sehse to suppose that the supply of
corn is perfectly elastic. And so it makes little sense to suppose that the
demand curve for wheat, at least in the short run, should be computed on
the basis of an unchanging price of corn. Changes in the price of wheat will,
through the workings of markets, change the price of corn, which then affects the
demand for wheat. Predictions on the demand for wheat (as the price of
wheat changes) that are based on a fixed price of corn will, therefore, be
wrong. Co
If you are analyzing the market in a commodity where changes in
its price (and the corresponding level of demands) won't much change
the prices of other goods, then a demand curve computed under the hy-
pothesis that other prices dont change at all won't be too far wrong. But
unless this condition holds for the commodity you are interested in, you
will want to think about whether there might.be other.prices that move
substantially as the price of the good in question moves, with feedback to
the demand for the good in question. If other prices can reasonably be ex-
pected to move with movements in the price of the good in question, then
you must analyze more than the single market, if reasonable predictions
are to emefge.
The same sort of consideration arises on the supply side of the market.
Our analysis in section 8.2, for example, was. predicated on an assumption
that the prices of factors of production don't change. We might think to
justify this assumption by appealing to the notion that many firms are in
the industry, and so each is a price taker in all the factor markets. But
this is no justification at all. As we change industry supply levels, we
aren't looking at changes in demand for a given factor caused by a single
firm; instead we are looking at changes in demand for the factor caused
by changes in the activities of many firms in the industry. If this factor
of production is used by many firms in the industry, if demand for this
factor by firms in the industry is a large part of the demand for the factor,
and if supply of the factor is not perfectly elastic, then it is wrong to
build industry supply curves based on the supposition that the prices of
the factors don't change with changes in the level of industry supply.
An elaborate example
Let us illustrate by continuing with the example from the previous sec-
tion. We will continue to suppose that the price of legume is $1 per unit,
no matter how many units of legume are bought by producers in the pfillip
industry. But we suppose that the price of kapitose changes with changes in
pfillip industry demand for kapitose. In particular, we suppose that if the
8.3. What's wrong with partial equilibrium analysis? | 281
Pfillip industry demands K units of kapitose, i i i
pil p industry 4 pi pitose, the price per unit that kapitose
Why might this happen? We might suppose that kapitose is produced by
an industry of perfectly competitive firms, but entry to this industry is blocked
on legal grounds say only a given set of firms are licensed to produce
kapitose. If entry to the industry is restricted for this or any other reason, then
even when firms in the industry are price takers, the industry supply curve
may be rising; see problem 4. Or the kapitose industry might be perfectly
competitive and with free entry, but potential entrants have progressively less
efficient technologies for producing kapitose; see problem 5.
When kapitose was assumed to trade at $.50 per unit regardless of de-
mand for kapitose from pfillip producers, the long-run supply curve of pfillip
was perfectly elastic at price $1. We now proceed to compute the long-run
supply curve of pfillip under the newly presumed conditions. This gets a bit
involved, but try to persevere.
Suppose the price of kapitose is at some point. Each individual pfillip
producer is (assumed to be) a price taker, so each computes long-run total
costs of producing y units, given this factor price, as )
. 1.
min gk +1+ 2 subject to EP >
If you work through the math, you will find that this leads to a total cost
function
Te _3 1/3 2, 1
TOW) = 529) Us
and an average cost function
3 1
AC) = 22g) Py + =
@) 5 q) Vt es
Efficient scale for a firm with these average costs is the solution of (3/22? =
1/(6y"); if you manipulate the algebra, you will find that this is
ey 1
y (@) = 3Q2q)/s ?
where the superscript e stands for efficient. At this efficient scale, the level of
average costs is
e 3 1 1
A =e Lt
Cg) 5g) 3647 Tg Be = 29)".
6 Sorter .
Yet another possibility is that the kapitose industry is not competitive at all. In the prob-
lems at the end of chapter 9, you will be asked to consider the case of a monopoly kapitose
producer. This situation is harder to deal with because the notion of a kapitose supply curve
is not well defined in a monopoly situation.
282
Chapter eight: The competitive firm and perfect competition
New demand
.. *New long-run equilibrium
 Long-run supply if
 | varying price of kapitose
&
Hl] eememmmseen<TTTTT Taegpmemeet Long-run supply if
300 600 Quantity
Figure 8.4. Supply and long-run equilibrium in the pfillip market when the
price of kapitose rises with increasing demand for kapitose by pfillip producers.
(Don't be lazy; go through all the steps in these math derivations!) Hence if
q is the long-run equilibrium price of kapitose, (29)/ is the long-run equilib-
rium price of pfillip. Turning this around, if p is the long-run price of pfillip,
the equilibrium price of kapitose must be ap) =1/2.
At the same time, if q = p/2 is the price of kapitose and if each firm
in the pfillip industry is producing optimally at the efficient scale of y =
1/1329] = 1/@3p), each firm is using k = v*/ (9 = 1/0189) = 1/p")
units of kapitose. (You need to work out the solution to the cost minimization
problem above to see how we did this.)
This may seem counterintuitive to you. We have found that the level
of production of the single firm is a decreasing function of the price of pfillip!
But this is not counterintuitive as long as you remember that we are speaking
here of equilibrium values. The only way the price of pfillip could be higher
in a long-run equilibrium is if the price of kapitose is higher. And a higher
price of kapitose lowers the efficient scale of all the firms. }
Suppose long-run industry supply of pfilip is when the price of pfillip
is p. Since each firm is producing 1 /(3p), this means we have J = 3pS. firms.
Each of these firms uses 1/ (9) units of kapitose, 50 total kapitose utilization
by the phillip industry firms is
J 3pS
K= 5
op 9 3p
This causes the price of kapitose to be
7 K__S
2
Solving for in terms of p yields
S(p) = 300p".
This is the long-run equilibrium supply curve for pfillip.
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
8.4. General equilibrium with firms 283
In figure 84 we've drawn what we've discovered. The two demand
curves are the two curves from the previous example: the original D(p) =
400 100p; and the shifted demand curve Dip) = 750 150p. We've dashed
in the long-run supply curve of pfillip under the conditions that the price of
- kapitose is always $.50; this is perfectly elastic supply at p = 1 since, if the
price of kapitose never changes, the long-run average cost curves of firms
are always the same (at any scale of industry production), and so minimum
average cost is always $1. And we've drawn in the long-run industry supply
curve for the case where the price of kapitose rises with kapitose demand;
this is the curve S(p) derived above.
Note that the two supply curves intersect at p = 1, at the level S(p) = 300,
which just happens to be the equilibrium quantity for both with the original
demand curve. This is no coincidence; the numbers were picked so this would
happen. The point is that at higher levels of long-run equilibrium price, the
long-run industry supply of pfillip is less than when kapitose costs a flat $.50.
Hence if demand shifts in the fashion of the example and the price of kapitose
rises with kapitose usage, the new long-run equilibrium, marked with a x in
the figure, has a price higher than $1 and an equilibrium quantity less than the
600 we had before. (It is left to you to compute the new long-run equilibrium
prices and quantities. Since this involves an eleventh degree polynomial, you
will probably have to resort to numerical approximation?)
This derivation may seem quite involved to you. It is. But it has to be.
We are solving for equilibria in two markets at once. We can't tell what the
price of kapitose will be until we know how much is demanded by the pfillip
producers. But we cant tell how much is demanded by pfillip producers until
we know the price of kapitose. And we are relying on the pfillip market being
in a long-run equilibrium. Putting all that together is not an easy exercise.
(Now try problem 3.)
One point should be stressed about the example. The individual firm is
always acting as a price taker. When we solved the individual firm's cost min-
imization problem, we took the price of kapitose to be an unchanging . As
we noted at the start of the chapter, this isn't quite right. As even a single firm
increases its demand for kapitose, the price of kapitose rises. But this is no
worse than what happens in the individual firm's profit-maximization prob-
lem, given price p. Given downward sloping demand, as a single firm raises
its level of output, it depresses the market price however slightly, something
else our price-taking firms are ignoring.
8.4. General equilibrium with firms
Since perfectly competitive markets may be tied together as in the
previous section, we might try to put competitive firms into a general
equilibrium analysis.
ee
 It wasn't hard to do. Knowing that the first equilibrium has p = 1,q=.5,Y =300,and
industry kapitose utilization of KX = 100, a supply curve for kapitose was selected so that at
K =100, would be .5.
This is not an obvious thing to do if you are doing it to study the behav-
ior of the economy we inhabit. A model of general equilibrium in which all
- firms are price takers is not all that realistic. Some firms, and some industries,
may be perfectly competitive (or may be nearly so), but we might be sceptical
if it is asserted that all are. That is one of the virtues of partial equilibrium
analysis; if one makes an assumption such as firms are competitive, the as-
sumption doesnt have to apply to every firm, but only to those currently
under examination.
At the same time, we have the problems of partial equilibrium analy-
sis highlighted in the previous section to contend with. We can do as we
did in the example: Try to cobble together a model of all the markets that
are relatively strongly connected, without bringing into the picture absolutely
every market there is. Or, if we are really interested in studying the gen-
eral equilibrium, we can hold out the production plans of firms that are
not competitive. Recall the definition we gave in section 6.2 of an exchange
equilibrium with fixed production. We could try a similar trick here: Take
as exogertously given the production plans of firms that are not price takers
(and, if it exists, any government or quasi-government production), and en-
dogenously model the production decisions of competitive firms, along the
lines to be sketched below.
We will not give a lot of details here, but instead give a quick overview
of what goes on in general equilibrium with firms.
The economy
An economy is specified by:
(a) A finite number K of commodities.
(b) A finite number J of firms. Each firm j is specified by a production
possibility set Z7 C RX,
(c) A finite number I of consumers. We assume that each consumer can
consume any nonnegative bundle of the K goods, so the consumers pref-
erences are defined on the positive orthant of R*, denoted X. These pref-
erences are assumed to be representable by a utility function U; : X R.
We assume throughout that preferences are continuous and are locally
insatiable. Each consumer comes with an endowment ef X. Each con-
sumer also comes with an entitlement to share in the profits of the firms.
(This is a strictly capitalist economy.) Consumer i is entitled to the share
5% of the profits of firm j. These shares will be assumed to be nonnegative
and to satisfy >L 5% = 1 for each j; that is, consumers taken together
are entitled to all the profits generated by each firm (and no more).
An ensemble of the items listed above is called a (general equilibrium)
economy.
8.4. General equilibrium with firms 285
Walrasian equilibrium
Definition. A Walrasian equilibrium for a given economy consists of a price
vector p RE, an array of production plans (27), one for each firm j, and an
array of consumption plans (zt), one for each consumer i, such that
(a) For each firm j, 27 Z7 (the production plan of j is feasible), and 27 solves
the problem
maximize p - z subject to z Z7.
(b) For each consumer i, z* X, and z* solves the problem
7
maximize Uy(e) subject tos X, p-z <p-e'+Y s9p-2J.
1
I; I i xd Lj
(c) Markets clear: 3; 7" <3; +305, 27.
Or in words, firms are maximizing profits, consumers are maximizing their
utility given their budget constraints, and demand is less than supply for
all commodities. Note especially the budget constraint for the consumer;
the consumer derives wealth from her endowment and from the profits
paid out by firms. 
Three technical remarks are in order:
(1) It should be obvious that if (p, (27), (z%)) is a Walrasian equilibrium, so
is (Ap, (2%), (z?)), for any scalar A > 0.
(2) We will want (for reasons of ease of exposition) to conclude that equi-
librium prices are nonnegative. In chapter 6 we obtained this conclusion
by assuming that preferences are nondecreasing. That will work quite well
here. But we can equally well assume that at least one firm has access to
a free disposal technology. (The proof is left to you.) We hereafter will
assume that equilibrium prices are always nonnegative, by virtue of one
of these two reasons. Of course, local insatiability implies that equilibrium
prices could not be identically zero.
)
2 It has not been assumed that profits are nonnegative; consumers are assumed to make
up the losses incurred by a firm in proportion to their shareholdings. But by adding an
assumption that 0 Z7 for each j, this unhappy possibility is avoided.
286 Chapter eight: The competitive firm and perfect competition
(3) Since consumers are locally insatiable, we know that in any equilibrium
they will spend their entire budget, or p- Ti=p-e+ pH sp. 28. Sum
this over i using the fact that 7 54 =1 and you will conclude that
I J
p> di=pretp ) 2,
51
i=1
where e = 31, is the social endowment. By virtue of (2) then, any good
in excess supply in equilibrium must have zero price.
Everything we said in chapter 6 about the credibility of this reduced
form solution concept extends to a setting with firms. We haven't speci-
fied a trading mechanism or trading institutions, so this is a reduced form
solution concept. There are many realistic reasons to doubt that the out-
come of economic activity in an economy would approximate a Walrasian
equilibrium. But there is experimental evidence to support the concept, at
Jeast in very carefully controlled conditions.
The welfare theorems
When considering the efficiency of a Walrasian equilibrium, we are
concerned only with the preferences of the consumers. Accordingly, for a
fixed general equilibrium economy, the following definitions are made:
Definitions. (a) A plan for the economy consists of an array of production plans
(29), one for each firm, and an array of consumption plans (z*), one for each
consumer. A plan (#9), @) is called feasible if 24 79 foreach j, z* X
for each i, and shai< Shoe pi 2.
(b) A feasible plan (27), (&")) is Pareto efficient if there is no other feasible plan
(89), (8%) such that the allocation (8%) Pareto dominates (z).
Theorem. The First Theorem of Welfare Economics. If (p, (#9), (a?) is a
Walrasian equilibrium, then (9), (zi) is a Pareto efficient plan.
The proof is not much different from the proof for a pure exchange econ-
omy. Assume that (p, (29), (z)) is a Walrasian equilibrium and that there
is some feasible plan (#9), (&") such that the allocation () Pareto domi-
nates (z'). Since the hat plan is feasible, vias I, e+ Y], 47. Since
prices p are nonnegative, we can premultiply this vector inequality with
p and keep the inequality:
I I J
Spay pe ps
i=1 g=1
i=1
8.4. General equilibrium with firms 287
As noted above, since consumers are locally insatiable,
1 - I . J .
Yopeat=d peer ps
i=1 i=1 g=1
By the argument from chapter 6, we know that p-a* <p- # for every i,
with a strict inequality for at least one consumer i. So
I J I I I J
Sp-d+d pd =) pT Spay peer) pF
= i = pr i =
Look at the two extreme terms and cancel the common term vip cet
This leaves
J J
Spd <> p-#.
3=1 j=1
Thus for at least one j, p-# <p" 5. But this would say that 27 is not
a profit-maximizing plan for this firm j at prices p, a contradiction to the
definition of a Walrasian equilibrium.
Theorem. The Second Theorem of Welfare Econontics. Assume that prefer-
ences are convex, Continuous, nondecreasing and locally insatiable, and produc-
tion sets are convex. Let (29), (=) be a Pareto efficient plan such that zi is
strictly postive for all 4 and k. Then the plan ((z%),(z") is the plan part of
2 Walrasian equilibrium, if we first redistribute endowments and shareholdings
among CONSUMETS.
3
We will not go into the details of the proof. The proof used in chapter 6
works quite well, except that you have to modify the definition of X filet
I
xt ={zeR:a= 3, ' for some feasible plan ), @N}-
i=1
As we noted in chapter 6, the assumption that the allocation part (z) of the
plan is strictly positive is much too strong, and serious renditions of this result
will weaken this assumption.
At the risk of confusing you, we add a remark about efficiency. We sug-
gested earlier that when some firms in a competitive industry have access to a
better technology than others do, the better firms will (a) make profits and
(b) operate at larger than efficient scale. (You will prove that [a] implies [b]
in problem 2.) The same thing can happen if there is a limit to the number of
firms that can enter a perfectly competitive industry; i.e., firms in the indus-
try can be making positive profits and, therefore, be producing at larger than
efficient scale. (See problem 4 for an example.) How do these inefficiencies
square with the result of the first welfare theorem? Is there an implicit as-
sumption in the theorem (which guarantees that a Walrasian equilibrium is
efficient) that for any production technology Z possessed by any firm, there
will always be a queue of potential entrants possessing this technology? Is it
implied that firms in a Walrasian equilibrium always make zero profits?
The answers to the last two questions are resounding noes. Any confu-
sion on this point arises because efficiency is being used in two different
ways. Efficiency in the welfare theorems pertains to efficiency relative to the
productive capacities of the economy, which are determined (in part) by the
number of firms possessing each technology. If, in an equilibrium, a firm is
making positive profits and producing at larger than efficient scale, then we
would be able to improve (in the sense of Pareto) on the equilibrium plan if
we could create more firms with this technology. But this isn't how efficiency
is defined in the welfare theorems; efficiency in those theorems is relative to
the firms that are present in the given economy.
We can read this distinction in two ways. On the one hand, earlier
discussion of firms producing at larger than efficient scale shouldn't be taken
to mean that the market system (with price-taking firms) leads to correctable
inefficiencies; the market system will be doing as well as it can given the
economys technology. On the other hand, even if all firms in an economy
are competitive, one can potentially improve on the allocation of goods
achieved in a Walrasian equilibrium when there are profit-making firms by
transferring the technology of the profit-making firms to others. (This last
recommendation is not a serious policy recommendation. One has to worry
about the supply by innovators of profitable innovations. If the government
immediately transfers any profitable innovation from the innovator to many
competitors, there wouldn't be much incentive to innovate. Because these
issues are well beyond us at this point, they are left for the interested reader
to pursue.)
Externalities, taxes, and efficiency
As we noted in chapter 6, externalities can overthrow the conclusions
of the two welfare theorems. That remains as true here as in the pure
exchange context, if not more so. In chapter 6 we considered consumption
externalities; firms add to the potential for consumption externalities, as
anyone who has lived next to an oil refinery or chemical plant can testify.
7 We should note that insofar as effluents and noxious odors from refineries and chemical
plants are modeled as commodities, we will have to redo a lot of the theory we've pre-
sented; these are goods for which preferences are not nondecreasing, and they are not freely
disposable by firms. If you read on in general equilibrium theory, you will see how to model
noxious commodities like these.
8.4. General equilibrium with firms 289
But the presence of firms gives us a new category of externalities to worry
about, namely production externalities.
The idea in a production externality is that a firm, by its choice of
production plan (or, for that matter, a consumer by her choice of con-
sumption bundle) changes the feasible set of production plans for other
firms. A chemical plant sited on a river can certainly change the feasi-
ble technology of its downriver neighbor, a soft-drink manufacturer, A
firm that extracts oil from one plot of land can affect the ease with which
a neighboring firm can extract oil, when the oil comes from a common
underground pool. A firm that raises sheep by grazing the sheep on the
village green affects the prospects for its neighbor who wishes to graze its
goats on the same village green.
When production externalities of these sorts exist, the welfare the-
orems once again go awry. We will point out where the proof of the
first welfare theorem would break down, leaving you the (harder) task of
showing that, in such cases, a Walrasian equilibrium can most certainly
be inefficient. The theorem breaks down right at the end. Recall that
we supposed a feasible plan ((#7),(%%)) that was Pareto superior to the
Walrasian equilibrium plan ((27), (z*)). We concluded (and would, absent
problems of consumption externalities, continue to conclude) that in this
case it would have to be that
J
J
=1 J=1
7
where p are the Walrasian equilibrium prices. From this we concluded
that for at least one firm, p+ 2 > p- z/, which was taken to imply that
#7 was not profit maximizing for firm j at prices p. But when there are
production externalities, this last step doesnt quite work. When there are
production externalities, what firm j can do depends on the production
plans selected by other firms; we would write something like Z7((z7"), (z%))
for the production possibility set of firm j. And then it might be possi-
ble that 37 Z9((27), (z%)) while 57 Z9((3%), (4%). That is, 5 would
give better profits for firm j, but isn't feasible given that other firms and
consumers are following the plan ((z7"), (z%)).
Taxes give further grounds for scepticism about the two welfare the-
orems. This statement may seem rather perverse, since you might have
read the second welfare theorem as saying that to change the distribution
of utility among consumers, you should reallocate endowments through a
system of taxes and subsidies and then let the market go to work to achieve
290 Chapter eight: The competitive firm and perfect competition
efficiency. But you need to be very careful in interpreting the second wel-
fare theorem and the sort of taxes and subsidies that go along with it.
In the second welfare theorem, people begin with endowments, anda
redistribution of endowments is supposed to be accomplished before any
economic activity is undertaken. In contrast, redistributive taxes and trans-
fers in the real economy are undertaken by taxes on the product/ outcome
of economic activity. You trade leisure, part of your endowment, for wages
with which to buy consumption goods, and the chief form of tax in the
U.S. economy, an income tax, takes away part of those wages. Hence when
you decide how much leisure to trade for wages, you make a marginal cal-
culation based on your after-tax income. Your employer, in deciding how
much labor to purchase, calculates on the basis of pretax wages. (Actually,
the employer looks at the effect of wages on her post-tax earnings, which
compounds many tax effects.) The point is that in the welfare theorems,
it is crucial to the results that all consumers and firms face the same set of
prices the same set of marginal tradeoffs. Reallocating endowments at
the start doesnt cause problems, as this sort of reallocation doesnt affect
the (equilibrium) marginal trade-offs that an individual faces; in particular,
all face the same margins. But when we tax wages or impose excise or
sales taxes-on goods, the prices that the buyer and seller face are forced
apart, and there is no particular reason to think that efficiency will result.
Where would this cause the proof of the first welfare theorem to break
down? Recall that the proof began with the supposition that (p, (z), (4)
is a Walrasian equilibrium, and ((39),(&) is a Pareto superior, feasible
plan. Using the feasibility constraints and the fact that prices are non-
negative, we premultiplied each side of the feasibility constraints by the
equilibrium prices to get a #yalue inequality for the hat plan and (using
local insatiability) a value equation for the equilibrium plan. From there,
by comparing the values of bundles and production plans consumer-by-
consumer and firm-by-firm we proceeded to derive a contradiction.
What are we to do when different actors in the economy face dif-
ferent prices for the same good? We can still make the firm-by-firm and
consumer-by-consumer comparisons using the prices that the firm and
consumer face. But we cant use different sets of prices in going from the
feasibility inequalities to the value equation/inequality. The entire method
of proof breaks down.
There are good reasons to have faxes on endogenous economic vari-
ables such as income that are simply missed by the general equilibrium
model. Take as given the position that it is equitable to redistribute some-
what from the more fortunate in terms of ability or Tuck to the less, even,
if necessary, at the cost of some loss in efficiency. The second welfare
8.4. General equilibrium with firms 291
theorem says that, ideally, you dont need to suffer any efficiency loss;
figure out in advance who is among the more fortunate and transfer some
of their endowment to the less. But this scheme presumes that the more
and less fortunate can be identified at the outset. Endowments and shares
in the firms are publicly available data; someone fortunate in these things
cannot hide her fortune in order to avoid the tax man. In reality, we
cannot tell who is more fortunate and who is less who will be lucky,
who has more ability, and so on. The clues we will get will be based on
observed market data such as income levels. And, therefore, equitable
redistribution may well have to come at the cost of some efficiency loss.
We might try to make the efficiency loss as small as possible, by ma-
nipulating the form of taxes we impose. This is taken up in the literature
of public finance. Your attention is called especially to the literature on
optimal taxation; here a social welfare function is given and, subject to
informational constraints that more nearly approximate a realistic setting,
the analyst uses the methods of chapter 5 to find an optimal tax system,
one which balances the gains from a more equitable distribution of in-
come, which comes out of the social welfare function, with the losses in
efficiency, captured by the extent to which the constraints bind.
Existence and local uniqueness
Finally, questions arise about the number of Walrasian equilibria for
economies with firms. Recall that in chapter 6, we discussed results along
the lines of every exchange equilibrium that meets certain conditions has at
least one equilibrium, and most exchange economies have only finitely
many. Similar results can be obtained for economies with competitive
firms. The results on most economies having finitely many equilibria
involve mathematics that are completely beyond the scope of this book,
and we do not comment further, but for readers who read through the sub-
- section on the existence of equilibria in exchange economies, we include
some brief technical remarks:
The sort of fixed point techniques sketched in chapter 6 are adapted to
the context of economies with competitive firms to prove existence. Besides
looking at consumer demand at given prices, we also must look at the firms
profit-maximizing choice of netput vectors. These choices will have to be well
behaved mathematically, just as consumers demand choices are required to
be well behaved. But we have already seen that this can be done: I Z is
convex, then the set of solutions to the firm's profit-maximization problem
at a given set of prices is convex (proposition 73[b]); and if Z is closed,
the correspondence that associates to each price vector the set of solutions
is upper semi-continuous (problem 4 in chapter 7). Actually, a lot of the
work that goes on in general equilibrium with firms is done in an attempt to
avoid very strong assumptions on Z that guarantee a solution to the firm's
profit-maximization problem for any prices. In particular, general equilibrium
theorists like to get existence results even when production technologies have
constant returns to scale, where part of the existence proof will be that prices
where the firms can make infinite profits will be avoided.
8.5. Bibliographic notes
Virtually every text presents the partial equilibrium analysis of per-
fectly competitive markets a bit differently from every other text, so you
may wish to reinforce the material on partial equilibrium by looking at
other treatments. I strongly recommend as well looking at some examples
of presumably perfectly competitive industries; as noted in the text, the
Oil Tanker Shipping Industry case is an example with enough things going
on to make the comparison with the theory very interesting.
As for general equilibrium with firms, the standard references given
at the end of chapter 6, namely Debreu (1959) and Arrow and Hahn (1971),
remain the best places to go. :
One of the unsatisfactory things about models of perfect competition
is that firms conjectures are usually wrong; firms assume they have no
market power when in fact they have a little bit. One might hope for
formal results showing that perfect competition is appropriate as an ap-
proximate model of economies where firms have (and realize they have) a
small amount of market power. There is a literature on this subject which,
if you are very ambitious, you may wish to tackle. You probably should
complete part IIT of this book before looking at this literature. But, if ever
and whenever you are ready, a good place to start is with the Journal of
Economic Theory symposium issue of April 1980.
References
Arrow, K,, and F Hahn. 1971. General Competitive Analysis. San Francisco:
Holden-Day.
Debreu, G. 1959. Theory of Value. New Haven: Cowles Foundation.
Porter, M. 1983. Cases in Competitive Strategy. New York: Free Press.
8.6. Problems
= 1. Prove proposition 8.1.
= 2. (a) Prove that it is inconsistent with the theory of perfect competition
that a firm in a long-run equilibrium would ever produce a (positive)
8.6. Problems 293
quantity at which its long-run average costs are declining. What are the
implications of this for an industry in which all firms have average costs
that are perpertually declining?
(b) Prove that in any long-run equilibrium, firms produce at efficient scale
or larger, and if a firm is making positive profits, it must be producing at
larger than efficient scale. (You may assume that average and marginal
cost curves are all continuous.)
Endless variations on the example given in section 8.2 and 8.3 can be played.
Problem 3 is quite difficult; in it you consider the equilibrium dynamics in
the second example from the text. In problem 4, you see what happens if there
is limited entry into a competitive industry; in problem 5 we consider a case in
which firms possess a number of different technologies; and in problem 6 you
work through equilibrium dynamics when a factor price changes.
m3. (a) In the analysis of the example in section 8.3, we worked through
the long-run equilibrium supply curve of pfillip for the case where the
price of kapitose depends on kapitose demand by pfillip consumers: The
price of kapitose is K/200, where K is pfillip industry demand for
kapitose as a factor of production. Suppose demand for pfillip is given
by D(p) = 400 100p. What is the long-run equilibrium? (This should be
very easy.)
(b) Suppose demand for pfillip is given by D(p) = 750 150p. What is
the long-run equilibrium? (You will probably need to resort to numerical
calculations, both here and throughout the rest of the problem.)
(c) Suppose demand for kapitose begins at D(p) = 400 100p, and the
long-run equilibrium you computed in (a) is reached. Then, suddenly,
demand for pfillip changes to D(p) = 750 150p. What is the new short-
run equilibrium, where in the short run firms cannot enter, or leave the
industry and cannot change their levels of kapitose utilization. (Once
again, this is very easy, given what is in the text.)
(d) Continuing from (c), what is the equilibrium in the intermediate run,
where in the intermediate run firms cannot enter or leave the industry but
can change their levels of kapitose and legume utilization. (Good luck!)
= 4. Imagine that for some reason there can be only 300 firms producing
piillip; only these 300 firms have licenses, say. In the long run, these 300
firms can exit the market (and later reenter, if conditions warrant), and they
can vary the amount of legume and kapitose they use. In the intermediate
run, firms cannot leave (or enter), but they vary their factor usage. In
294 Chapter eight: The competitive firm and perfect competition
the short run, firms can only change their levels of legume usage. Assume
the price of kapitose is q = $.50, no matter how much kapitose is used by
pfillip producers. (That is, we are back in the setting of section 8.2.)
(a) Suppose demand is given by D(p) = 400 100p. What is the long-run
equilibrium in this industry?
(b) Suppose the equilibrium computed in part (a) is reached, and then
demand suddenly shifts to D(p) = 750 150p. What is the short-run
equilibrium position? What is the intermediate-run equilibrium position?
What is the new, long-run equilibrium position?
(c) What is the long-run industry supply curve?
a 5. Suppose there are two production processes for making pfillip. In the
first, the production function is y= 3}/611/3 and fixed costs are 1/6. In the
second, the production function is y = 1/92/9 and fixed costs are 1/4. One
hundred firms have access to the first technology, but only those hundred
can use this technology. An unlimited number of firms have access to the
second technology. Assume that the price of kapitose is $.50 no matter
how much kapitose is utilized by pfillip producers.
(a) What is the long-run industry supply curve for this industry?
(b) Suppose demand is given-by D(p) = 400 100p. What is the long-run
equilibrium for this industry?
() Suppose demand suddenly shifts to D(p) = 750 150p. Work out the
short-run, intermediate-run, and new long-run equilibria.
a 6. In the production of psillip, a nonnarcotic relaxant, there are three
factors of production: legume, kapitose, and jehosa fat. Letting | be the
amount of legume, k the amount of kapitose, and j the amount of jehosa
fat, the production function is
y = FG, RD = F/RIE.
The price of legume is a fixed $1 per unit; kapitose costs $4 per unit, and,
at the start of this problem, jehosa fat costs $2 per unit. Many firms could
enter this industry, all of whom have access to this technology, and each
of whom, if active, must pay a fixed cost (in addition to the costs of any
factor inputs) of $216. Demand for psillip is given by D(p) = 1440 10p,
where p is the price of psillip.
(a) Assuming conditions of free entry and exit and assuming all firms are
price takers in all markets, what is the long-run equilibrium in the psillip
8.6. Problems 295
market under these conditions? Give: equilibrium price, quantity, number
of firms, output per firm, amount of factors used by each firm, profit per
firm. (Hint: The equilibrium price is 72.)
(b) Suddenly the jehosa crop fails, and the price of jehosa fat jumps to $4
per unit. In the very short run, firms can vary the amount of legume they
input to production, but the levels of jehosa fat and kapitose are fixed and
the number of firms is fixed. In the medium short run, firms can vary the
amounts of legume and jehosa fat they use, but the level of kapitose is
fixed and the number of firms is fixed: In the medium run, kapitose joins
legume and jehosa fat as a variable factor of production, but the number
of firms is fixed. And in the long run, there is free entry and exit from this
industry. Solve for the very short-run, medium short-run, medium-run
and long-run equilibria in this industry, beginning from the equilibrium
position of part (a). When you solve for the long-run equilibrium, do not
worry about fractional numbers of firms.
The next problem shifts a factor price in the setting of two linked markets.
a7. The manufacture of rhillip, a nonnarcotic nutrient, takes two stages.
In the first stage, legume and kapitose are used to produce rhipigume. In
the second stage, rhipigume and further amounts of kapitose are used to
make rhillip. Rhipigume has no uses other than for the manufacture of
rhillip; as you know full well by now, legume and kapitose are the bases
for many speciality chemicals.
For purposes of this problem, suppose that legume and kapitose are traded
in perfectly competitive markets. The price of kapitose is $1, and the price
of legume is $4 (for the time being).
Rhipigume is produced in a perfectly competitive industry that is filled
with many identical firms, each of which has production function
r= Raps
where r is the amount of rhipigume produced from k units of kapitose
and | units of legume. Each firm in this industry faces fixed costs of $16
(per firm) as well. There is completely free entry and exit to and from this
industry.
Rhillip is produced in another perfectly competitive industry. (For legal
reasons, no firm can produce both rhillip and rhipigume.) There are many
firms in this industry as well, each of whom has production function.
R= Bltp 4,
where R is the amount of rhillip produced from k units of kapitose and
7 units of rhipigume. Each firm in this industry has fixed costs of $72 (per
firm). There is completely free entry and exit to and from this industry.
Industry demand for Rhillip is given by the equation
P=96 R/10,
where P is the price of rhillip and R is the total quantity of rhillip brought
to market.
(a) What is the long-run equilibrium in these two industries? I want to
know prices for the two goods, numbers of firms in each industry, output
supply and factor demands of each firm, profits per firm, and total industry
supply and factor demands.
In the short run, firms in both industries can vary the amounts of kapitose
they use in production, but not the amounts of legume or rhipigume. In
the intermediate run, firms can vary the amounts of their factor inputs,
but entry to or exit from either industry is not possible. In the long run,
entry and exit becomes possible.
(b) Beginning from the position you computed in part (a), the price of
legume suddenly falls to $.25. What will happen in these two industries
in the short run? In the intermediate run? And in the long run? (For the
long rum, don't worry about fractional numbers of firms.)
The next problem works through what happens when there are constant returns
to scale.
= 8. Suppose that the production function of a single firm in an industry
that produces zipple, a nonnarcotic pain killer, out of kapitose and legume
is f(k,1) = K/P/3. In this case, firms have no fixed costs. Suppose that
the price of kapitose is given by = 1/2 and the price of legume is $1.
Suppose there are precisely 100 firms in the industry; they can leave if
they are unprofitable, but no one else can enter.
(a) If demand for zipple is given by D(p) = 400 100p, what is the long-
run equilibrium? Are there parts of the long-run equilibrium that are
indeterminate? (Yes!)
(b) Demand shifts to D(p) = 750 150p. What is the new short-run equi-
librium where the firms can vary their usage of legumes but not their
8.6. Problems 297
usage of kapitose? Does the indeterminacy you found in part (a) affect
your answer to this part?
Next we have an easy finger exercise, which will come back to haunt you in
Chapter 19.
u 9. Imagine that there is an industry for a particular product where the
demand for this product is given by P = 100X. There are two factors of
production, capital K and labor L; the price of each will be $1 throughout.
The firms all have identical technology, which is given by a fixed coefficients
production function:
1/2
ren)"
a la
where Y is the level of output and is some constant from 0,1). Each
firm has fixed costs of 16.
(a) Suppose there are precisely six firms in this industry; they can exit
if they are unprofitable, but no firms can enter. What is the long-run
equilibrium in this case? (Even though there are only six firms, they all
entertain competitive conjectures about their effect on various prices.)
(b) Suppose there is free entry into this industry. What is the long-run
equilibrium?
a 10. Suppose one firm in a general equilibrium economy has a technology
with free disposal. Prove that Walrasian equilibrium prices are nonnega-
tive.
u 11. Consider the following economy: There are three goods, legume,
tillip and quillip, two consumers (called 1 and 2), and twa firms (called
x and y). Firm x is owned entirely by consumer 1 and makes tillip out
of legume according to the simple linear production technology < 3.
That is, for every unit of legume input, this firm produces three times as
many (or less) units of tillip. Firm y is owned entirely by consumer 2
and makes quillip out of legume according to the production technology
g = 4l. Each consumer initially owns 5 units of legume. Consumer 1
has utility function u,(,) = 6 + 4In(#) + .61In(g). Consumer 2 has utility
function u,(%, ) = 8 + In(t) + In(g).
(a) What is the general equilibrium of this economy? Assume that firms
take prices as given and are profit maximizers, and consumers take prices
298 Chapter eight: The competitive firm and perfect competition
as given. When you give prices, normalize them so the price of legume
is $1. What would be the general equilibrium if the shareholdings were
reversed? If each consumer held a half-share in each firm?
(b) What is the set of all feasible, Pareto efficient allocations for this econ-
omy?
nen een nt tet
chapter nine
Monopoly
The theory of monopoly is, on the face of things, very simple and straight-
forward. But behind this simple and straightforward theory lie some deep
and interesting questions. We won't be able to answer most of these ques
tions here, but we can pose the questions and give a rough idea what the
answers might look like. And later in the book we will see some of the
answers that have been developed.
9.1. The standard theory
In a monopoly market, we imagine many buyers and a single vendor
of a good. This single vendor is called the monopoly. Buyers are as-
sumed to be price takers, and their demand as a function of price is given,
as in the case of perfect competition, by an aggregate demand function.
We will write D(p) for the level of demand at price p, and we will also
write P(d) for the inverse demand function; that is, P(D(p)) = p. To guaran-
tee a well-defined inverse demand function exists, we must make certain
assumptions about demand. But we make those without qualms: We as-
sume that demand is downward sloping. In fact, to keep the mathematics
simple, we assume that D is a continuously differentiable function whose
derivative is strictly negative (and finite) at any argument p > 0 such that
D(p) > 0. To cover corner cases, we assume that the monopoly can sell
as much of the good in question as desired, if the price of the good is set
at 0. We do not require that the demand function is continuous at the
price of zero; that is, there may be a finite upper bound on the amount
demanded at any positive price. And we do not require strictly positive
demand at every price; demand may be zero at some finite price (and at
all higher prices).
The monopoly is assumed to be characterized by a total cost function
TC(z), where x is the level of the monopolys output. Then, the standard
i
1 This is a firm, so we will use the impersonal pronoun it. Although it is sometimes awk-
ward, we will refer to the monopoly as if it were making decisions; we should be referring
to the monopolys manager, but that becomes too tortured.
theory runs, the monopoly sets the quantity of output z to maximize its
profits:
max P(2)z TC(s),
which gives first-order conditions
P\(z)z + P(x) = MC(z).
That is, we have the slogan that marginal revenue equals marginal cost.* Note
here that the monopolys conjectures about how the price of its product
will change with changes in the level of output (or, alternatively, how the
level of demand will change with changes in the price he charges) are
correct; they are given by the actual market demand curve. Compare this
with the perfect competitors of chapter 8, whose conjectures were slightly
wrong.
Recall from chapter 7 that we can rewrite marginal revenue as P(x)(1+
1/e(z)), where e(x) = P(x)/(aP"(z)) is the elasticity of demand. Since P(x)
is decreasing (by assumption), is a negative function. When e(z) < 1,
demand is said to be inelastic; when e(x) > 1, demand is said to be elas-
tic; and when ~e(z) = 1, demand is said to have unit elasticity. From the
formula given above for marginal revenue, we see that this means that the
monopolys marginal revenue is negative when demand is inelastic; it is
zero when demand has unit elasticity; and it is positive when demand is:
elastic. Note that whenever marginal revenue is negative, the monopoly
increases revenues by decreasing quantity sold. Since, it is normally pre-
sumed, marginal costs are always positive (or, at least, nonnegative), this
implies that a monopoly would never produce a quantity at which de-
mand is inelastic. If marginal costs are everywhere strictly positive, then
production would never be at a level where demand has unit elasticity.
We can also think of the monopoly choosing an optimal price p. In this
case, the monopolys problem would be written
max D(p)p TC(D()).
 We are sloppy and assume a solution to the monopolys problem at some finite level of
output . The easiest way to justify this assumption is to assume price is zero beyond some
finite level of supply and, as supply goes to zero, prices stay bounded. But we do not restrict
attention to this sort of case in examples, and the careful reader will no doubt check us as we
proceed. Moreover, we dont check second-order conditions in the marginal revenue equals
marginal cost equation. But in examples, TC will be convex and TR will be concave, so
we'll always be okay.
9.1. The standard theory 301
The first-order conditions are
D'(p)p + Dp) = MC(D(p)) D(p).
If you remember the formula for the derivative of the inverse of a function
F(x) is df-"(y)/dy|yo = 1/(dF /dz)|.0.71y0, You will see that this is the same
first-order equation as before.
There is no presumption that the monopoly will produce at an efficient
scale (that is, at a scale where average costs are minimum). In figure 9.1(a),
Wwe see a case where the monopoly will produce at an inefficiently large
scale, and in figure 9.1(b) a case where the monopoly will produce at an
inefficiently small scale.
How do we know this? The problem is to find the Position of the
marginal revenue curve. You are given a geometrical procedute for doing
this in figure 9.2; if you use this procedure, you remember the relative posi-
tions of marginal and average cost, and you remember that the monopoly
equates marginal revenue to marginal cost, you should have no problem
with these conclusions. But this leaves the question: Why is this geomet-
rical procedure correct? Problem 1 asks for a proof.
That's it. Thats all there is to the standard theory of monopoly. We
think of the monopoly being able to select the quantity it will supply or,
equivalently, the price it will charge, and the resulting equilibrium price
or quantity is read off the demand curve. But this simple classic theory is
subject to a lot of questions, caveats, variations, and elaborations. In the
next few sections, a few of these are sketched.
Price Price
Demand
Demand
AC
AC
Quantity Quantity
(a) (b)
Figure 9.1. The optimal scale of a monopoly.
The optimal scale of a monopoly is inefficiently large in (a) and ineffi-
ciently small in (b).
302 Chapter nine: Monopoly
~ Demand
x Quantity
Figure 9.2. Computing the value of marginal revenue.
At any point z along the quantity axis, draw the tangent to the inverse
demand demand curve P(z) back to the p-axis. Measure the distance
from the point z where this tangent intersects the p-axis to P(z) and
move an equal amount on the other side from P(z). This is MR(z).
That is, M R(z) = P(z) (z P(e).
9.2. Maintaining monopoly
You might wonder, for example, how the monopoly came to be a
monopoly, and why it stays that way. If the monopoly is making a profit,
why doesnt the industry attract entrants? It may be that legal barriers fm-
pede entry. The monopoly might hold a patent on a particular production
process OF On a particular product. Or it might be illegal for any com-
petitors to enter the market. This is especially likely to happen where the
production technology favors one very large company where average
costs are falling at all levels of output. (The case where average costs are
decreasing at every level of output is sometimes referred to as the case of
a natural monopoly) In cases such as this, the monopoly is apt to be
subject to regulation; it cant charge any price it wishes, but instead must
obtain approval of some regulatory body for the prices it sets. There is
a very large literature on the economics of regulation that looks at this
situation. 
Another reason we might find a monopoly industry is because, while
other companies can enter this industry, the monopoly acts in a way that
forestalls potential competitors. A classic story of this sort associated with
the names of Bain and Sylos-Labini runs as follows: Imagine an industry
in which there is a constant variable cost of production, say $1 per unit
and a fixed cost for any firm in the industry amounting to $2.25. (These
are convenient, not realistic, numbers.) This production technology is
ee mremgn r gr
9.2. Maintaining monopoly 303
available to one and all. Demand in this industry is given by D(p}=9-p.
There is, at the time being, a single firm in this industry (seemingly a
monopoly). Note that the standard theory of monopoly suggests that this
monopoly will equate marginal cost, which is 1, with marginal revenue,
which is 9 2z at output level z. (Total Revenue = 9z g2 Differentiate.)
This gives z = 9-1)/2=4, P=5, and monopoly profits of 4(51)2.25 =
13.75.
But despite this prediction of the standard theory, it is discovered
upon inspection that the monopoly has set the quantity of output equal fo
5, thus realizing a profit of 54 1) 2.25= 12.75. When asked why, the
monopoly responds:
Out there are many people who would enter this industry and
take away my profits if they thought that they themselves could
make a profit. So put yourself in their shoes. Here am I (the
monopoly) with an output of 5. If you enter and have an output
of z/, assuming that I keep my output level at 5, the price would
be 95 gz = 4 2, so your margin (gross of your fixed costs)
would be 3 z'. You will then (optimally) set 2 = 1.5 so your
gross profits will be 2.25. That is, at best, you will only just
cover your fixed costs. Since you won't make a positive profit,
you won't enter, and I'll stay a monopoly. On the other hand, if
I were producing 4 units, and potential entrants believed that I
would hold to this level of output, then they would be able to
cover their fixed costs, and they would enter. My choice of an
output level of 5 may look silly in the short run, but if it keeps
you (and other potential entrants) out of my market, it is a good
strategy to employ.
The general idea is that the monopolys choice of quantity and/or price
may be based on a strategy for keeping the monopoly, rather than for
maximizing short-term profits.
Now rather a lot is wrong with the story just told, primarily concern-
ing the supposed follow-on if you, as a potential entrant, choose to enter:
Why would you suppose that after you enter the monopoly will maintain
its quantity of output at 5 units? Why wouldn't it accommodate to your
entry? What will it do if you enter? We aren't in a position just yet to talk
about such things (since, for one thing, they involve what happens in a
duopoly). And so we will leave this simple story of entry deterrence as it
stands for now, returning to it in chapter 13. But the point remains: If
monopoly power isn't granted by law, then monopolies may take actions
that are directed towards the maintenance of monopoly power, which may
be very different from short-run profit maximization. Hence, in trying to
analyze what a monopoly will do in its market, it is essential to have
answers to the questions: Where does the monopoly come from? What (if
anything) must be done to maintain it?
Although this may be beating the subject to death, it should also be
noted that even when the monopoly results from legal protection, say by
a patent, considerations like those just mentioned may intrude. Suppose
that a manufacturer does hold an unbreakable patent on a particular prod-
uct. The scope of patent protection does not always extend to protection
against close substitutes for the patented product. If substitute products
are produced and sold, they restrain the monopolys market power by
flattening and shifting-in the monopolys demand curve. That is, as the
monopoly raises the price charged, many of its customers will move to
the substitute good, and it will see a dramatic fall in the quantity it can
sell. In this situation, what is observed will be in accord with the standard
theory; it is just that the monopoly will face fairly elastic demand.
But (and this is the reason for introducing this now) suppose those
substitute geods are not being produced and sold. Then the monopoly
may act in 4 way to impede the entry of producers of those substitute
goods. The story is one degre more complex than the story of entry
deterrence sketched above, but the same basic notions apply. What we
anticipate seeing in the short run, according to the standard theory, may
not be observed, insofar as the monopoly is setting its price to keep sub-
stitute products from being placed on the market.
9.3. Multigood monopoly
The idea of substitutes for a monopoly product comes up in an-
other context that of multigood monopolies. Suppose a monopoly has
monopoly rights on two different products that are substitutes. By raising
the price of one, demand is stimulated for the other and vice versa. Hence
we might well see prices for two substitute goods that are higher than the
prices we would expect if we analyzed in isolation the market for either.
An extreme form of this, which combines aspects of the sort of entry
deterrence discussed above, involves what are called sleeping patents.
Suppose a firm holds a monopoly in a certain product, and it knows on
its own or learns of the existence of a close substitute that is not yet on
the market but which may be produced. The monopoly may then seek
9.3. Multigood monopoly 305
to patent (or buy exclusive rights to manufacture and sell) the substitute.
And then, once it holds exclusive right to manufacture the substitute, it
may produce none at all. Especially when there are large fixed costs in
production, the monopoly may maximize its profits by producing only one
of several close substitutes. Hence it gains the patent to prevent anyone
else from manufacturing the substitute, and then it puts the patent to
sleep to maximize its overall profits.
A third issue on substitute goods and monopolies concerns the range
of product variety. A monopoly often offers a number of varieties of the
basic product it produces. In the offering of many varieties, the monopoly
is competing with itself; red and blue widgets are probably close sub-
stitutes, and insofar as the monopoly is selling red widgets, by offering
them in blue it cuts into its own market. There is no real problem if no
extra fixed cost is associated with offering multiple colors (or, in general,
different varieties). But where there are increased fixed costs, either in
manufacture or distribution, then the monopoly must decide how many
(and which) varieties to offer. We leave these vague ideas here, although
problems 9, 10, and 11 will give you some ideas about how to model and
analyze this issue.
On the other hand, a monopoly might hold monopolies in two com-
plementary goods. Lowering the price of one stimulates demand for the
other. Hence we might expect to see prices lower than those we would
predict from analyzing in isolation the market for either. For example,
imagine a firm that produces both cameras and film for a particular sort
of photographic process for which it has no rivals. (Think of a case where
conventional photography is a substitute but not a perfect substitute.) It
isnt hard to imagine that this firm might sell cameras suited for its film
at a relatively low price to stimulate demand for its film.
Even more interesting are cases where a monopoly in one product can
also participate in a second market in which it doesnt hold a monopoly.
Suppose, for example, that there are potential entrants ready and will-
ing to serve the second market. And suppose that the products involved
are very strong complements. Then the monopoly may be able to use its
monopoly in the first product to gain power in the second; we have what
is called an extending monopoly. For example, a firm that holds a monopoly
on a particular sort of computer might bundle sale of the computer with
servicing (which, for the sake of argument, we assume anyone could per-
form). The company might even go to the extreme of refusing to sell its
computers at all it will only lease them so that it can control forever
who services the machines.
306 Chapter nine: Monopoly
9.4. Nonlinear pricing
The standard theory presumes that the monopoly must charge linear
prices. That is, the monopoly sets a price per unit, and customers can buy
as many/few units as they wish at that price. The usual justification for
this assumption is that the good is bought anonymously and can be resold.
If the monopoly were, say, tO give a quantity discount, then someone
would buy a large amount (at a discount) and resell it in smaller lots to
consumers who dont want quite as many. If the monopoly were to fry to
mark up the price for larger lots, then the consumer desiring a large lot
would buy a number of small lots (or have her friends buy small lots and
resell them to her). But for many sorts of commodities this justification
for linear prices doesnt hold water. The resale of electricity, or telephone
services, or, education (or just about any sort of service) is difficult if not
impossible, and the purchase of electricity or telephone services (at least)
is not anonymous. When resale is impossible and/or the purchase of the
item is not done anonymously, the monopoly may wish to consider using
nonlinear prices to increase its profits.
This is not only true for monopolies. The same sort of consideration
might intrude in the case of oligopolists, or even in a competitive industry.
But analyses of nonlinear pricing have, for the most part, been devoted to
the context of monopoly, because nonlinear pricing is hard enough without
introducing considerations of competition.
The absolutely best position for a monopoly to be in is (a) to know
the precise utility function of every consumer, (b) to be able to tailor a
price schedule for each individual consumer, and () to be able to control
absolutely any resale of the good being sold. Then the monopoly can make
a take-or-leave offer to each individual consumer, which extracts from
the consumer all the surplus that this consumer would otherwise obtain
from consumption of the good in question. That is, suppose that our
consumer's preferences can be represented by a utility function u(x, 7),
where z is the amount of the good produced by this monopoly that the
consumer consumes, and y is the income that this consumer has to make
other purchases. All other prices are being held fixed. Note that this
function u is something like an indirect utility function, and it should be
parameterized by those fixed other prices. We suppose that this consumer
has total income (or wealth) 3, so if the consumer consumes none of the
monopolys product, the consumer will have utility = u(0,3"). Now
imagine that the monopoly makes a take-or-leave offer to the consumer;
the consumer may take z* units of the good, for a payment of 2* in total.
Note well: The consumer isnt being given the option of taking as much
9.4. Nonlinear pricing 307
or as little as he desires at a price per unit of z*/z* The consumer may
have z* or none, and that is it. The consumer, then, will take this offer if it
gives him utility greater than o; that is, if u(z*,3 2") > uP. We can see
that the monopoly, if it makes a take-or-leave offer with z* the amount
of the good offered, will set the payment z* as high as possible while
keeping to the constraint ulz*,y 2%) >. (In mathematical analysis of
the problem, we'll have trouble with this strict inequality. So it is typical
in economics to rewrite the constraint as ulz*, y 2%) = , and either
assume that the consumer, if indifferent, will buy, or later fudge things by
assuming that the monopoly charges, say, a nickel less than z*.)
This is for a single consumer. If we look over all consumers, indexing
them by the subscript i, we find that this lucky monopoly is seeking to
solve the problem
max y zt TC (= | subject to u;(ef, 3; 2) 2 ul for all 4,
i i
where TC is the monopolys total cost function. Letting \; be the multiplier
on the utility constraint of consumer i, the first-order conditions on 2} and
x} are
Ou;
1 = Ai
oy
du;
d M * = j
an o(3 ) A Fo
Combining these two, we see that our monopoly will set each consumer's
marginal rate of substitution of the good for money to be equal to its own
marginal rate of substitution, which is just its marginal cost. In other
words, the monopoly will make available to every consumer enough of
the good so the consumers marginal value (in terms of dollars of other
consumption) for the good is just equal to the monopolys marginal cost.
(How does this compare with the strategy of a monopoly that is using
linear prices?) Then the monopoly extracts all the utility gains that the
consumer gets by setting the fixed take-or-leave price at the most the
consumer is willing to pay. It takes a little more algebra, but it can be
demonstrated that, short of coercion, there is no way the monopoly can
do better than this.
Of course, the assumptions that underpin this analysis are extreme.
The monopoly is assumed to be able to deal with each consumer individ-
ually. It knows the utility function of each. It can tailor its prices to each;
one consumer might be asked to pay $100 for 100 units of the good,
(},2]) (7,27)
whereas a second, who gets greater utility from the consumption of 50
units, might be asked to pay $500 for those 50. (For these two to be part
of an optimal scheme, the marginal valuation of the first consumer for the
101st unit must equal the marginal valuation of the second for the 51st,
and each of these must equal the monopolys marginal cost for producing
another unit.)
In fact, it seems unlikely that a monopoly would have this much
knowledge and power. Even if the monopoly knows the utility function
of each individual consumer, it may be compelled by law to offer to any
consumer any deal that it offers to a second. (In which case our second
consumer above would, it seems likely, prefer to pay $100 for 100 units,
and forego paying $500 for 50.) Of course, if the monopoly doesnt know
which consumer has which utility function, then it is forced to offer to
each one the same set of deals and leave it to them to select which they
wish to accept.
Still, even if the same set of deals must be offered to all consumers
(allowing them to pick which they want), nonlinear prices may come in
handy. We might imagine the monopoly trying linear prices but with a
fixed charge to each consumer; you can buy as much as you wish (as a
consumer) at a set price p per unit, but if you buy any, you must pay k
up front. Or we might imagine a scheme where consumers can buy up to
np units at a price of p; per unit, and further units cost p2 apiece. Will p,
be greater or less than p,? It depends, in part, on how well the monopoly .
can control to whom it sells how much. You are probably familiar, on
the one hand, with quantity discounts for telephone service. On the other
hand, the rate of interest on a loan will typically increase with the size of
the loan.
Actually solving for the optimal nonlinear pricing scheme can be quite
an involved problem. But the basic method is easy to state. One supposes
that the population of consumers has a given distribution of utility func-
tions, levels of wealth, and so on. Then, for each pricing scheme, one
can work out how each type of consumer will react, hence how consumer
reactions will be distributed across the population. From this, one obtains
profits for the given scheme. If the scheme is characterized by only a few
parameters (e.g., a price plus fixed fee system has two parameters, namely
k and p; a two-part linear tariff system has three, namely p;,n; and p,),
one might be able to solve analytically for the optimal scheme. Or one
could at least conduct a numerical search over values of the parameters.
For the optimal nonlinear price scheme in general, somewhat more ad-
vanced techniques (the calculus of variations or control theory) may be
needed, but the same basic method is employed.
ry ee rm ee ge ere ag esteem
eager ng
rg ee
merece
9.4. Nonlinear pricing 309
An example: A monopoly selling to monopolies
To illustrate some of these notions of nonlinear pricing and price dis-
crimination, consider the following example. A manufacturing monopoly
can produce a particular item, called a poiuyt, at a constant unit cost of
 per unit. For some reason this manufacturer cannot engage in the re-
tailing of this item. Instead, it must work through a system of retailers,
each of whom holds a monopoly on the retail business in a particular
geographical region. More specifically, in each of I regions, indexed by
=1,..,1, one firm is allowed to engage in the retail sale of poiuyts. We
will assume that retailing is a simple business so simple that it involves
no cost at all, except for the cost incurred by the retailer in buying the
units from the manufacturer. Demand for poiuyts at the retail level in
region i is given by the demand curve z; = (4 :)/B; or, equivalently,
pi = A B;z;, where p; is the retail price in region , and x; is the level of
units sold in region 4; A and B; are positive constants.? We will assume
that the manufacturer sets price(s) for the retailers, who then set prices p;
for the retail trade in each region. To keep matters simple, we'll assume
that there is no possibility of customers in one region buying from the
retailer or some middleman in another, so there is no need to insist that
Pi =p; in equilibrium. Moreover, we'll assume that, in the retail markets,
only linear prices can be charged and no discrimination is possible. We
will, however, not insist on these requirements for the wholesale markets.
Instead, we'll make a series of different assumptions about the wholesale
market to see how things change with those assumptions.
To begin, we'll assume that the manufacturer, whom we will call M
hereafter (using pronouns she and her, to distinguish from the retailers
for whom we use he and him), must use linear prices, but is allowed to
discriminate among the various retailers. That is, each retailer i is quoted
a wholesale price P;, which this retailer must pay per unit bought at
wholesale. The retailer is allowed to choose how many units he wishes
to buy and resell (or, equivalently, what retail price p; he will charge
his customers). Retailer i, facing wholesale price P;, will treat FP; as his
marginal cost and will set p; to
max (pi PA i)
Pi B;
2 We assume throughout that A > c. The fact that the same constant A applies to all
regions is an enormous convenience analytically. If you wish to, try replicating the analysis
to follow for the case where 4; changes from region to region. If you do, be prepared to do
a lot of algebra.
310 Chapter nine: Monopoly
Since this is nearly the first time we've worked with linear demand
and imperfect competition, and it is far from the last, let us solve this
in gruesome detail. First, since demand is given by pi = A BiZi, total
revenue at sales level z; is TR(z;) = Az; Biz}. Marginal revenue is
thus A 2B;z;. Marginal revenue equals marginal costs (of P;) at A
2B;z; = P;, or 3; = (A P;)/2B;, which gives p; = (A + P;)/2, and profits
7; = (A Py?/4B;. We depict all this in figure 9.3. Demand is given by
the solid line. Marginal revenue is the dashed line; note that it has the
same intercept on the price axis, and its slope is twice as great as the slope
of demand. Marginal costs are given by the horizontal line MC = P;, s0
we get z; where this line hits marginal revenue. The retailer marks up
the price of the good to pi, and the retailer's profits equal the area of light
shading. The area of darker shading will be explained momentarily.
So how should M set Pi? 1f she sets the wholesale price at B;, the
retailer will purchase (4 P;)/2B;. Hence her profits will be (P; (A ~
P;)/2B;. In figure 9.3, this is the more darkly shaded region. She picks P;
to maximize these profits, which leads to P;=(A+0)/2, hence (see
Price
_. Demand in retail market
..-- Area= Profits of retailer
Pi Area = Profits of wholesale
monopolist
NG MR for retailer = Demand
Pi for wholesale monopolist
Xi Quantity
Figure 9.3. Retailer demand and mark up at price Pi.
Given the manufacturer charges retailer i the per-unit price P;, the re-
tailer purchases (4 FP) /2B; = =; units and marks the price up to
(A+ P;)/2 = pi. The more lightly shaded region gives the retailer's prof-
its, and the more darkly shaded region gives the manufacturer's profits.
-
3 Does this square with the geometrical formula given in figure 9.27
nga roger re ire
eee ge mrt gp mg 4+
9.4. Nonlinear pricing 311
Price
A
_.- Demand in retail market
pi=@Atclld Ne--e- Area = Profits of retailer
Pi=(A+0)f2 \-- Area = Profits of wholesale
monopolist
\-- MR for retailer = Demand
for wholesale monopolist
*i Quantity
Figure 9.4. The optimal value of P; is (A+0)/2.
figure 9.4) pi = (BA +c) /4, ZT; = (A- 0 /4B;, my = 4 c?/(16By), and
II; = (A 0)*/(8B;), where m; is the retailer's profits and II; is M's
profits from this particular part of her operations.
Note two things here. First, we assumed that M could charge a
different unit price to the various retailers. Because the intercept A is the
same in all the regions, she doesnt use that power of discrimination; she
charges P; = (A+c)/2 regardless of i. Second, if M engaged directly in the
retail business in region i, she would set the retail price p; to maximize
her profits (p; )(4 p;)/B;, which gives p; = (A+0)/2. Thatis, if M
sold the good directly, more would be sold at a lower price than when M
must go through a (monopoly) retailer.
Now consider nonlinear prices. In particular, imagine that M, rec-
ognizing that she is the only person who can produce poiuyts, decides to
charge the retailers a per unit price P; and a franchise fee F;. Of course,
she cant compel the retailers to pay this fee, but she can (and does) insist
that they pay the fee if they want to purchase any poiuyts from her. Note
that we've subscripted both the per unit price and the franchise fee. We'll
assume for now that she can perfectly discriminate.
So what are the optimal P; and F; to set? Retailer i will face the total
cost function TC(z;) = F; + Piz; (for z; > 0), so this retailer's marginal
costs will be P;, and, assuming he buys any at all, he will purchase (4 
P;)/2B;, mark them up in price to (A + P)/2, and realize gross profits
(gross of the franchise fee) of (A P;)?/4B;, just as before. In fact, he'll do
all this if his net profits (A P;)?/4B; F; are nonnegative. (We'll assume
that if he just breaks even, he'll still buy and sell poiuyts. If this is wrong,
then the analysis to follow changes a bit; F; should be set just a bit below
what we derive below, leaving retailer with a small net profit, so that
he'll stay in business.) So, pretty clearly, M wants to set the franchise
fee F; at (A P;)*/4B;, leaving retailer with precisely zero profits. Of
course, as she raises P;, she decreases the franchise fee she can set. But
she'll make more on the per unit sales. Where is the optimum? It comes
as the solution to
A-PF\ (A-PB)
x 7-a( 2B, ) TTB
where the first term represents her profit from per unit sales, and the
second is the franchise fee she'll collect. To find the optimum, we set the
derivative of the expression above equal to zero, which is
AP, P-c 24-P) _
 ee 0.
2B; 2B; 4B;
The first and third terms cancel out, and we are left with (P; ) /2B; =0,
or P=c.
This simple answer may surprise you a bit at first, but it really is very
intuitive. M is going to set F; at retailer i's gross profits. Thus, in the .
end, M is going to wind up with profits equal to the fwo shaded areas in
figure 9.3, so F; should be set to maximize those two areas together. But
the two areas together are just the profits that M would make charging
pi in the retail market, if M marketed the product directly. We know that
the optimal p; for direct retailing by M is (A+c)/2. So M wants to set P;
so that retailer 7 will charge that price, which is what P; = accomplishes.
Note that while P; is independent of i, F; is not. If B; is larger
than Bj, market is smaller than market j. Thus retailer 5 will make
smaller gross profits than will retailer j, and the franchise fee set for 7
cant be set as large as the franchise fee for j. Our manufacturer M is
certainly using her powers of discrimination here. This, by the way, is
not an outrageous use of the powers of discrimination. One generally
thinks that price discrimination won't work in cases where the good can
be resold by one customer who is charged a lower price to another who
would be charged a higher price. But the franchise to sell a product is
not something that can be resold so easily (or, at least, the contract that
gives the franchise can be written so that the franchise would be hard to
resell). And it is not altogether ridiculous to think that, say, a McDonald's
rg ge eg en + vgs
or og ngs eg =
pm or mg es
9.4. Nonlinear pricing 313
franchisee in a potentially very large market will have to pay a higher fee
than a McDonald's franchisee in a potentially small market.
Nonetheless, let us consider what would happen if M were forced by
law or by circumstances to charge the same franchise fee and per unit cost
to all the retailers. It doesnt quite make sense in this setting, but if M is
unable to tell which retailers have which B; but knows the distribution
of B; within the population, this restriction on her behavior would be
natural; she would have to charge the same (nonlinear) prices to all her
customers, and let them, by their actions, identify themselves in terms of
their characteristics. That is to say, the sort of analysis we will take on at
this point is the appropriate form of analysis for cases where a monopoly
uses nonlinear prices to discriminate among a heterogeneous population,
but where the monopoly is unable to tell a priori which sort of customer
is any given customer.
We'll be very specific at this point. Suppose that A =12, =0,
and there are eight retailers: three have B; = 9 and five have B; = 6.4
How should M set P and F (without subscripts) now? In particular, will
P = c=0 be the solution?
Suppose that P is set at zero. Then the gross profits of the three
retailers with B; = 9 are A%/4B; = 144/36 = 4, while the five with B; = 6
will have gross profits of 6. Our manufacturer will consider only two
possible values for F. She can set F = 4, so that all eight retailers will
sign up. This will net her profits of 32 (and will leave 2 for each of
the five retailers in the relatively large markets). Or she can set F = 6.
This will cause the three retailers with the smaller markets to refuse to
buy franchises, but will net 6 each from the five larger markets, for a net
of 30. The point is that F < 4 is silly, since raising F' up to 4 will simply
increase her profits. And once F > 4, she may as well push F all the way
up to 6. So, with P = 0, the best thing to do is to set F = 4, giving her
profits of 32.
Let us try P = 1 next. Now the gross profits of the two types of
retailers will be 3.3611, on unit sales of .6111 for the three smaller retailers,
and 5.042, on unit sales of .91666 for the five larger retailers. (Be sure that
you can replicate these numbers.) If M sets F = 5.041, she'll get the five
larger retailers to participate, netting 5.041 + .91666 = 5.957666 from each
(the sum of the franchise fee plus the net of unit sales), for a total profit of
29.78 (approximately). No surprise there we know that if she is going
to deal with the five larger retailers only, she can (without discriminating)
charge the best combination of F and P for them, namely F = 6 and
If = 0 bothers you, set 4 =13 and c=1, and you'll get the same answers.
314 Chapter nine: Monopoly
P=0. Sosetting P =1 and then charging whatever F' will get these five
only must be suboptimal.
But she could also try F = 3.3611 in conjunction with P =1. Then
all eight retailers will deal with her. Her net profits will be approximately
8 x 3.3611 +5 x 1x 9166643 x 1x 61111 = 33.3.
Note that this is eight franchise fees, plus .91666 sold to five clients at a
price of 1 apiece, plus 6111 sold to three clients at a price of 1 apiece.
And, sure enough, this gives greater profits than the best scheme with
P =0. What is happening here is that, since M cant extract all the profits
from the five larger retailers (without losing the three smaller ones), she
is forced back in the direction of the scheme where she cant charge a
franchise fee at all, where P is not Zero.
So the optimal P won't be 0. What will it be? You can work this out
if you wish, although you may find it more challenging to try problem 3,
where you are asked to work out a slightly more complex version of this
problem.
9.5. Monopoly power?
In all of the previous discussion, it was assumed that the monopoly
could name its price (or, equivalently, the quantity that it would sell) or
could make a take-or-leave offer to potential consumers. You might won-
der just why this is supposed to be true. Consider, for example, our
fortunate monopoly, which can make a different take-or-leave offer to
every consumer and which knows the characteristics of each consumer.
Suppose it makes this take-or-leave offer to consumer X, who says no
thanks, and then comes back with a take-or-leave offer of her own. For
example, consumer X might offer to take n units off the hands of the
monopoly, at (being generous) $1 above the monopolys marginal cost for
producing the n units. Wouldnt the monopoly take this deal, if it really
believed it was the best deal it could get? And, if so, how do we deter-
mine who, in this sort of situation, does have the bargaining power? Why
did we assume implicitly that the monopoly had all this power (which we
most certainly did when we said that consumers were price takers)?
ent,
5 For those of you who remember back to a principles or intermediate micro course, an-
other way to think of this is to consider that the monopoly dealing separately with a single
consumer is in a position of bilateral monopoly which, you will recall, is meant to have an
indeterminate solution.
ca eget
ey ny gett
cen eget cece
sen ceneeagceeinenernge 8 ange =
a NN RS 25
9.5. Monopoly power? 315
Standard stories, if given at all, get very fuzzy at this point. Hands
start to wave, hems give way to haws, and way is quickly given to the
next subject. The handwaving typically involves something about how
there is one monopoly and many consumers, and it can do without any
one of them, but they cant do without it. Somehow (and this is never
made precise), the monopolys advantage in numbers gives it a credibility
about setting and sticking to a price or in sticking to its take-or-leave offer.
An important variation on this basic theme explores the extent to
which the monopoly is its own worst enemy when it comes to sticking
credibly to a price. Imagine a monopoly that is able to produce a particular
good at a cost of $1 per good. Demand for this good is given by the
demand function D(p) = 25p. If you solve the monopolys problem,
you'll find that the optimal solution is for it to set p = 13 and to produce
12 units of the good. So suppose it does this it sells the 12 units at
$13 apiece. Once those twelve units are sold, why doesnt our monopoly
decide to sell a few more at, say, $8 apiece? At $8, there is unsatisfied
demand, and our monopoly will net $7 for every additional unit it sells.
After selling what it can at $8 apiece, why not cut the price again, to say,
$4, and so on?
The problem with this is that if you are a consumer who values the
good highly (you are willing to pay $13, or even $24, if it comes to that)
and if you think that the monopoly is going to cut the price after it sells
off a few at a high price, then you will wish to wait for the price to drop.
If all consumers rationally anticipate the drop in price, then no one will
buy at $13.
Note well that the monopoly itself is the real problem here. Once
it makes some sales at $13, if it makes any (and even if not), it is in its
own best interests ex post to drop prices and sell more. Tt won't be in its
own best interests ex ante to be perceived in this fashion. But if everyone
understands that, ex post, this will be in its interests and this is what it
will do, then there isnt much it can do to convince people that it won't
drop price.
The problem we are alluding to here is variously known in the litera-
ture as the Coase conjecture and the problem of a durable goods monopoly.
(The relevance of durability comes from the notions that (a) the market isnt
continually regenerating itself, as is, for example, the market in wheat, and
(b) if the good is durable, waiting for price to drop wont hurt a consumer
too much.) The Coase conjecture, stated a bit more baldly than normal,
is that a monopoly doesnt have monopoly power. It won't be able to
keep itself from dropping the price ex post, and so everyone expects to
see prices drop. But then no one will buy at a high price. And (so the
argument goes, when worked out fairly rigorously) a monopoly can't get
anyone to buy above the price at which it is just willing to sell its
marginal costs.
Once again, the problem is one of credibility. Before we were asking
how the monopoly credibly maintains that it won't haggle with an indi-
vidual customer. Now, how does the monopoly credibly maintain that it
won't drop the price it charges as time passes?
It may well be that the monopoly can make credible commitments
not to haggle and not to lower its price. We don't need to know why
and how such commitments can be made credibly if we are testing the
theory empirically; if, in a particular market, a monopoly acts the way the
theory suggests, then we suppose that somehow or other the firm has this
credibility. But a more precise analysis of why and how it has this sort of
credibility would help refine any empirical investigation that we conduct.
What would a more precise analysis look like? Let us give two rough
examples:
(1) Certain forms of art, lithographs and castings, can be made cheaply in
multiple copies. So a common practice of artists who make lithographs
and castings is to break the mold after making a given number of
prints/casts: This practice is clearly directed towards the durable goods
problem; the artist would othetwise always have an incentive to produce
and sell more (down to the marginal cost of production, which is very
low). More generally, a monopoly seeking to commit to produce a certain
quantity and no more might try to commit itself to a production tech-
nology where the marginal cost of production rises precipitously past the
level it wishes to produce. With such a technology, the monopoly could
credibly refuse to haggle on grounds that the marginal cost of producing
an additional unit (beyond the monopoly quantity) is prohibitive.
(2) The monopoly, in a fit of largesse, could offer all its customers most
favored customer guarantees. Such a guarantee might state, for example,
that if the monopoly ever sells the good in question at a price below that
which a particular customer pays, then the customer is entitled to a rebate
of the difference (with accrued interest, say). The effect of this is dra-
matic. To conduct a precise analysis takes techniques that we don't have
at our disposal yet, but the following assertions are likely to appeal to your
6 More precisely, the extent to which a monopoly can exploit its monopoly power depends
on two factors: the extent to which the monopoly can limit its own ability to drop the price
it quotes and the impatience of customers. If, for example, the monopoly cannot change its
price more than once a month, and if some customers are unwilling to wait a month for a
somewhat lower price, then the monopoly can exploit those customers.
ots aas a ome emg
9.6. Bibliographic notes 317
intuition. If some single customer attempts to haggle with the monopoly,
the monopoly will point out the dire consequences to it of lowering the
price for even one customer (namely, it means lowering the price for all).
Similarly, lowering the price as time passes is no longer attractive. Note
that insofar as the monopolys credibility problems prevent it from other-
wise charging monopoly prices, it is in the interests of customers to have
a general prohibition against such guarantees. But each customer sees it in
her personal interest to take such a guarantee if offered, so we can imag-
ine that such guarantees might be given and taken, if conditions would
permit them to be enforced effectively. For such a guarantee to be en-
forceable, each customer would have to be able to observe all the deals the
monopoly makes. It is, therefore, in the interest of monopoly and against
the collective interests of customers to arrange matters so that all sales are
a matter of public record, so that the guarantees will be effective.
These are only two examples. There are other sources of the type of
credibility that the monopoly would like to have. In particular, in chap-
ter 14 we will explore models in which the monopolys reputation could
provide the backbone needed to name and stick to a price.
Our point for now is primarily methodological: In the two examples
sketched (and, it will turn out, when we look at models of reputation),
we address the monopolys ability to commit to a price by examining
the institutions of production and exchange. As long as we avoid these
institutional details, it is hard to say much about whether a monopoly can
muster the credibility required. More generally, many of the questions
posed (but not answered) in this chapter arise from the lack of specification
of the institutional environment. To investigate these questions, it would
seem useful to get more deeply involved with the details of the monopolys
environment. We will pick up on this theme even more strongly in the
next chapter. ,
9.6. Bibliographic notes
The objective of this chapter has been to raise some issues that we
hope will lead you to conclude that rather a lot is interesting to resolve
concerning monopoly; certainly there is more to the subject than recita-
tion of MR = MC. Some of these issues will be resolved when we get
to the appropriate tools in later parts of the book. But for the most part,
you will have to read elsewhere for the resolution of these questions. An
 That is, we are seeing here a reason why it might matter that there is one monopoly and
many customers; viz., the many customers may by their numbers be unable to act collectively.
318 Chapter nine: Monopoly
excellent treatment of all manner of material that has been touched on in
this chapter (and much that has not) is given by Tirole (1988). Part I of
Tirole covers the basic theory of monopoly and a host of topics including
the Coase conjecture, multigood monopolies, nonlinear pricing, the prob-
lem of a manufacturing monopoly selling to retailing monopolies, product
selection, and advertising. His chapters 8 and 9 give treatments of entry
deterrence. (You will have a much easier time with these two chapters
after completing part IIT of this book.)
On the subject of nonlinear pricing and price discrimination, also
highly recommended are Phlips (1983) and Wilson (forthcoming).
References
Phlips, L. 1983. The Economics of Price Discrimination. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Tirole, J. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge, Mass.
MIT Press.
Wilson, R. Forthcoming, Nonlinear Pricing. Palo Alto, Cal.: Electric Power
Research Institute.
9.7. Problems
u 1. Why is the geometrical procedure for finding the value of marginal
revenue at a quantity = given in figure 9.2 correct? Why do we know that
a monopoly (which maximizes profits in the traditional way) will produce
at larger than efficient scale in figure 9.1(a) and smaller than efficient scale
in figure 9.1(b)?
w2. What is wrong with the picture in figure 9.5, which is meant to describe
the situation of a monopoly I know?
u 3. Recall that in section 9.4 we considered a large manufacturing monop-
oly selling to individual retailing monopolies. There were eight retailers,
three of whom face demand of the form p = 12 9z, and five of whom
face demand of the form p = 12 6z. Well, it turns out that there are
actually ten retailers the eight described above and two more who face
demand of the form p = 12 2x. Costs of production and sales are zero.
The retailers are price takers in their dealings with the manufacturer. The
manufacturer can set a fixed fee F' and a per unit charge P; the retailers
take these as given and decide (a) whether to participate at all, and (b) if
so, how many units to purchase. The fixed fee and per unit charge must
be the same for all the retailers; no discrimination is allowed.
9.7. Problems Co So 319
Price/Quantity
Demand
a
.
s
s
s
\
Quantity
Figure 9.5. Picture for problem 2.
(a) What is the optimal fixed fee to charge if P is set at zero?
(b) What is the optimal fixed fee to charge if P=1?
(c) What is the optimal fixed fee and per-unit charge?
u4. In problem 3(c), you found the optimal nondiscriminatory fixed fee-per
unit charge pricing scheme for the manufacturer to employ. Now consider
general nondiscriminatory schemes. Imagine that the manufacturer is able
to publish any sort of price scheme she wants. Being formal about it, the
manufacturer picks a function & : (0,00) [0,00] with the following
interpretation: A retailer can purchase quantity = from the manufacturer
at a total cost of (z). We allow &(z) = oo for some quantities x, with the
interpretation that the manufacturer is unwilling to sell that quantity. The
manufacturer is able to control resale of this good, so each retailer must
live with the scheme @; given , each retailer chooses that level z to buy
such that its revenues selling = less its costs (z) are as large as possible.
But the manufacturer is unable to discriminate among the retailers; the
manufacturer must set a single cost schedule & and allow the different
retailers each to choose his own preferred point.
(a) Prove that the best the manufacturer can do with such a general nondis-
criminatory scheme is strictly worse than what she can do if she is allowed
to discriminate (and use general schemes).
(b) To what extent does your proof in part (a) depend on the exact num-
bers and parameterization in problem 3? Specifically, suppose that we
looked at an example in which there were a number of different retail-
ers, all of whom faced demand with the same B but with different A;.
320 Chapter nine: Monopoly
Would your proof work in this case? And what if both the A; and B;
varied? Would your proof still work in all cases? Would it only work
in some? If the latter, can you characterize precisely those circumstances
in which a nondiscriminatory scheme can do just as well as the optimal
discriminatory scheme?
() Go back to the parameterization of problem 3. What is the best general
nondiscriminatory scheme from the point of view of the manufacturer?
(This is difficult. You will be in better shape to tackle this part of this
problem after finishing chapter 18.)
u 5. Recall from chapter 8 all the problems about the pfillip industry. In
particular, recall that you solved in problem 3 for the market equilibria
(in pfillip and kapitose) when the kapitose supply function was given by
g = K/200' and the demand for pfillip was given by D(p) = 750 150p.
Now considr what will happen in these two industries if the supply of
kapitose is controlled by a monopoly whose marginal costs for producing
K units of kapitose are K/200. (You may well need to resort to numerical
solutions.)
We did nothing in this chapter in the way of deriving testable propositions from
the standard. model. Just so you don't get away without at least a taste of this:
=u 6. Consider a monopoly that faces a downward sloping demand curve
X = D(P) and constant unit costs . We are interested in how this -
monopoly will adjust the price it charges as changes.
(a) If demand is linear X = A P, show that less than the full change in
costs is passed on to the customers. (That is, if we think of p(c) as the
monopoly price, given as a function of cost c, then dp(c) [de <1.)
(b) Suppose that demand takes the form X = P~% for a > 1. Show that
the monopoly passes on more than the full cost increase to consumers.
(That is, dp(c)/dc > 1.)
(c) For which demand functions (if any) will the monopoly precisely pass
on to consumers any cost increase? (That is, for which demand functions
will dp(c)/de = 1?) You should give demand functions for which this
works at every level of . (Hint: If you begin by drawing the obvious
picture in part [a], it may help you see what to do in part [c].)
Since we introduced linear demand in the last two chapters, it might be a good
idea to say something about where it comes from. So:
u 7. In an economy that I know, there are many consumers. One of the
9.7. Problems 321
goods consumed in this economy is phiffle, a nonnarcotic relaxant. It turns
out (for reasons that neednt concern you) that we can represent the pref-
erences of every consumer in this economy as follows: If the consumer
consumes units of phiffle and has $z left to spend on all other commodi-
ties, whose prices are held fixed throughout this problem, the consumers
utility has the form
u(x) + k; 2,
where the subscript refers to the consumers index, u; is a given func-
tion, and k; is a given positive constant. This consumer must consume a
nonnegative amount of phiffle and cannot spend more money on phiffle
than he has in total, but is otherwise unconstrained.
(a) Suppose the consumer has $w to spend in total, and the price of phiffle
is $p per unit. Set up, as a constrained maximization problem, the prob-
lem of the consumer (who is a price taker) in deciding how much phiffle
to consume. Give first-order conditions and (if relevant) complementary
slackness conditions.
(b) Suppose in this economy there are ten consumers. Each of these con-
sumers has u;(z) = /z. Three of the consumers have k; = 4; four have
k; = 3; and three have k; = 2. Each consumer has $1,000 to spend. What
is the market demand curve for phiffle in this case?
(c) Continue to suppose the data from part (b). Imagine that the production
of phiffle was controlled by a monopoly with rising marginal costs given
by MC(z) = z. What will be the price and quantity delivered by this
monopoly?
(d) Now we suppose in this economy there are 100 consumers. Each of
these consumers has k; = 1, and each has u;(z) = x ;z? for = < 1/(2;)
and u;(z) = 1/(4e;) for z > 1/(2;). Moreover, the 100 consumers are
indexed by = 1,...,100 and for consumer number i, ; = i. All the
consumers in this industry have initial wealth of (at least) 2. What is the
market demand curve for phiffle in this case?
(e) Suppose in a somewhat larger economy there are 10,000,000 consumers.
This economy is broken into four regions. In region 1, are 4,000,000 con-
sumers; in region 2 are 3,000,000; in region 3 are 2,000,000; and in region 4
are 1,000,000. Inside each region, the consumers are a scaled-up replica of
the 100 consumer economy of part (d). That is, in region 2 (say) are 30,000
consumers with ; = 1, 30,000 with ; = 2, etc. What are the demand
functions for phiffle in each of these regions?
322 Chapter nine: Monopoly
u 8. Suppose a monopoly facing the sort of credibility problem sketched
in section 9.5 decided to be generous to its customers and offer each one
a most favored customer contract as outlined there. Create and analyze
a formal model that supports some (or, if you can, all) of the intuitive
assertions we made. You may ignore the time value of money, to keep
the analysis relatively simple. You may wish to return to continue your
analysis after you have completed part TI of the book.
In the next three problems, you are introduced to ways of modeling demand
for differentiated goods and to the problem of a monopoly deciding how many
varieties of a good to provide. We look at a particularly simple case of this
problem; see Tirole (1988, chap. 2) for a much more complete discussion.
a 9. Imagine a single consumer with the following very strange pattern
of demand for a particular good. This good, which we will call a griffle,
can come in any number of varieties. Specifically, any griffle is of a type 
for some [0,1]. Our consumer is interested in purchasing at most one
and precisely one griffle; he will do so if there is a griffle whose price and
type meet a hurdle that he sets. His preferences and demand behavior
for griffles are characterized by a function r : [0,1] (0,00) as follows.
Suppose N types of griffles are for sale, types ,t,...,tn. Suppose that
plt,) is the price of a griffle of type tn. Then if for each n, pltn) > rn),
our consumer will not purchase any griffle. On the other hand, if for some
tn, Py) < 7(tn), then our consumer will purchase precisely one unit of
some type n that maximizes the difference r(t,)p(t,). Note well: If more
than one type n maximizes this difference, our consumer will purchase
precisely one unit of some one of the maximands; it is indeterminate which
he will purchase. 
(a) Suppese that our consumer's demand behavior is characterized by the
function 7(t) = 7p +k|t ty] for some constants ro, k, and t; [0,1]. Being
very specific, suppose that mo = 5, k = 1, and #; = .6. Suppose three
types of griffle are being sold: types .3, 5, and .7 at prices 3, 3.3, and 4,
respectively. What will our consumer do (in terms of purchasing griffle)
in these circumstances?
(b) Fix the prices of types .3 and .7 at 3 and 4, respectively. Draw this
 You may worry that this sort of demand doesnt conform to our models of consumer
preference and demand in chapter 2. But except for an unhappy lack of continuity, this
demand behavior can be rationalized by preferences that are representable with a utility
function. If you like a real challenge, give one such utility function.
9.7. Problems 323
consumers demand curve for griffle of type 5 asa function of the price
of this type of griffle.
You may wonder how to interpret these types of good. Orne interpretation appro-
priate for the particular function T(t) given in problem 9 is that there is really
only one type of griffle, but the different types refer to locations at which griffle is
sold. More precisely, imagine that consumers live along a 100-mile-long highway.
Our consumer lives at milepost 60. Our consumer is willing to pay 5 for a unit
of griffle, as long as that griffle is delivered to her door. But there is no griffle
delivery service. Instead, there are stores along the highway where griffle is sold.
Specifically, there are stores at mileposts 30, 50, and 70. It costs our consumer
05 to drive one mile, and she counts this against the purchase cost of griffle. So
if griffle is being sold for 3 at the store at milepost 50, she figures this means a
roundtrip of 20 miles and an effective price to her of 3+ (.05)(20) = 4. She is
willing to buy a unit of griffle if it is sold somewhere at an effective price of 5 or
less, and if it is sold at this reservation price or less, she buys it from wherever
the effective price is lowest.
u 10. Now suppose there are many CONSUmers, all of whom have demand
of the sort described in problem 9, but with different values of ro, k, and
t,. We imagine, in fact, there is a mass of consumers given by a density
function (r,k,t) defined on the space [0,101 x [0,10] x [0,1]. That is, for
any subset 4 C [0,101 x [0,10] x [0,1], the number of consumers whose
characteristics (ro, k, to) lie within the set A is J, (r, k,t)drdkdt.
If is a uniform density, what does the aggregate demand function for
griffle of type .5 look like, if griffle of types .3 and .7 are for sale at prices
3 and 4, respectively. (If you find this too hard, assume that all consumers
have rp=5, k=1, and % distributed uniformly on the interval [0,1].)
= 11. Assume consumers are distributed according to a uniform density
 as in problem 10. (If that is too difficult, answer both parts of this
question assuming that only i, is distributed among the population, with
uniform distribution on [0,1].) Suppose a monopoly manufactures and
sells griffle. This monopoly has a constant marginal cost technology, with
marginal cost equal to 1.
(a) If the monopoly may sell only one variety of griffle, what variety of
griffle will the monopoly sell and at what price?
(b) Suppose the monopoly may sell as many varieties of griffle as it
chooses, but it must pay a fixed cost of 1 for every variety of griffle it
die you know measure theory, generalize suitably.
324 Chapter nine: Monopoly
chooses to offer. Suppose that the total mass of consumers is 100; that is,
lr,k,t) = 1 for all (r,k,t) [0,10] x [0,10] x [0,1]. How many varieties
of griffle will the monopoly offer? What varieties will be offered? What
price will be charged for each?
1+ perenne = ge
abn pe gre. ee
chapter ten
Imperfect competition
We move next to models of imperfect competition. Firms in these models
have rivals, and the actions of their rivals affect how well they do. But at
the same time firms are not price takers; when they optimize, they take
into account how their actions affect the prices they face both directly and,
through possible reactions of their rivals, indirectly.
We will give only a bare introduction to the subject. As in chapter 9,
we will cover the rudiments, in this case the classic models of duopoly with
undifferentiated goods: Cournot, von Stackelberg, Bertrand, and kinked
demand. Then we will discuss informally and briefly some of the many
important issues that impinge on the basic models. (The problems present
the opportunity to move beyond informal discussion.)
10.1. The classic models of duopoly
We imagine an industry with two vendors/ firms, each producing and
selling a single good. Consumers don't care from which firm they purchase
the good. Demand, as in the theories of perfect competition and monopoly,
is given by a demand curve. We'll take a very concrete and simple case
of linear demand: X = A P, where P is price, X is total quantity
demanded, and A is a constant. We'll assume that the two firms are
identical, with constant marginal costs of production k and no fixed costs.
(We assume that A > k.)
Just to set the stage, we recall the competitive and monopolistic out-
comes in this setting. In a competitive industry, price (in the long run)
would equal minimum average cost, which in this very simple setting is
marginal cost k. So quantity sold would be X, = 4 k. If the indus-
try were a monopoly, the monopolist would equate marginal cost k with
marginal revenue A 2X, giving equilibrium price P, = (4 + k)/2 and
equilibrium quantity X,, = (4 k)/2.
What differentiates the various models of duopoly are the conjectures
that each industry participant makes concerning the actions and reactions
326 Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
of its rival. In the typical model, one makes assumptions about those
conjectures and then finds the corresponding equilibrium outcome, where
an equilibrium is a point at which neither firm in the pursuit of maximal
profits wishes to change its own action, given the (re)actions that it supposes
others will take if it changes its own action.
Cournot equilibrium
In the first model we consider, each firm has Cournot conjectures about
the actions of its rival: Each of the two firms assumes that the other firm
will act in a way to keep fixed the quantity that it sells.
If we suppose that each firm has these conjectures about the other,
we can compute what is called the reaction function of each to the quantity
choice of the other. Suppose that firm 2 has output at level z,. Firm 1,
since it has Cournot conjectures, supposes that firm 2 will not change this
level of output. So firm 1 conjectures that as a function of its level of
output x, price is 4 2 Ts. The profits of firm 1 as a function of x;
will be (A 3, z;)@; kz; . This is maximized (aslong as z, <A k) at
 oi (xy) = (A k x12) /2.
(To see this, simply differentiate the profit function of firm 1.) This reaction
function of firm 1 to firm 2 says how firm 1 reacts (optimally) to the
quantity choice of firm 2, based on firm 1's Cournot conjectures about
firm 2. Similarly, firm 2's reaction function to firm 1s choice of quantity
z; is given by
zz) = (A k=z)/2.
We are at an equilibrium in this industry when neither firm wants to
change what it is doing, given how it believes the other firm will react to
any change. Here the assumed reaction is to keep the same level of output.
So we are at an equilibrium when we are at quantity levels (21, ,), which
are on the two (optimal) reaction functions. That is, (1, %,) should satisfy
#, = a3(%,) and #, = z3(&,). Since we have these two reaction functions,
we can solve these two equations (in two unknowns) and find that the
unique solution is & = &; = (4 k)/3. Alternatively, we can graph the
two reaction functions in (z;,%,) space.and find this intersection point
graphically; this is done for you in figures 10.1 and 10.2. In figure 10.1,
we graph the reaction function of firm 1 to firm 2, with iso-profit curves
10.1. The classic models of duopoly 327
Reaction function for firm
1, reacting to firm 2
(A-k)f2 i
Figure 10.1. A Cournot reaction function and
the iso-profit curves from which it is built.
_ Reaction function for firm
--~"" 1, reacting to firm 2
_.- Cournot equilibrium
(A-K)2 -
A-)3 ms
(A- 0 : ..- Reaction function for firm
2, reacting to firm 1
A-03 (ABZ A-k
Figure 10.2. The Cournot equilibrium.
for firm 1.! Note that the reaction function for firm 1 is the locus of points
where its iso-profit curves are tangent to lines of the form z, = constant.
In figure 10.2, we superimpose the reaction functions of the two firms.
Where they intersect is the Cournot equilibrium.
At this Cournot equilibrium, total output is the sum of the two equi-
librium quantity choices, or X = 2(4 k)/3, and price is Po = A ~
Xc = A/3+2k/3. Note that the Cournot equilibrium price is higher than
the competitive price but lower than the monopoly price. Prices aren't
! An iso-profit curve for firm 1 is a locus of points (z1,;) that give the same level of
profit to firm 1; that is, for a given constant C, the C-iso-profit curve is the set of points
such that (A $1 ~~ 3 k)zy =C.
328 Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
competitive, because each firm takes into account that it depresses price
when it raises output. (That is, firms are not price takers.) But firms,
by raising quantity, dont feel the full brunt of the depressed price; their
competitor feels some of this as well. Hence the equilibrium is at a lower
price and higher quantity than would be the case for a monopoly.
In the analysis above, we took as the decision variable the quantity cho-
sen by each firm. We could, with greater algebraic difficulty, have made price
the decision variable. At the risk of confusing matters, let us go through this
exercise: Suppose firm 2 is producing a quantity z,. Firm 1 can choose the
optimal equilibrium price P for itself under the Cournot conjectures that =,
will remain the output of firm 2. Of course, not every price P is available
to firm 1; it can't have a price P > A =, since such a price would be
inconsistent with firm 2 selling z;. And, we can presume, it won't want to
choose a price P lower than zero. In fact, it won't want to choose a price
P lower than k, since its average costs will be k. So suppose it chooses a
price P from [k, A =]. Under its Cournot conjectures, it will sell a quantity
z; = A x, P for a profit of (P k}A =; P). The optimal choice of
P as a function of z, is P*(z;) = (A x, + k)/2. Similarly, as a function
of z;, firm 2 will want the market price to be P*(z1) = (A =, + )/2. We
solve for the equilibrium with the conditions that at the equilibrium price and
quantities the price that each side desires should be equal to each other and
to the equilibrium price. That is,
P'(#)=P*"(&)=A& &, or
(A22+k)2=(A 21+ k)f2=A 8 &,
which simplifies to the equilibrium we computed before: # = , = (A k)/3.
Why go through this algebra when we already had the answer? We wish
to stress that to say that firms have Cournot conjectures is not to say they
take quantity (and not price) fo be their decision variable. Rather, Cournot
conjectures are conjectures about the response of the other firm, namely that
the other firm will (re)act in a way to keep the quantity that it sells fixed. 
Von Stackelberg equilibrium
Continue to suppose that firm 2 has Cournot conjectures about the
actions of firm 1, so that firm 2's reaction as a function of the quantity
choice x; of firm 1 is z3(z1) = (A 3; k)/2. But suppose that firm 1
does not have Cournot conjectures. Instead, firm 1 believes (correctly, as
 Although it will seem cryptic to most readers, a further comment is in order for those
of you who have read about Cournot equilibrium elsewhere. The statements just made do
not contradict an assertion we will make at the end of this chapter and more coherently in
chapter 12, namely that one reason to suppose that firms have Cowrnot conjectures is that
quantity output is the decision variable of each firm. For those of you to whom this is hope-
lessly cryptic, wait until the end of chapter 12 before panicking,
pn org = egret
10.1. The classic models of duopoly 329
Xa
Reaction function for firm 2,
reacting to firm 1
Cournot equilibrium
(A-k)2 _.- von Stackelberg equilibruim
(A-K)3 fmm SS
(AIM [pf ;
Iso-profit curves -:-
+
(A-k)f2 A-k
X1
Figure 10.3. The von Stackelberg equilibrium.
it turns out) that firm 2 will react to firm 1's choice of quantity in Cournot
fashion. That is, firm 1 believes that firm 2 will be influenced by z;; firm 2
will set x; = z3 (x). In this case, firm 1 selects x; to
max{(4 zy zy (z))zy kay].
Substituting for z3(z;) and differentiating with respect to z;, this yields
an optimal quantity choice for firm 1 of ; = (Ak)/2, which in turn leads
to a choice by firm 2 of #; = z3((4 k)/2) = (A k)/4, total quantity of
3(A k)/4, and equilibrium price of A/4 +3k/4.
This is known as the von Stackelberg model of duopoly, with firm 1
the so-called von Stackelberg leader and firm 2 the follower. To be more
precise, we should call this the Cournot-von Stackelberg model, since it is
assumed that the follower has Cournot conjectures, and the leader knows
(and uses) this fact.
The picture for this equilibrium is given in figure 10.3. We see here
the reaction function of firm 2, and iso-profit curves for firm 1. Firm 1 is
choosing from the reaction function of firm 2 that point which maximizes
its own profits.
Two von Stackelberg leaders and consistency
of conjectures at the equilibrium
Suppose that both firms had the conjectures of firm 1 above. That is,
firm 1 conjectures that firm 2 will respond to z; with z3(z;) and firm 2
conjectures that firm 1 will respond to z, with z(z;). What would be the
equilibrium in this case?
330 Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
Presumably, the only possibility for an equilibrium is where both firms
produce (4 k)/2. But is this an equilibrium? If firm 1 sees firm 2 pro-
ducing (A k)/2 when it is producing this quantity itself, it will surely
recognize that its conjectures about firm 2 are false, and similarly for firm
2. Because of this, we would not call this an equilibrium. In general,
we will say that we have an equilibrium when two conditions are met:
Neither firm, given its conjectures, wishes to change what it is doing; and
the equilibrium actions of the two firms are consistent with the conjec-
tures that each firm is supposed to hold. In the Cournot and the single-
leader von Stackelberg stories, the equilibrium quantities (and prices) were
consistent with the firms conjectures. In the case of Cournot, this is by
default; each firm conjectures that the other won't change its quantity,
which is consistent with any pair of quantities for the two firms. In the
case of von Stackelberg, there is a bit more to this: Firm 2's conjectures
about firm 1 (that firm 1 will not change its quantity) hold by default; and
firm 1's conjectures about firm 2 hold because of firm 2s conjectures and
corresponding reaction. But in the case of two von Stackelberg leaders,
there is no equilibrium. The only point at which firms conjectures about
each other are consistent with the situation is where each firm produces
(A k)/3. And at that point, both firms, given their conjectures, wish to
increase their output.
We will not stress this consistency condition in what follows except
in one place. But you should check along the way that the equilibria we
describe do give situations where each firm's conjectures about the other
are not disconfirmed by the equilibrium activity levels.
Bertrand equilibrium
The two firms are said to have Bertrand conjectures if each believes
that the other will not change the price that it is quoting. Now this poses
something of a quandary. Suppose the equilibrium price of a good is, say,
$10. We typically assume that this means that both firms (in a duopoly)
charge $10. Put yourself in the place of one of the two firms and imagine
that you (a) have Bertrand conjectures and (b) contemplate lowering your
price to $9 (or otherwise taking actions that would cause the market price
to fall to $9). What, precisely, does it mean to say that your rival will
maintain a price of $10?
Presumably, since the goods in question are undifferentiated, every-
one would rather buy from you than from your rival, if you are really
selling at $9 and your opponent at $10. So we will assume just this: If, in
these circumstances, you contemplate lowering your price to $9, and you
anticipate that your rival will hold to a price of $10, then you anticipate
ee gern
10.1. The classic models of duopoly 331
that the whole of the market demand at $9 will queue up outside your
door clamoring to make a purchase from you. Your opponent, meanwhile,
will face a queue without customers. Now, will you be willing to serve
all those customers? Perhaps yes and perhaps no it depends on how
many customers are queued and at what point your marginal costs equal
$9. But, for the time being, we will assume that for some reason (perhaps
legal) you are forced to sell all the demand that comes to your door.
At the same time, if in a given situation the market price is $10, you
hold Bertrand conjectures, and you contemplate raising your price, then
you contemplate that all your customers will go to your rival, and you
make no sales.
Now suppose that you are in an equilibrium situation, where both
firms charge the same price, say $10. And suppose that at a price of $10,
there is demand of A 10. How is that demand divided between the two
firms? This is quite indeterminate. Any number of divisions of market
demand between the two firms is consistent with a price of $10. So in
looking for a Bertrand equilibrium, we will describe situations in terms
of the prices firms are charging and the demand they are serving, where
prices and demand served must be consistent with the rules: If the two
firms charge unequal prices, the demand served by the low-price firm must
equal all of market demand at that price (and the high-price firm gets no
sales); and if the two firms charge the same price, total market demand
at that price is divided in some arbitrary, but specified, way between the
two firms.
Why didnt we need to worry about this in the context of Cournot
and von Stackelberg equilibria? That is, why did we simply suppose that
the two firms would both wish to charge the market clearing price, so
that we could deal in an equilibrium in terms of the two quantity levels
of output? For one thing, in any situation where both firms sell strictly
positive amounts, they must be selling at the same price, at least in the
model under consideration. But still we might worry about an equilibrium
where one firm charged a higher price than the other and made no sales;
if you wish to be very careful about things, you can go back and reassure
yourself that in neither of the previous two cases would such a situation
be an equilibrium.?
We could next try to construct reaction functions just the way we
did in the subsection on Cournot conjectures, to find equilibria. But each
2 Once again, for those of you who have seen the Bertrand story before and remember
it as being less convoluted than this, bear with this convoluted story. This way of doing
things will eventually lead you to a better understanding of just what is going on than will
direct reference to the less convoluted story that you may have heard.
332 Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
firm's reaction to a particular situation is a bit more complex in this
case, since how one reacts to a situation in which the two are charging the
identical price may depend on how demand is divided between them. It
is easier in this case to try to reason directly about what sort of situation
could conceivably be an equilibrium.
An equilibrium will consist of a pair of prices (f;,5,) and a pair of
quantities (2;,%,) where:
(@) if pr <P, then $= Ap; and ,=0
(b) if p, <P, then &,=AH, and &, =0
(0) if pr =p,, then &1 +3 =A py
and, most critically (d) neither firm wishes to change the situation, given
that it holds to Bertrand conjectures.
Now we proceed by cases.
(1) Could there be an equilibrium where the prices are unequal and where the
smaller of the two prices is more than k? No, because in such a situation, the
firm charging the higher price is selling nothing and by undercutting the
price charged by its rival this firm will capture the entire market, making
positive profits as long as it undercuts its rival at a price that still exceeds k.
(2) Could there be an equilibrium where the prices are unequal and where the.
smaller of the two prices is less than or equal to k? No, because in such a
situation the firm charging the lower price would wish to raise its price
at least a bit. If the high-price firm is charging more than k, then the
low-price firm can move from a loss or zero profits (which it incurs by
charging a price below or equal to k) to a profit (by charging more than k
and a bit less than the other firm), and if the high-price firm is charging &
or less, the lower-price firm is charging strictly less than k and so is taking
losses, which it can avoid by charging anything above the price charged
by the high-price firm.
(3) Could there be an equilibrium where the prices are equal to each other and
equal to something less than k? No, because then one firm or the other is
taking losses (we cant say which one, because we dont know whether
both are making positive sales, but one at least is doing so), and that firm
would do better to change to a higher price and make zero profits.
(4) Could there be an equilibrium where the prices are equal to each other and
equal to something more than k? No, because then at least one of the two
firms would do better by shaving its price slightly. To see this, note that
10.1. The classic models of duopoly 333
one or the other is selling no more than half the market demand at the
equilibrium price, so that firm believes that it can more than double its
sales by decreasing price slightly. This causes the profit per unit sold to
decline, but if it shaves its price only a bit, then the profit per unit won't
fall by half, and so total profits will increase.
50 the only possibility left is where p, = p, = k. And any division of market
demand between the two firms at those prices is an equilibrium. This is so
because each firm makes exactly zero profits in this configuration, which
is the best it can do given Bertrand conjectures about its rival. If it lowers
its price, it will take a loss on any unit it sells. And if it raises its price,
it will make no sales, and hence continue to have zero profit. Even if it
could change its share of demand (and we haven't indicated how it might
conceivably do that), it has no incentive to do so, since it makes zero profit
on each and every unit it might sell.
The remainder of this subsection is a bit esoteric, and even readers who reli-
giously read through the small type may wish to avoid it on a first reading. The anal-
ysis given above assumes that a firm must serve any demand that comes to
its door. If we modify that assumption, the analysis looks a bit different. To
make this precise, however, we have to specify the mechanics of the market
 what happens if one firm refuses to serve some of the demand that comes
to it. The issue here is best understood by considering a case where one firm
quotes a price p; and the other a price p,, for p; < p,. Then demand at the
lower priceis A~p:. Suppose that, for whatever reason, firm 1 is only willing
to fill =: < A pi worth of demand. Some of the unsatisfied demand may
be willing to buy at price p,. Having been turned, away at firm 1, do these
consumers get a chance to go to firm 2? And, if so, how much demand turns
up at firm 2? If we imagine, for example, that all consumers have identical
utility functions and that firm 1 rations its output z; equally among all the
consumers who show up, then it is natural to assume that the demand that
moves to firm 2 is A p, z1, as long as this is positive. (Why is this the
natural solution? We won't go into details here, but this makes a good home-
work problem.) On the other hand, firm 1 might engage in the following
rationing scheme: All the consumers who show up are given numbers. Then
numbers are drawn randomly; the consumer whose number is drawn first
gets. to demand as much as he or she wants at p;. Then a second number is
drawn, and so on, until all #; units are sold. This sort of rationing scheme
leads to the conclusion that firm 2's demand is (A p; ~ 2:4 p,)/(A ~ py).
(Another good homework problem! In fact, here are two good homework
problems, since it isnt so natural to assume that this is firm 2's demand if
the good in question can be resold.) Moreover, when we analyze the con-
jectures of each firm about the other, we have to specify conjectures about
how much demand each thinks the other will serve at various prices. This is
too hard for now, so we will stick to the simple analysis given. But, if you
have read this far, do take careful note: To make sense of this story, we had
334
Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
to begin to be very specific about the structure of the marketplace. This,
it turns out, will be the key to sorting through the various stories of classic
oligopoly.
While we are here, it is a good time fo mention another variation on the
Bertrand story, which is also too hard for a first pass. This is the Edgeworth-
Bertrand model, in which firms have Bertrand conjectures about each other
(neither will change the price it charges), but each has capacity constraints on
the amount of demand it can serve. Firms are assumed to fill all the demand
that they can up to their capacity constraints. But there may be unsatisfied
demand at some prices because of the capacity constraints. And then we need
to specify what becomes of that demand. Does it go to the other firm, and in
what quantity? Exactly the sorts of considerations given above intrude.
Another comment to make here is that the assumption that each firm is
forced to serve all the demand that comes to its door is reasonable in the
case we have been considering constant marginal costs. This is so because
no firm will (one expects) ever quote a price below its marginal cost, and
so it is willing to serve any demand that does come along. But suppose we
tried to redo our analysis in a setting where marginal costs were rising. To
be very specific, suppose that we have two identical firms whose marginal
costs of production at level z are 2%. (That is, total cost of production of
= units is #/3.) And suppose that the constant A in the demand function
is 12. One Bertrand equilibrium, which is analogous to perfect competition,
comes where price equals the marginal costs of the two firms. This is where
12 (2; + @) = @& = 3, or (approximately) @; = z, = 2.605, for a price
of 6.789.. Note that at this Bertrand equilibrium each firm makes a positive
profit, since it has strictly rising marginal costs, and price equals marginal cost
at the equilibrium. Note also why this is a Bertrand equilibrium: If either firm
raises its price, then it loses all its demand and makes zero profits. (It causes
its rival to take substantial losses, but the firms in this story don't care about
that) If it lowers its price just a bit, it can (more than) double its demand.
But every additional unit demanded is at a price below the marginal cost for
that unit. So profits will go down.
Now consider the situation in which each firm quotes a price of 8, for
total demand of four units, or two per firm. (This, it turns out, would be the
industry supply if the two firms acted as a single monopoly firm, splitting
production efficiently between them.) At this point, each firm has revenue of
16 and costs of 8/3 for a profit of 13.333. Now if either firm raises its price
from this point, it gets no demand at all. Whereas if a firm lowers its price
a bit, it will (expect to) get a bit more than twice its demand. Ignoring the
penny, if it shaves the price by a penny, it doubles its revenues to 32. But
its costs shoot up to 21.333, for a net profit of 10.667. So we have another
Bertrand equilibrium.
Of course, this second equilibrium supposed that a firm must meet all
the demand that comes its way at the price it quotes. If the firm could shave
its price by a penny from 8 and then only fill the orders it wishes to (up to
where its marginal costs equal 8), then it would indeed increase its profits. So
our second Bertrand equilibrium would collapse if firms could turn away
demand. But then our first equilibrium would collapse as well. Recall that
10.1. The classic models of duopoly 335
there both firms quoted price 6.789. Neither firm will want to lower its price.
But suppose that one of the two firms raised its price. The other firm, at a
price of 6.789, would not wish to supply more than 2.605 units, since any
additional units (at a price of 6.789) would lower its profits. (Marginal cost
at 2.605 units is 6.789, recall) So what demand would face the firm that
raises its price? This depends, once again, on the rationing rule that the other
firm uses to ration out the 2.605 units that it will sell. But whatever that
rationing rule is, as long as the first firm sees some smooth fall in its output
as it raises price, it will want to raise price to some extent. Why? Equate the
first firm's marginal revenue to marginal cost and reexpress marginal revenue
as price times (1 +1/), where is the elasticity of demand facing the first
firm as it raises its price. As long as the elasticity is finite (essentially, as long
as its demand falls off smoothly) and marginal costs are nondecreasing, the
first firm will raise its price from marginal cost. Most sensible rationing rules,
including the two we discussed above, will have demand fall off smoothly.
Thus price-equals-marginal-cost won't be a Bertrand equilibrium, when firms
can refuse some demand and marginal costs are (strictly) increasing.
So what will be a Bertrand equilibrium? No pair of prices will do in this
instance, at least if the firms have the same cost function. For suppose there
were a pair of prices and a pair of quantities that would work. One case is
that the two prices are the same. Then either that price is at the marginal
cost of the two firms, and we saw that this wasnt possible, or it is above the
marginal costs of the firms. This isnt possible either, since at least one of the
two firms, by cutting price just a bit, can increase its demand discontinuously.
As long as price is above marginal cost, profits will increase strictly by sucha
move. And if the two are quoting different prices, the lower price will have
to be the monopoly price or above for one firm, since it acts as if it has the
entire industry demand curve for itself.? But then the firm with the higher
price by cutting its price to just below that charged by the firm with the lower
price will certainly do better. At this point, it is best that we leave Bertrand
competition.
Kinked demand
The last classical model we will look at concerns kinked demand. A
version of this is phrased in terms of price conjectures, and another is
phrased in terms of quantity conjectures. We'll do the latter, as it makes
sense a bit more easily.
In this model, the conjectures of each firm about the other depend
on the equilibrium attained. Suppose we are in a situation where the
two firms are producing, respectively, & and Z,. At this point, firm
1 conjectures that firm 2 will continue to produce & as long as firm 1
produces #; or less. But, firm 1 conjectures, if it attempts to produce an
amount x; greater than #,, then firm 2 will increase its output to match
b . a
For rigor freaks, this implicitly assumes that the revenue curve in the industry is con-
cave. Can you see the argument if this assumption doesnt hold?
336 Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
whatever firm 1 produces. And firm 2 has symmetric conjectures about
firm 1. :
Where do these conjectures come from? They are, like all the other
conjectures discussed so far, simply supposed. We've so far seen no rea-
sons to support the hypothesis that they are reasonable conjectures. Which
isnt to say that they aren't reasonable each firm may well react in just
this fashion. All we are saying is that we have no theoretical grounds to
suppose that this will be so.
We note immediately that the consistency condition discussed back in
the subsection on two von Stackelberg leaders plays a role here: The only
points that are consistent with the firms conjectures are where ; = I.
This is so because, if &; < &, (say), then firm 2 conjectures that firm 1 will
increase its quantity to &, and symmetrically if &, < &;. Accordingly, we
can restrict attention to situations where the two firms pick identical levels
of output, and we will use & to denote that level.
In this case, reaction functions can be used again. What will the
reaction functions look like in this case? Suppose that firm 2 is at output
level & = z,. Firm 1's problem, then, is to
* max(A Ty (x1, I) - kz,
 1
where y,(z,, &) = max{z;, x}. (That is, y, gives firm 2's supposed response
to z;, which is to produce z; = & if firm 1 produces & or less and to match
firm 1's output above %.) This gives firm 1 a marginal revenue curve that
is discontinuous. For z; < z,, firm 1's marginal revenue is A x; 27;.
For x, > x, firm 1's marginal revenue curve is A 4z,. Firm 1's optimal
response is given by the level of x; at which marginal revenue equals
marginal cost k. This is
A-kx)/2 A-k1)/2<m; Ge, z, > (4-k)/3);
z7(z,) = (A-k)/4 if (AFk)/4 > 3; and
T for (Ak)/4 <x, <(A-FK)/3.
We can draw some pictures of this muddle. First, for fixed T = x,,
firm 1 sees its demand curve as the curve given in figure 10.4. Note well
the kink that is why this is called the theory of the kinked demand curve.
The kink falls precisely at #; = ,, which is where firm 2's (supposed)
behavior changes. This demand curve gives the marginal revenue curve
shown. Note the discontinuity in the marginal revenue curve, which falls
at the position of the kink. And now we see why we get the funny reaction
i sg eommimg
10.1. The classic models of duopoly 337
_..- Demand curve facing firm 1
_.- Marginal revenue curve for
firm 1
Xi
2 Al2
Figure 104. Demand and marginal revenue
for the story of kinked demand.
A-k _.-- Firm 1's reaction to firm 2
"4 - Possible equilibria: points within the
oe oval along the line x; =x; between
A (A-l)/dand (A -k)/3 are equilibria
VN (A-RB(A-0)
(A - 4 PF
,---- Firm 2's reaction to firm 1
(A-K)4 A-k
Figure 10.5. The two reaction curves for kinked demand.
curve described above (and drawn in figure 10.5). If =, is small enough,
then the marginal revenue curve passes through the level k on its bottom
segment. If z, is rather large, then the marginal revenue curve passes
through the level of k on its top segment. And for a range of z,,
marginal revenue jumps from above k to below k at its discontinuity
point. For those values of x,, the optimal response of the firm 1 is just to
match firm 2's output.
So what are the equilibria? We have also drawn on figure 10.5 the
reaction function of firm 2 to firm 1's choice of quantity output. The two
intersect at a number of points, namely x; = (= ) between (4Ak)/4 and
(Ak)/3. Any of these give an equilibrium. Note that this ranges from the
monopoly outcome (total supply is (4 k)/2 and price is (A+k)/2) down
to the Cournot outcome (total supply is 2(Ak)/3 and price is 4/3+2k/3).
338 Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
Which of the classic models of duopoly is correct?
We have seen that the models of Cournot, Bertrand, and von Stack-
elberg all make distinctly different predictions as to what will happen in
the duopoly situation we describe. The model of kinked demand makes a
number of different predictions, any of which might happen, which widens
the set of predictions still further. Which, if any, of these predictions will
be borne out by data?
In the end, the answer to this question must be empirical. And it will
probably be that none of the models is correct in all cases of real oligopoly.
Instead, one may be able to develop propositions such as: Across a set of
industries, long-run equilibria more closely resemble the predictions of
Cournot, say, the more the industry has the characteristics (fill in
the blank). To form a better test of such propositions, one would like to
see why, on theoretical grounds, certain characteristics might go well with
certain of the classic models.
The sorts of characteristics that might be studied are those concerned
with the actual mechanics by which price is set and demand is filled in
an industry. The classic models above are quite deficient in this respect.
Demand is given, and equilibrium conjectures about out-of-equilibrium
responses are specified. But (except for when we discussed rationing in
the Bertrand model) no attentiqn is paid to how equilibria are achieved.
To take five extreme cases, suppose that the mechanics of the industry
are one of the following:
(a) Two producers work in isolation, preparing the quantity they bring to
market. They decide upon these quantities with a foreknowledge of this
market structure and with knowledge of the characteristics of demand, but
neither side gets to see how much the other is producing. After production
is completed, each side brings the quantity it produced to a central market
place, where it is handed over toa state sales commission that sets price
so that the total amount brought to market is just demanded at the set
price.
(b) We have the same two producers as above and the same state sales
commission, but one producer is able to produce its quantity first. That
is, this producer brings to the market a quantity ;, which the second
producer observes. And then the second producer decides on an amount
x, to produce, knowing that price will be set so that the market clears at
total quantity z + 2.
(0) Things work much differently in this case. The two producers inde-
pendently call the state sales commission and give a price at which each
ag gr
ggg Teg ge
[E
I
SU,
10.1. The classic models of duopoly 339
is willing to sell. The state sales comission investigates market demand
at those prices, and then calls back the two producers, telling them how
much they are obligated to bring to the market. (Or, to take a variation,
the state sales commission tells the one quoting a lower price how much
it may bring, if it wishes. After the first says how much demand it will
service, the state sales commission calls the higher price producer. The
state sales commission has a particular rationing scheme it uses in cases
where a firm doesnt wish to service all the demand it gets.)
(d) Back to our two producers who produce quantities independently. But
now they call the state marketing commission in advance, saying how
much they plan to bring. And if one says it will bring more than the
other, the second is given permission by the state marketing commission
to bring up to the amount being brought by the first.
(e) This one is very complex. The two producers must first install capacity
for production. Capacity is costly, coming at a cost of k; per unit capacity
installed. Capacity is installed by the two simultaneously and indepen-
dently. Then each sees how much capacity the other installed. And then
each calls the state marketing commission and quotes a price at which it
is willing to sell. Production is possible up to the level of capacity at an
additional marginal cost of k, per unit where k = k; + k,. No production
beyond the level of capacity is possible. If a capacity constraint does bind
when prices are named, the state marketing commission rations demand
by some system or other. This good is resaleable among consumers, and
all consumers are aware of market demand conditions.
In scenario (a), Cournot conjectures make particularly good sense.
Fach side believes that the other won't change its quantity in the face of
a change by the one for the simple reason that neither side has the op-
portunity to change its quantity. In scenario (b), von Stackelberg seems
sensible. The second firm (presumably) takes the first firm's quantity sup-
ply as given, since it is given, and maximizes its own profits. So it works
off its reaction curve. And the first firm, if it understands this, would pick
an initial quantity so that it maximizes its profits with the second firm's
optimal response coming from that reaction curve. Scenario (c) leads nat-
urally to Bertrand conjectures for the same reason that scenario (a) leads
to Cournot. Scenario (d) may remind you of kinked demand, but it isn't
quite the same; we have to check that if one firm outproduces the sec-
ond the second will wish to respond by increasing its output unit for unit.
(Any guesses about how this will turn out? Sounds like a good homework
problem.) And scenario (e) probably reminds you of nothing you've ever
340 Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
seen before. But, it turns out, it leads fairly naturally to a prediction of
Cournot outcomes. Seeing that this is so is fairly difficult.
Do any of these models match the market mechanics of any industry
you can think of? Probably not. For one (important) thing, each of them
is a story of a one-shot encounter between two firms. Any of them could
be complicated by adding, ... and the same thing happens again every
month, with the two firms discounting profits at a rate of (say) 10% per
year. We will see in chapter 14 that this complication is extraordinarily
significant.
The answer to the question posed at the start of this subsection is that
no one of the classic models is going to give accurate predictions in every
case. Each makes sense (and should give accurate predictions, although
this remains an empirical question) if you have in mind a particular de-
tailed mechanism for how the market operates. None will mz:> sense if
you have in mind some different mechanisms. You might be able to tell
whether (or when) one model or another should give a good prediction
by looking at the details of the market mechanism. But this will require a
theory of how to move from market mechanics to outcomes.
We will use techniques from noncooperative game theory for this
purpose. The key to these techniques is that one is very precise about
the mechanics of the competitive interaction, saying precisely who moves
when, with how much information. By being precise in this fashion, one
sometimes gets quite sharp predictions. (As we'll see, at other times the
predictions are anything but sharp.) We will begin to develop these tech-
niques in chapter 11, and we will return to the classic models of duopoly
at the end of chapter 12. But before doing so, we discuss a few further
basic ideas from the theory of imperfect competition.
10.2. Bibliographic notes and discussion
The treatment of duopoly with undifferentiated commodities that we
have given is adequate for our present purpose of developing the basic
tools of microeconomic theory. But this treatment is both a bit unfair
to the classical references themselves, which give a much more reasoned
explanation of from where the sundry conjectures might come and more
than a bit incomplete as a sampling of what is important in the theory
of oligopoly and, more generally, imperfect competition. The reader can
repair the injustice by reading the classics: Cournot (1838), Bertrand (1883),
 And if after the next two chapters you wish to see how it works, see Kreps and
Scheinkman (1983). Good luck.
pr ye qu PR Gp A AT Ag ge
ge +
A ps ee
10.2. Bibliographic notes and discussion 341
von Stackelberg (1934), Hall and Hitch (1939) and Sweezy (1939) (the last
two for kinked demand). And, preferably after completing this book,
the reader can plunge into the rich theory of imperfect competition quite
efficiently by studying Tirole (1988). (By recommending Tirole alone, I
do not mean to slight other books. But Tirole gives a comprehensive
treatment of most important theoretical issues, with everything done in
the most modern style, a style for which the rest of this book is meant to
prepare you.)
We will in later chapters return to some of the issues connected with
oligopoly and imperfect competition. But these are issues that take many
pages to do justice to, so for the most part we do not pursue important
variations on the basic models above. To whet your appetite, then, we
close with the mention of some of the more important variations.
Oligopoly
We examined only the case of duopoly and, at that, the case of two
identical firms. Many oligopolies have more than two firms and/or firms
that are not identical; it is obviously germane to extend our models accord-
ingly. Solving for the Nfirm symmetric Cournot and Bertrand equilibria,
where the firms are identical, demand curves are linear, and production
technologies are linear, is an entirely straightforward exercise. (In fact,
it is problem 5.) Looking for asymmetric equilibria, which is necessary
when firms are not identical, is a bit, but only a bit, harder (cf. problems
6 and 7).
Entry and exit
Why are there only a given number of firms in an oligopoly? Espe-
cially when firms in the industry are making profits, we can wonder why
the industry doesnt attract entry. In the case of monopoly, one can make
a case based on legal restrictions. For oligopolies, similar cases can be
made in some instances only a certain number of firms may be licensed
to make a particular product. These licenses may come from the govern-
ment, say in the production of pharmaceuticals or pesticides or in VHF
broadcasting, or they may be granted by a monopoly holder of a patented
process.?
But more often the explanation is that there are economic (instead of
legal) barriers to entry. The threat of cut-throat competition by incumbent
? Why would a patent holder ever license another firm to produce the product on which
it holds the patent, instead of producing the product as a monopolist? For one story, see
problem 19 of chapter 12.
342 Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
firms can hold other firms out of the industry. (When spun out into a
model, this story becomes a more sophisticated version of story of entry
deterrence in monopoly that was caricatured in chapter 9.) There may be
technological or knowledge barriers to entry; breaking into the business
of manufacturing large commercial jet airframes is, to say the least, difficult
for a firm that has no experience making jet aircraft. And fixed costs by
themselves may prove to be barriers to entry see problem 8 below.
Taking a more detailed look at an industry, there may be segments,
some of which are inhabited by some firms, others inhabited by others.
Then the notion of an entry barrier is transformed into the notion of a
mobility barrier something that prevents firm A from moving into the
profitable sector of the industry inhabited by firm B. For a normative dis-
cussion of entry and mobility barriers, see Porter (1980).*
When asking why there are only four or five (or however many) firms
in a particular industry, one can think of the industry as static; the focus
is on a long-term stationary situation, in which no new firms enter (and
no incumbent firms leave). In a sense, these are not theories of entry,
but theories of no-entry. A different perspective comes from looking at
an industry or a product more dynamically; think of industries that grow
and industries that decline. There have been a number of studies (of
varying degrees of formality) about entry and exit decisions of firms in
such industries, studies of which firms enter at which stage of industry
growth, and which depart as the market shrinks away.
Differentiated commodities
Tn the formal models discussed in this chapter, the duopolists were
assumed to be producing and selling undifferentiated commodities. Note
especially that it was the undifferentiated character of the product that led
to the extreme results of Bertrand competition, since a penny less in price
by one firm meant that firm got all the demand.
Some oligopolies produce virtually undifferentiated commodities 
producers of industrial chemicals, for example. But in many oligopolies,
the products sold are (or are made to seem) different. A Chevrolet and
a Ford or a Toyota and a Honda of roughly the same size and charac-
ter may be similar, but consumers perceive differences between them; if
4 That is, Porter is writing for oligopolists, explaining how to build and maintain entry
and mobility barriers.
5 Ben in this case there is some differentiation in the goods having to do with relation-
ships between the producer and the dient firm. The test of how much differentiation exists is
quite simple: How much lower a price would one firm have to charge than all others before
it stole virtually the entire market from its rivals? )
que rere reg rg germ
eg
10.2. Bibliographic notes and discussion 343
Toyota charges $500 less than Honda for a similar cat, it may increase its
demand at Honda's expense, but some loyal customers will still stick with
Honda.
If we just take as given that oligopolists produce differentiated com-
modities where the differences (and corresponding cross-elasticities of de-
mand) are exogenously imposed, we can redo much of the simple duopoly
theory we developed above. (You will do this in problem 9.) But it is even
more interesting to consider whether oligopolists will endogenously strive
to differentiate their products. The.reason to engage in differentiation
should be clear: Especially if we believe in the Bertrand model, but in
any model where oligopolists compete, the more they differentiate their
goods from one another, the less competition there will be, and the more
each can engage in something like monopoly pricing. (See problem 10 for
one example.) On the other hand, if your rival has fixed his product in
a certain position in terms of its attributes, by moving the characteris-
tics of your product closer to his you are providing for yourself a broader
market. Starting with Hotelling (1929), there has been great interest in the
extent to which oligopolists engage in willful product differentiation and
whether the amount of product variety provided is more or less than is
socially desirable. Tirole (1988, chap. 7) gives a good survey.
Research and development
Nowhere in this book have we (or, except at the very end, will we)
think about the dynamic process of research and development in which
new products and production technologies are discovered, developed, and
refined. These issues transcend the setting of oligopoly. We can investi-
gate how much R&D will be undertaken in competitive industries and
by monopolies, but oligopoly is a particularly fertile field for inquiry into
these questions, since the rivalry between oligopolists is meant to provide
strong incentives to engage in R&D (incentives that are weaker at best in
monopoly, except for the cases where patents reward successful R&D with
further monopoly). At the same time, oligopolists have the wherewithal
to engage in large scale R&D. As usual, our suggestion is to begin to study
these topics with Tirole (1988, chap. 10).
Monopolistic competition
We come in the end to the other model of competition between imper-
fectly competitive firms, the model of monopolistic competition as developed by
Chamberlin (1933). Most books on intermediate microeconomics (and many
principles books) develop this theory in detail, as much detail or more than
is given to oligopoly. In comparison with oligopoly, the theory is remarkably
344
Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
Price
Average cost
Demand
Quantity
Figure 10.6. Equilibrium in a monopolistically competitive industry.
determinate it gives simple and dean answers complete with a very in-
teresting picture (figure 10.6). Were it not for the presence of this theory in
most lower level texts we would ignore it here altogether. But since many
readers will have seen it and wonder how it fits into the general picture be-
ing presented here, we will offer a very fast recapitulation and then some
criticisms.
The story of monopolistic competition runs as follows: We imagine an
industry for a product that can be produced in many different varieties. There
are matty firms in the industry and many more waiting on the sidelines to
enter if entry seems profitable. Each firm produces a particular (unique) va-
riety of the product in question. Each firm's technology is described by a
U-shaped average cost curve, given, say, by a fixed cost plus increasing
marginal cost technology. If we compute demand curves for each firm by -
varying the price charged by the firm while holding other prices fixed, each
firm faces a downward sloping demand curve. This downward sloping de-
mand curve arises because each firm produces a product that has unique
characteristics and so attracts (to some extent) its own clientele.
* Each firm believes that it can adjust its price/ quantity to be any point
along its own demand curve without engendering a change in price for any
of its many rivals, so each approaches its own demand curve as would a
monopolist; each sets marginal revenue equal to marginal cost, finding the
price to set and quantity to sell. The usual justification for this assumption
is that if one firm lowers its price all other firms see a very small change in
their demand and so will not react at all.
As for entry and exit, if any firm in this industry is making losses, it will
leave the industry. And if any firm in this industry is making positive profits,
entry to the industry will occur. These entrants all pick their own unique
variety of the good to sell, and the entry of any one entrant has negligible
effect on the demand curve of any firm already in the industry. But as many
entrants enter, the effect is cumulative on industry participants; they sez their
demand curves shift down and to the left.
Taking this story at face value, what will an equilibrium look like? Every
active firm in this industry will be making zero profits; that must be true
because firms making negative profits leave, and if firms are making positive
en, spor rin
peg eg rns rg ein. i
10.2. Bibliographic notes and discussion 345
profits, entry occurs. If an equilibrium is a situation with no inflow or outflow
of firms, the only possibility left is zero profits. This means that the demand
curve each firm faces must be tangent to and otherwise below the firm's
average cost curve; if the demand curve lies entirely below the average cost
curve, the firm will be making losses no matter what it does, whereas if
the demand curve is (at any level of quantity) above average costs, the firm
can make strictly positive profits at that quantity. If in equilibrium firms
face downward sloping demand, the only possible picture is that given in
figure 10.6. The firm's demand curve is tangent to average cost at a quantity
that is less than efficient scale. To speak in jargon, firms are producing (in
equilibrium) at a level at which they have excess capacity.
Following development of the rudiments of this theory, it is normal to
comment on the efficiency of this market structure; on the one hand, firms
are producing at an inefficient scale (bad), but consumers are getting some-
thing for this, namely a wide variety of products (good). The issue of effi-
ciency of a monopolistically competitive industry gets rather complex, and
we won't attempt to summarize the debate here. (See Tirole, 1988, chap. 7.)
Instead we ask, What industry might this be a model of?
The dassic answer given is retailing or service industries. The feature
that is meant to differentiate the many shops is in the first place location; each
shop is unique in that it alone occupies a particular location in a particular
block, and it faces a downward sloping demand curve despite the vast number
of shops in the world, because it really only competes with shops near to-it.
Someone living on Second Avenue between 10th and 11th Streets is unlikely
to consider a visit to a shop all the way across town, even if that shop across
town has the product at a much cheaper price than any of the local shops.
The real choice set for this consumer consists of the shops on the corners of
Second Avenue and 10th and Second and 11th, and maybe, if it really has
good prices, the shop on Third and 10th. Hence each shop, even if it raises
its price a bit above that of the competition, will still attract some clientele.
Whether the retailing business approximates the conclusions of monop-
olistic competition is an empirical question. Retailing in the United States,
at least, is usually a very low margin business, which is a point in favor of
the theory's implications. But it is worth objecting to the application of the
model to shops on various street corners on purely theoretical grounds. (That
is, we may have the right conclusions but for the wrong theoretical reasons.)
The objection is that what the shop on Second and 10th does cannot be sup-
posed to have negligible effect on how nearby shops fare and what they do.
The shop on Second and 11th knows well that its competition is just a block
away, and if Second and 10th runs a special on apples, Second and 11th will
respond with a special on bananas. Moreover, if the shops on Second Avenue
are making profits and a new shop, in response to this, sets up on Second Av-
enue and 12th, this will significantly affect the demand of the Second Avenue
shops (that are near to 12th Street), and it will have little or no effect on the
demand at shops across town. This situation is not as described in the model
of monopolistic competition; it is a model of local oligopoly with entry.
There is nothing wrong with having a theory of local oligopoly, except
that just as oligopoly theory isn't determinant, neither is a theory of local
346 Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
oligopoly. In the story of monopolistic competition, each shop owner believes
he can change his prices without response from any competitor. The reason
given is that when he changes his prices, none of his competitors see much
effect on his own demand. That dearly is wrong for local oligopolists. We
could assume in a local oligopoly that all the shop owners have Bertrand
conjectures, but (at this point) that is just one assumption out of many that
we could make.
Is there an industry that meets the conditions of monopolistic competi-
tion? We leave the reader with this question as a challenge. Can you think
of an industry in which (a) firms face downward sloping demand, (b) cross-
elasticities of demand for any pair of firms are low, and (c) there is free entry?
Here is one case to chew on: Consider the lunchtime restaurant trade (or
private clubs) in a metropolitan business district. Can you construct a model
of consumer demand at a large number of restaurants such that if any restau-
rant lowers its price it draws a little bit of clientele from each of the other
restaurants, and such that a new restaurant entering the business takes a bit
away from all incumbents, but doesnt drive any one (or a few) significantly
closer to bankruptcy?
References
Bertrand, J. 1883. Thorie Mathmatique de la Richesse Sociale. Journal
des Savants 499-508.
Chamberlin, E. 1933. The Theory of Monopolistic Competition. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Cournot, A. 1838. Recherches sur les Principes Mathmatiques de la Thorie des
Richesses. English ed., N. Bacon, ed., Researches into the Mathematical
Principles of the Theory of Wealth. New York: Macmillan, 1897.
Hall, R, and C. Hitch. 1939. Price Theory and Business Behavior. Oxford
Economic Papers 2:12-45.
Hart, O..1985. Monopolistic Competition in the Spirit of Chamberlin: A
General Model. Review of Economic Studies 51:63-82.
Hotelling, H. 1929. Stability in Competition. Economic Journal 39:41-57.
Kreps, D., and J. Scheinkman. 1983. Quantity Precommitment and Bertrand
Competition Yield Cournot Outcomes. Bell Journal of Economics 14:326
37.
Novshek, W. 1984. Finding All n-Firm Cournot Equilibria. International
Economic Review 25:61-70.
41 am grateful to Drew Fudenberg for suggesting this industry as a possibility. If you wish
some help in constructing preferences with the required properties and a bit of heavy math-
ematics won't dissuade you, see Hart (1985), from whom much of this commentary is drawn.
10.3. Problems 347
Porter, M. 1980. Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and
Competitors. New York: The Free Press.
Sweezy, P. 1939. Demand under Conditions of Oligopoly. Journal of Po-
litical Economy 47:568-73.
Tirole, J. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Von Stackelberg, H. 1934. Marktform and Gleichgewicht. Vienna: Julius
Springer.
10.3. Problems
nl. In the model of a duopoly with undifferentiated commodities, one firm
has Cournot conjectures and the second has Bertrand conjectures. Can you
find an equilibrium?
m2. In the model of kinked demand, the firms conjectures were such that
the only possible equilibria were symmetric. If we change the nature of the
firms conjectures, then perhaps we can find asymmetric equilibria. For
both sorts of conjectures described below, find all the pairs (&;, 2.) that are
equilibria.
(a) At equilibrium (2,4), firm 1 believes that firm 2 will continue to
produce #, as long as z; < #1, but that firm 2 will match any increase
in firm 1's output (above #,) unit for unit, and vice versa. That is, firm
1 believes that firm 2 will produce #, + max{0,z; ;}. Firm 2 holds
symmetric conjectures about firm 1.
(b) At equilibrium (;,%,), firm 1 believes that firm 2 will continue to
produce , as long as firm one produces a level z; below ;. But firm 2
will increase its production in response to an increase in firm 1's production
in an amount that keeps the relative market shares of the two firms the
same as in equilibrium. That is, firm 1 believes that firm 2 will produce
max{#,, (2/#1)x:}. Firm 2 holds symmetric conjectures about firm 1.
m 3. An economy I know has 1,000 identical consumers and two goods.
The two goods are phiffle, a nonnarcotic stimulant, and manna, a basic
foodstuff. Each consumer has a utility for phiffle and manna of the form
u(z, 2) = wz) + z, where z is the amount of phiffle consumed and z the
amount of manna. Assume that w is strictly concave and continuously
differentiable. The function w is concave and satisfies w'(0) = 100 and
w'(100) = 1. The price of manna is always $1, and each consumer has
wealth exceeding $10,000 which is spent entirely on phiffle and manna.
348 Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
(a) What is the shape of the market demand curve for phiffle, for prices
between $1 and $100?
Two firms sell phiffle. For some reason, one firm is willing to sell at a
price of $2, while the other insists on a price of $3. Moreover, the first firm
is willing to sell only 50,000 units of phiffle. The second firm is willing to
sell to all comers. Assume that w'(90) = 2 and w'(75) = 3.
(b) Suppose that the following mechanism is used for the distribution of
phiffle. The first firm asks each consumer how much phiffie he wishes to
buy at a price of $2. If total orders are less than 50,000, each consumer
is given whatever he asks for. Otherwise, phiffle from firm 1 is rationed
equally to each person who wants some, up to the amount that the person
wants. That is, we divide the 50,000 units equally among all the consumers
and ask whether any consumer is getting more than he asked for. If so,
those consumers who asked for less are given what they asked for, and
the remainder of their share is divided equally among all the consumers
who are still rationed, and so on.) After this rationing scheme, consumers
can go to the second firm, if they wish, and buy as much (more) phiffle as
they would like for $3. What will be the result of this scheme?
(0) Suppose that phiffle is distributed as follows. The first firm asks each
consumer how much phiffle she wishes and then distributes the phiffle as
follows: A consumer is chosen at random and is given whatever she asks
for, up to 50,000 units. Then, if anything remains of the 50,000 units, a"
second consumer is chosen at random, and so on, until either all consumers
have been served or the 50,000 units are exhausted. After this distribution,
consumers can purchase phiffle from the other firm, at $3 per unit. What
will be the outcome of this distribution system if phiffle cannot be resold?
(d) What will be the outcome of the distribution system in part (c) if phiffle
can be resold? (Assume that consumers in this economy are very savvy
folks.)
(e) If you like a challenge, think about these three scenarios with the added
complication that the economy is populated with a large number of het-
erogenous consumers. You will need to formulate some of the problem
for yourself.
az 4. Go back to a manufacturing monopoly that produces items at a con-
stant unit cost k, and that must sell these units to retailers who sell the
items at zero additional cost (beyond the cost the retailers incur to buy the
items from the monopoly). Suppose there are two retailers, and they act
according to Cournot conjectures. Demand is (what else) P= A Q.
10.3. Problems 349
(a) Assume the monopoly charges retailers according to simple linear
prices at a price the monopoly sets. What is the optimal price for
the monopoly to set?
(b) Suppose the monopoly can use a two-part tariff scheme, where it
charges each retailer a fixed fee, plus a per unit charge for any units bought.
What is the optimal pricing scheme for the monopoly?
(c) Now consider what will happen if the two duopolists compete with
Bertrand conjectures.
#5. Consider an industry in which NV firms all produce an undifferentiated
product. Demand for the product is given by X = A P. Each producer
is identical, having a constant average cost of k.
(a) Suppose all N producers have Cournot conjectures: Each conjectures
that it can change the amount it produces and all its rivals will continue
to produce the amounts they are producing. What is the symmetric equi-
librium in this case? (An equilibrium is symmetric if all the firms are
producing the same amount.) What happens to the equilibrium price as
N approaches infinity?
(b) Suppose all N producers have Bertrand conjectures: Each conjectures
that it can change the price it charges without any reaction from rivals in
the prices they charge. What is the symmetric equilibrium in this case?
() Suppose one firm is a Stackelberg leader and all the rest have Cournot
conjectures. That is, each of the NV 1 followers believes that it can change
its quantity without any response in quantities from any of the other firms.
The one leader understands this and picks its quantity optimally. What
equilibria can you find? What happens to price as N goes to infinity?
(d) Suppose the N firms are numbered 1,2,...,N, and 'they have the
following sort of conjectures: Firm N has Cournot conjectures. Firm N1
has Cournot conjectures about firms 1 through N2 and believes that firm
N works off its Cournot reaction curve. Firm n has Cournot conjectures
about firms 1 through n1 and believes that firms n+1 through N work
off the reaction curves given by their conjectures. What equilibria can you
find? What happens to price as NV goes to infinity?
(e) Construct a model in the spirit of kinked demand for the setting of an
N firm oligopoly.
m 6. Here is an alternative scheme for finding Cournot equilibria. In our
discussion in the chapter, we computed reaction functions for each firm
350 Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
of the form what quantity would the firm choose to output if the
other firm produced 2z'? Suppose instead we answer the question:
quantity x produced by one firm is consistent with X in total from both
firms? We would find this by looking at the problem
max(A k X 6)(a +8)
and finding, for a given X that amount that has 6 = 0 as a solution.
Why? Because we are computing here how the firm would choose to vary
its output from z if the total output is X when the firm chooses x; when a
variation of 0 is optimal, x is consistent with X. Carrying this out (so you
will see that it works), the first-order conditions in 6 are A-k-Xa = 26,
which are satisfied at 6=0 if A-k-X =a. Thatis, s.X%)=A-k-X
is the production by one firm consistent with X produced by both. At
an equilibrium 22(X) = X, or 2(A k X) = X, or 2(A k) = 3X, or
X = 2(Ak)/3, which then yields z = (Ak)/3, our Cournot equilibrium.
(This technique is due to Novshek [1984].)
(a) In part (a) of problem 5, you were asked to find the symmetric equi-
librium of an N firm oligopoly where firms have Cournot conjectures.
Using the technique just presented, find all the equilibria including any
asymmetric ones that may exist.
(b) Now repeat part (a) of this problem but in a setting where the N firms
that make up the oligopoly have possibly different unit costs; let k, be
the unit cost of firm n for each n.
a 7. Suppose that in a duopoly with an undifferentiated product, demand
is given by X = AP and firms have Bertrand conjectures and different
unit costs., Specifically, firm 1 has constant average costs of k, and firm
2 has constant average costs of k,, with k,; < k,. What is (are?) the
equilibrium(a)?
a 8. Suppose an industry produces an undifferentiated product for which
market demand is given by X = AP. There are many potential producers
for this product, each of whom has a production function of the form:
Fixed costs of F' must be paid for being in business, and the marginal
cost of a unit of production is a constant k. We imagine that firms decide
whether to enter the industry under the supposition that, after all the
firms that are going to enter do so, competition will be according to the
Cournot model. That is, if N firms are in the market each has Cournot
conjectures. An equilibrium is achieved with N firms in the industry if
10,% Problems 351
each firm, having its Cournot conjectures, does no worse than break even,
whereas if another firm entered and made this an N +1 firm Cournot
oligopoly, all the firms would lose money. What is the equilibrium in this
case? What (if anything) would be the equilibrium if firms had Bertrand
conjectures throughout? (Note well: The number of firms is set and then
firms compete. The exercise is not that firms charge a price, say, and then
other firms can enter assuming firms already in the industry will stick to
that price. But as long as we're sketching this alternative, what would
be the Cournot and Bertrand equilibria with entry under this alternative
scenario?)
2 9. Suppose two duopolists produce given differentiated goods. The
prices that each obtains in equilibrium depends on the quantities output
by each (or, alternatively, the equilibrium quantities demanded for each
depends on the prices each charges), according to the inverse demand
functions
p= A~ 2, baz and p,=A2~ bz,
for constants A and b. The constant 6 is restricted to the interval (1,0),
where b > 0 means that the goods in question are substitutes and b <0
means they are complements. (We use quote marks here because we are
not working with precise definitions of these terms; cf. chapter 2.)
(a) Give Cournot, von Stackelberg and Bertrand equilibria for this model.
If you find the algebra getting a bit too thick, solve for equilibrium values
(quantities, prices, profits) for the parameters Az=10,k =1 and b=
.9,.5,.1, and .5. Note that the two firms do better in Bertrand than in
Cournot for the case b < 0. Can you give an intuitive explanation of this?
(b) In the von Stackelberg equilibrium of part (a), the follower has Cournot
conjectures and the leader optimizes given the followers reaction function.
We could equally well imagine a case in which the follower had Bertrand
conjectures and the leader optimizes given the reaction function so en-
tailed. This is called the Bertrand-von Stackelberg equilibrium. (The von
Stackelberg equilibrium in part (a) is then called the Cournot-von Stackel-
berg equilibrium.) Solve for it, at least for the four parameterizations given
previously.
(c) In both sorts of von Stackelberg equilibria, the leader has higher profits
than if there were no leader at all. Prove that this is so. (It will suffice to
demonstrate a weak inequality.)
352 - Chapter ten: Imperfect competition
(d) In Cournot-von Stackelberg for b > 0 and Bertrand-von Stackelberg for
b <0, the follower has smaller profits than if there is no leader, while for
Bertrand for b> 0 and Cournot for b < 0, the follower has larger profits
than if there is no leader. What intuitive explanations can you give for
these observations?
This entire problem is the tip of an iceberg that goes by the rubric strategic
substitutes and complements. If you read Tirole (1988) or other treatments of
imperfect competition, watch for it under that name.
= 10. Imagine a duopoly in which firms produce an identical good
for consumers who live along a 100-mile highway. We imagine (in the
spirit of problem 10 in chapter 9) that consumers are distributed uniformly
along the highway at a density of ten consumers per mile. Each consumer
has reservation price $100 for one unit of the good, but each pays a cost
getting to and from the store that must be added to the price of the good
when comparing against the reservation price. The good costs each of
the two firms $1 per unit to produce. Each firm is allowed to open one
store somewhere along the highway. If the firm is located d miles from
a consumer, the consumer pays $(d/50)* for the round-trip from home
to the store-and back. The two firms locate their stores (which serves to
differentiate their goods in the minds of consumers, if they dont locate
one on top of the other) and thn they compete with Bertrand conjectures.
What is the equilibrium in this case? (We have been a bit imprecise in .
specifying the model, so be very clear what assumptions you are making.
If you like a challenge, consider what would happen if travel costs were
linear instead of quadratic. If you do this, be prepared for enormous
frustrations.)
Further problems on variations on the classical models of duopoly are given in
chapter 12.
 pi re re pr gr
part II
Noncooperative game theor:
~
pr ap reg ge TT gg TTT
emer pris get
chapter eleven
Modeling competitive
situations
Prologue to part III
In part III, you will be introduced to some of the terms and concepts of
noncooperative game theory. Note the words introduce and some;
this is far from rigorous and far from comprehensive. But I hope it will
serve as enough background for the sorts of applications we will discuss
later and will arouse your curiosity sufficiently so that you'll study it
further.
Note also at the outset that these chapters will concentrate exclusively
on noncooperative game theory, and, at that, primarily on equilibrium (or
Nash equilibrium) concepts. A lot of game theory, perhaps the bulk of
developments from the 1950s and 1960s, concerns so-called cooperative
game theory. Recently, however, the emphasis has shifted toward nonco-
operative game theory to the point where noncooperative game theory
has become a very important tool for microeconomists. Do not be misled
by the terminology. It isn't that economists have recently become more
interested in uncooperative behavior. Rather, as we will see in great detail
in chapter 14, the emphasis recently has been more on explaining(how(co- ~
| operation (and many other forms of aggregate behavior) can(emerge(from) =
> {(self-interested( individual(behavior within a given set of rules, which is;
the defining characteristic of noncooperative game theory. It is probably
best just to regard the terminology as jargon and wait to see what emerges
from so-called noncooperative theory. Nevertheless, the jargon is used, so
be forewarned that we will not discuss a large chunk of game theory at
all. Seek other sources for an introduction to cooperative game theory.
In this chapter, we will look at how competitive situations are con-
ventionally modeled in noncooperative game theory. Two sorts or forms
of models are used, the so-called extensive form game and the normal or
strategic form game. We will describe each of these modeling forms in this
chapter and consider some of the basic issues involved in moving from
356 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
one form to the other. In chapter 12, we will consider solution concepts for
the games posed in this chapter, concentrating on Nash equilibrium analy-
sis. Then in chapters 13, 14, and 15 we investigate three important types
of application of the theory: models of incomplete information, repeated play,
and bilateral bargaining.
11.1. Games in extensive form: An example
The story
Consider the following story. As owner-manager of Jokx Toys and
Games, you are thinking about introducing a new game called Oligopoly,
which will teach children from ages 8 to 12 the basic principles of imperfect
competition: You must decide very soon whether to introduce Oligopoly
and if you do decide to go ahead, you will have to spend $40,000 to
complete design of the game, advertise it, and set up production.
The market for a game like Oligopoly is highly uncertain. You decide
to consider two possibilities: The market will either be large, yielding total
sales of 20,000 units, or it will be small, with sales totalling 6,000 units.
You assess probabilities .4 and .6 for these two possibilities. These figures
suppose a wholesale price per unit of $12; raising the price will cause sales
to plummet, whereas lowering it will not increase demand appreciably.
Another source of uncertainty is that a competitive firm, Beljeau Games
and Toys, is considering the introduction of a game called Reaganomics,
which will compete directly with Oligopoly. In fact, if you introduce
Oligopoly and Beljeau introduces Reaganomics, the competition that en-
sues will force each of you to charge only $10 per unit (wholesale) the
overall market, which will be either 20,000 or 6,000 units, will not be en-
larged by the fall in price and you will each get a one-half share of the
market.
It will cost you $5 per unit to produce Oligopoly in addition to the
$40,000 fixed costs mentioned above. You will be able to produce exactly
as many units as you sell (produce to demand).
The situation for Beljeau is somewhat similar. As you sit debating
whether to introduce Oligopoly, the managers at Beljeau are debating
whether to introduce Reaganomics. The press of getting these games out
in time for Christmas means that you cannot wait to see what they do
before deciding whether to go ahead with Oligopoly; similarly, they must
decide about Reaganomics before learning of your decision on Oligopoly.
But they have one advantage they have commissioned a market sur-
vey whose results they will learn before deciding whether to proceed with
11.1. Games in extensive form: An example 357
Reaganomics, a survey that will tell them without error whether the market
will be large or small.
Beljeau will incur a fixed cost of $60,000 if it develops Reaganomics,
and a unit cost of $3 per unit (produced to demand). Reaganomics will
sell for precisely the same price as Oligopoly $12 wholesale if only one
product is in the market and $10 wholesale if both firms are marketing
their (respective) games.
Decision trees
Looking at this problem from your point of view, we can build a
decision tree that represents the problem you face. The tree is given in
figure 11.1. For those of you who have never seen a decision tree before,
we offer some words of translation. We start at the left-hand side; the box
there with two branches coming out represents the decision that you must
make right now whether or not to introduce Oligopoly. Boxes are called
decision or choice nodes. If you choose to introduce Oligopoly, then things
will begin to happen to you: You learn the size of the market (large or
small), and you learn what Beljeau decided to do (introduce Reaganomics
or not). These are things outside your control; from your point of view
they are chance events (although you may have a pretty good idea what
Beljeau will do). So we depict them as chance nodes, or branching points
in the tree marked by circles. On the other hand, if you dont introduce
Oligopoly, from your point of view the problem is over.
This gives us five branches in the tree, each one representing a
unique sequence of choices by you (Jokx) and outcomes of events that are
outside your control. Note in this regard that we put in two chance nodes
for Beljeaus choice, so that we have four outcomes following a decision
by you to enter the market. Then for each of the five branches, we can
+
Contribution to
profits in $000s:
Beljeau in
Large market 10
Beljeau out
Introduce 14) ] 100
Beljeau in
Small -25
market {.6} Beljeau out 2
Don't introduce Oligopoly 0
Figure 11.1. The decision tree of Jokx.
358 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
evaluate how much contribution to profit you will receive. For example,
if you introduce Oligopoly, the market is large, and Beljeau introduces
Reaganomics (the topmost branch), you will sell 10,000 units for $10 whole-
sale, or $100,000 in revenues, less fixed costs of $40,000 and manufacturing
costs of (10,000)($5), or total costs of $90,000, for a $10,000 contribution to
profits, and so on. These numbers are written in on figure 11.1 at the end
of each branch. Finally, we know the probabilities that the market is large
or small, so we put these in on the appropriate branches in the tree.
Could we depict your decision tree in other ways? Figure 11.2 gives
two possibilities. In figure 11.2(a) we interchange the two chance nodes,
putting Beljeaws decision first and then the size of the market. And in
figure 11.2(b) we combine the two chance nodes into one having four
possible outcomes. The rule that we must follow in constructing decisions
trees is
The fundamental rule of decision trees. A chance node precedes a choice node
in the tree if and only if the uncertainty represented by that chance node resolves
- Contribution to
: profits in $000s:
: Beljeau in Large market 10
Introduce small -25
Large market 100
2
0
(a)
Contribution to
profits in $000s:
Large market and Beljeau in
10
Large market and Beljeau out
Introduce 100
Small market and Beljeau in
mall market and Beljeau out
Don't introduce Oligopoly 0
]
Figure 11.2. Two different representations of Jokx' tree.
11.1. Games in extensive form: An example 359
Contribution to
profits in $000s:
Jokx in
Introduce
Large 120
market |.4} 0
-39
-6
market .6} 0
Figure 11.3 The decision tree of Beljeau.
in the mind of the decision maker prior to the time at which the choice must be
made.
Since you must decide on Oligopoly before any uncertainty resolves, as
long as your choice node comes first, you are living within the strictures
of that rule.
As for Beljeaus tree, they will learn the size of the market prior to
making their decision, so the chance node for size of market must come
first in their tree. And they dont learn about your decision regarding
Oligopoly until after their decision, so the chance node for your decision
must come after their choice node. This gives the decision tree in fig-
ure 11.3, with contributions to profit and probabilities for the market size
supplied.
This is a relatively simple example, and we can see the answer just
by inspecting the decision trees. Look at figure 11.3 first. If the market
is large, then Beljeau will make a positive contribution no matter what
Jokx does if they go ahead with Reaganomics, so they are pretty sure
to do so. Whereas if the market is small, Beljeau is sure to lose money
with Reaganomics whatever Jokx does, so they will probably decide not
to proceed in this case. This means that in figure 11.1, if the market is
large, you (Jokx) can be sure that Beljeau will be in the market, netting
you $10,000 if you introduce Oligopoly. Whereas if the market is small,
you can be pretty sure that Beljeau will be out of the market, and you will
net $2,000 if you introduce Oligopoly. So since you are fairly sure that
9 We haven't supplied probabilities on the branches in figure 11.2, because we don't know
probabilities for Beljeaus actions (yet). In general, the rule on probabilities in decision trees is
that the probability that goes on any branch must be conditional on any previously resolved
event, so we cant even supply probabilities for market size in 11.2(a).
360 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
Beljeau will be out if the market is small, you can safely enter the market;
you will make a positive contribution no matter what.
Despite this simplicity, we will carry forward with this example. Early
in the next chapter we will arrive at the conclusion just stated, and while
we already know the answer to this problem, the techniques we will use
will help us to see through more complex games?
An extensive form representation
In a game tree, we use one tree structure to represent both players
decision problems. How could we ever represent both decision problems
in a single tree? The obvious problem is that the order of nodes depends
on whose perspective we take. Even so, it can be done. Have a look at
figure 11.4. This is rather a mess, but if you bear with me, it will become
clear. to
The game starts with the open circle or node near the middle of the
page. (The game will always start at the open circle in this sort of picture.)
Note that Jokx appears besides this open circle, meaning that at this point
it is Jokx who must choose what to do. Jokx is limited to two choices that
correspond to the two arrows pointing out of this initial node labeled intro
O (for introduce Oligopoly) and don't.
Follow the choice intro O by Jokx to a second node depicted by a
closed circle. (Open circles will be used to denote only the initial node.?)
This node is labeled nature, meaning that at this point we imagine the -
Intro R IntroR
(0,120) (10,10)
0,0 (100,0)
Nature
Don't ~ Intro O
Small Small
16] {.6}
Intro R
0,6) (-25,-39)
0 2,0
Figure 11.4. The game in extensive form.
! Problem 1 gives a good example. If you like to work out problems as you read along,
now is a good time to do problem 1(a).
bor nodes see below.
11.1. Games in extensive form: An example 361
choice of which path to follow is determined by events under the control
of neither player. Nature chooses between a large market and a small one
with the probabilities given on the branches. You next come to nodes at
which Beljeau must choose between intro R (introduce Reaganomics) or
dont, and at the end of each path through the tree you find a vector of
payoffs, in this case measured by contributions to profit. Jokx payoff is
first and Beljeaus second. So, for example, if Jokx introduces Oligopoly
(move right), the market is small (move down), and Beljeau introduces
Reaganomics, you reach the vector (25,-39), meaning that Jokx loses
$25,000 and Beljeau loses $39,000. Similarly, if Jokx introduces Oligopoly,
the market is large, and Beljeau doesn't introduce Reaganomics, you reach
the vector (100, 0), meaning Jokx has made $100,000 and Beljeau has netted
Zero.
The one problem is that we've put Beljeaus decision after Jokx
decision in the tree. Beljeau, remember, doesnt know what Jokx has done
when it must make a decision. We depict this in the picture by the two _
dashed lines. Take the upper one. This connects Beljeaus two decision
nodes in the circumstances (a) Jokx introduces O and the market is large,
and (b) Jokx doesnt introduce O and the market is large. Beljeau cannot
distinguish between these two circumstances, and so we join these with
the interpretation: Whatever Beljeau does at one of the two nodes joined
by the(dashed (line, it must do precisely the same thing at the other. This
- >|is called an (information set; in general, all the nodes in an information
- set(represent(circumstances at which some player is{called upon to move
- withemt (knowing which of those(circumstances pertain.
Recall that we labeled the initial node Jokx, since Jokx moved there,
and the second two nodes nature, since the moves there were taken by
forces outside of players control. But we didnt label the next set of
nodes directly with Beljeau. Instead, we labeled the two dashed lines or
information sets, and these labels on dashed lines are meant to imply that
at all four of the nodes in the two information sets Beljeau chooses what
to do.
Most importantly, note that Beljeau has two information sets labeled
Beljeau #1 and Beljeau #2. These correspond to the two different decisions
that Beljeau must make: Whether to introduce Reaganomics if the mar-
ket is large (#1); and whether to introduce Reaganomics if the market is
small (#2).
There is, of course, a strong, (connection between the{extensive form game
tree in figure 11.4 and the {two (decision trees in figures 11.1 and 11.3. In par-
|ticular, every (choice(pode in the decision tree of a player will{correspond
to one(information (set for the player in the game tree. So, just as there are
F
362 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
two decision nodes for Beljeau in 11.3, so there are two information sets
in 11.4. And just as there is one decision node for Jokx in 11.1, so there is
one information set for Jokx in 11.4, where a single node belonging to a
player that is not joined to any other by a dashed line is thought of as an
information set in its own right.
Why did we put the nodes in the order we did? In many cases, we
have a lot of freedom in choosing the order. The only rule that we must
follow is that
| . . . . -
i If someone learns something prior to making a particular decision, where the
something learned could be either a move by nature or a move by another player,
then the node representing what is learned must precede the node where the
: decision is taken.
Hence the node(s) for nature must precede Beljeaus nodes. Compare with
the rule for decision trees, where the rule is more definitive; there we say
that something outside the control of a player, depicted by a chance node,
comes before a choice node if and only if the player learns the resolution of
that chance event before making the decision. For game trees the impli-
cation runs only one way: We are allowed to put a chance node before
a choice node if the player who is choosing doesnt learn what hap-
pened at the chance node until after the choice must be made; to repair
this misordering, we use information sets.
In this particular example, we have three generations of nodes: One
for Jokx' decision, one for Beljeaus, and one for nature's. The rule says
that in a game tree natures nodes must precede Beljeaus. But that is the
only implication of the rule. Hence besides the order J] n B that
we used in figure 11.4, it is possible to depict this situation in a game tree
with the order n B J and in the order n J B. It is probably
a good exercise to draw these two other orders for the game tree. It
hardly needs saying, but the point of this exercise is entirely in getting the
information sets drawn correctly. :
There is animportant point here. In tepresenting the game on a single
' tree, what we want to do is(convey (what each(party(knows(whenever itis
that partys(move, and we want to include all the complete {sequences |
of steps that might get us from start to finish. The word sequence is
in quotes because there is @o) (particular (temporal sequence to things 
{sets of(events might be better. Actual calendar time matters only insofar
as it determines (to some, but not complete, extent) what one party might
know when it is time for that party to move. That is, barring prescience,
I
~-
- menage meg
earner nee ear eter
11.2. Games in extensive form: Formalities 363
which we will do, one can only know things that happened before. Bub)
there is no reason to suppose that one knows everything that happened
before that is hardly descriptive of reality and it is knowledge and
not time that rules what orders of moves can/ cannot be used in this sort
of tree.
(Once you understand this example, a useful way to test your under-
standing is to proceed to the problems at the end of the chapter.)
11.2. Games in extensive form: Formalities
The tree representation of a game in figure 11.4 is called a game in
extensive form. Now that we have an example to bear in mind, we will
look at the formal structure of games in extensive form. What follows is
formal and mathematical, and the mathematically unsophisticated reader
may find it hard to read through. Most of the examples we'll look at
will be fairly straightforward, and if you understood the example in the
previous section, the formalities to follow are likely to be unnecessary. But
it is probably worthwhile to give what follows a try, if not to get all the
details (which become fairly obscure toward the end) then at least to get
a sense of how one proceeds generally. We will restrict attention in these
formalities to finite player, finite action, and finite tree games, with a few
comments at the end about extensions to more general settings.
An extensive form representation of a noncooperative game is com-
posed of the following list of items: a list of players, a game tree, an assigh-
ment of decision nodes to players or to nature, lists of actions available at each
decision node and a correspondence between immediate successors of each decision
node and available actions, information sets, an assignment of payoffs for each
player to terminal nodes, and probability assessments over the initial nodes and
over the actions at any node that is assigned to nature. This is a long list and
these things are subject to various rules and regulations, so we proceed to
develop this list a step at a time.
(1) There is a finite set of players. We will number the players with arabic
numerals, as 1,2,...,1, for a game with I players. A typical player will
be labeled 4. In addition to these players is a natural force, which we
will call nature, that acts something like a player. We will refer to nature
with the symbol IV.
(2) There is a game tree. This consists of a finite set T and a binary relation
< on T'. A typical element of T' is denoted by t and is called a node. The
binary relation is called precedence; and T forms an arborescence with <.
364 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
This means that < is asymmetric, transitive, and satisfies the following
additional property:
Ift <t" and t' <t" and if t#t', then either t < or t/ < t.
To understand what this means, make the following constructions and
definitions.
For t T write P(t) = {t/ T: ' < t} and call P(t) the set of predecessors
of t.
For t T write S(t) = {t' T: t < t'} and call S(t) the set of successors
of t.
Let W denote the set of nodes in T with no predecessors, or W i= {t 
T: P(t) = 0}. We sometimes call W the set of initial nodes of the game
tree.
Let Z denote the set of nodes in T' with no successors, or Z := {t T :
() = 0}. The nodes in Z are called the terminal nodes of the game tree.
Let X denote the set of nodes that are not terminal nodes, or X := T\ Z.
These nodes are sometimes referred to as the decision nodes of the game
for reasons that will become clear in a bit.
Now let us try to make sense of the requirements that < is asymmetric
and transitive and has the extra property listed above. First, we will
translate this extra property into words. What it says is that if two distinct
nodes precede a third then one or the other of the two nodes precedes
the other one. That is to say, the set of predecessors of a given node is totally
ordered by <, where a set is totally ordered by a binary relation if any two
distinct elements of the set are ordered in one direction or the other.
Think in terms of the pictures we were drawing in the previous sec-
tion, where nodes (elements of T') are depicted by circles and arrows point
from some nodes to others. We say that < # if, starting from , you can
find a path of arrows that point from to some ti, from ; to t,, from
t, to 3, and so on, until is reached. Note that the way this has been
defined < is automatically transitive. Asymmetry of < then tells us that
there are no cycles in this arrangement of nodes and arrows. And to say
that < totally orders the set of predecessors of a given node is to rule out
the sort of thing shown in figure 11.5(a), where the node labeled x has two
predecessors that are unordered by precedence.
11.2. Games in extensive form: Formalities 365
oo os
do
 @ J No
Ne INA
|
(a) (b
Figure 11.5. Two things that aren't allowed in game trees.
In (a) the node x has two (immediate) predecessors, neither of which
precedes the other. This violates the condition that the predecessors of
any node must be totally ordered by <. In (b) a cycle starts at x.
To see more formally what this assumption does, consider the follow-
ing proposition:
Proposition. For each t T which is not in W, there exists a unique node
p(t) T such that p(t) <t and, if t <t and t' + p(t), then t' < p(t).
We call p(t) the immediate predecessor of t. Uniqueness of p(t), if it exists,
is easy to show. If there were two nodes, say ' and t that satisfied this
definition, then # < t and # < would both be required, and this
would contradict asymmetry of <. As for existence, since P(t) is a finite
set and since it is totally ordered by a transitive and asymmetric <, there
is some element of P(t) that does not precede any other element of P(%).
(Prove this, if you like little logical puzzles.) This element is p(t).
This is what we get from the assumption that < totally orders the
predecessors of any node : Any node that has predecessors has a unique
immediate predecessor. So if we begin at any node , either it is an initial
node or it has a unique immediate predecessor p(t). And either p(t) is an
initial node or it has a unique immediate predecessor p(p(t)), and so on.
Beginning from , we can trace back along a unique path to some (unique)
initial node. (Remember that T is a finite set, so we have to come to an
initial node eventually if we are to avoid cycles.) This explains why this
sort of structure is called an arborescence or a tree. Think of a point in a
(real) tree. If we go back along the tree's branches from this point toward
the roots of the tree, a single path of branches leads back to the trunk and
366 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
thence to the roots. Put the other way around, starting from the roots the
tree opens out; it doesnt grow back in on itself.
Note that we have not insisted that our tree T' have a single ini-
tial node. That is, we allow more than one node to be in W. In figure
11.4, we had a single initial node (the open circle), but we wish to keep
available the possibility that the tree T has a number of possible starting
points. So, to pursue the botanical metaphor, perhaps we should call Ta
grove instead of a tree. (We will stick to conventional language and use
tree.)
In fact, let us tie together carefully the sort of picture in figure 11.4
and our mathematical construction of a tree. In our pictures, nodes are
of three types: open circles, filled-in circles, and vectors of numbers, with
arrows pointing from some nodes to others. In these pictures, there is
never more than one arrow pointing towards any given node. Open circles
are distinguished by the fact that no arrow ever points toward them, ie.
arrows only point out. And vectors of numbers only have a (single) arrow
pointing toward them, ie., no arrows leave them. All nodes that are not
vectors of numbers have at least one arrow pointing out from them. And
no path that follows arrows is a cycle. With these geometrical conventions,
we have that the open circles are the initial nodes (members of W) and
vectors of numbers are the terminal nodes {members of Z). One node
precedes another if some path from the first along the direction of our
arrows leads to the second. The crucial properties are that each node has
at most one arrow pointing at it, which corresponds to the assumption that )
the set of predecessors of a given node are totally ordered by precedence,
and the absence of any cycles, which is asymmetry of precedence. (If you
have good geometrical intuition, you can see how these properties imply
that stafting from any node there is a unique path back along the arrows
to some node that has no arrow pointing at it.)
This says how we would create the mathematical objects of T' and <
from a picture. To reverse the process, if we had a pair (T,<), we would
(a) Draw on a piece of paper a symbol for each element of T': an open
circle if t W, a set of parentheses (to be filled in later) if t Z,and a
filled-in circle for all other .
(b) Then for each node that has at least one predecessor draw an arrow
from its unique immediate predecessor p(t) to t. Donel
We will find it useful to have yet another piece of notation. For any
node t X (any node that is not a terminal node), we write s(t) for the
set {t' T:t=p(t"}. Thatis, s(t) is the set of immediate successors of t.
11.2. Games in extensive form: Formalities 367
(3) One player (or nature) is assigned to each decision node. This is given for-
mally by a one-to-one function +: X {N,1,2,...,T}. The interpretation
is that at node z player u(x) selects what happens next. Note that we
allow the possibility that nature makes this selection. If you refer to figure
11.4, you see an example: The initial node of the game (the open circle) is
labeled Jokx, which means that Jokx moves there. Both successors to the
initial node belong to nature, and so at each of those nodes would be N.
And at each of the four successors to N's two nodes, the move belongs
to Beljeau.
(4) For each t X, there is a finite set of available actions A(t) and a function
ost) AQ) that is one-to-one and onto. The idea here is that each arrow
or step in the game is given a name, this being the action that is required
to move from one node to one of its successors. The requirement that is
a one-to-one and onto function from s(t) to A(f) means that from a given
node there is a correspondence between actions that can be taken and
the next node in the game that will be reached. Every action leads to a
distinct successor to , and every successor to is reached by a distinct
action. In terms of figure 114, from the node in the left-center of the
page following the action don't by Jokx, nature has a choice of two actions,
large market and small, which lead to two different nodes (where Beljeau
moves).
(5) The nodes t X are partitioned into information sets with the following
three requirements for any pair t and t' that are in the same information set:
(a) t P(t) and t' & P(t);
(b) L(t) = {t'); and
(c) At) = At).
The idea here is that certain subsets of decision nodes are such that
the player choosing the action at one of the nodes doesnt know which of
those nodes he or she is at. Refer to figure 11.4. All the decision nodes
there are partitioned into five information sets. The initial node, belonging
to Jokx, is by itself (as a singleton set) an information set. So are its two
successors, which belong to nature. (Conventionally, nodes that belong to
nature are always singleton information sets, a convention we will follow
throughout.) Then there are two nodes in the information set Beljeau #1
and two in the information set Beljeau #2. As shown in this figure, we join
 If we were being very formal, we would subscript a by , but we will not be quite that
formal.
368 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
nodes in a single information set with a dashed line. (Other authors will
put all the nodes of a single information set into a balloon.)
Information sets are meant to model the notion that a player when
called upon to move might not know everything that happened previ-
ously in the game. (We put previously in quotation marks, because, as we
noted before, the order of nodes in a game tree needn't necessarily follow
temporal order of the moves.) But built into the formal construction that
Wwe use are some restrictions to this general notion. First, we require that
information sets partition the set of decision nodes. That is, every decision
node is in one and only one information set. The point is that if at node 
player (t) doesnt know whether he is at or at some t' (so ' is in the
same information set as t), then at #, this player doesnt know that he isn't
at t. Now one can imagine circumstances in which a player at one point
in a game is so badly confused that he doesn't realize that he isn't at some
different point, whereas if he were at that second point, he would realize
that he wasn't at the first point. Such circumstances cannot be modeled
directly in conventional game theory. (There are ways to model this sort
of confusion indirectly within the structures of conventional game theory;
see chapter 13 concerning how one models irrational behavior.)
Beyond this basic assumption, we make the three further assumptions
listed previously. Assumption (a) says that a player remembers at any
point in the play of a game whether he moved previously. Assumption
(b) says that any. two nodes in an information set have the same player
moving. This means that a player doesnt confuse a situation in which
he is given the choice of action with another situation in which another
player has the choice. And assumption (c) says that a player is faced with
the same available actions at any two nodes from the same information
set; otherwise (the logic goes) the player could look at the sets of available
actions and distinguish the two nodes.
In a sense, this construction of information sets and the three assump-
tions reflect an underlying basic assumption of the model, namely that the
structure of the game is understood by the players. Pictures such as fig-
ure 11.4 are meant to be available to each player, and each player is smart
enough to look at the picture and discern from it all the implications of the
structure laid out there. There is more to the three assumptions than this;
for example assumption (a) includes the assumption that players remem-
ber that they moved previously. But it is the underlying basic assump-
tion that plays the largest role in these formal restrictions. Now one may
well complain that there are many competitive situations in which players
are somewhat ignorant of pieces of the structure of the game. A player,
for example, may not know some of the options available in a particular
a
o
11.2. Games in extensive form: Formalities 369
situation. We handle this sort of thing by saying that the player in this case
doesnt really have those options. A harder case to domesticate follows:
In a given situation, a player believes he does not have certain options.
There is another situation that he cannot currently distinguish from the
present situation, and thus he currently believes that in this other situ-
ation he would not have those options. But in this second situation he
would, in fact, know that those options are available, and so he can distin-
guish between the two. This we cant model directly. (It is hard enough
to say.4) Or to take a third example, there may be circumstances in which
your rival has available options that you dont know she has. This we
can't model directly. We will discuss in chapter 13 how we might try to
model these things; for now understand that they are things seemingly
outside the bounds of our formal models.
We will use H to denote the set of all information sets in a given
game, with kh a typical information set. That is, H is a partition of X and
each h is a subset of X. By virtue of (b) and (c), every node from a given
h has the same assignment of player and the same set of available actions.
That is, if t,' h, then i(t) = 4(t') and A(t) = A@t'). Accordingly, we will
abuse notation and write (h) for the player whose turn it is to move at
all nodes in h and A(h) for the set of actions available to (k) at any node
in h. Finally, for any z X, we will write h(z) for the information set
that contains xz.
In addition to the three assumptions above, it is sometimes conven-
tionally required that for and ' that are in different information sets,
ANA) =. This assumption is useful to keep notation from getting out
of hand and it is without any loss of generality, so we make it whenever
convenient.
(6) An assignment of payoffs for each player to each terminal node of the game is
given. Formally, a function uw: {1,2,...,I} x Z R is given, where u(%, 2)
is the payoff to player 4 if the game ends at node z. We sometimes will
write this function with the as a subscript as in u;(2). In our pictures,
we write vectors at each terminal node for the vector of payoffs, with
player 1's payoff the first component of the vector, and so on. Insofar as
there is or will be any uncertainty in the game, we think of the players as
maximizing expected utility, and we think of the payoffs as denominated
in units of utility. Insofar as the players pick up bits of payoff as the game
d Develop a formal model of this situation. The key is to have separate formal objects for
the objective reality and for a player's subjective perceptions of reality. Information sets
formalize subjective perception, but the conditions placed on information sets limit what can
be modeled with them.
370 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
goes along, all those bits are aggregated into a final outcome and then
translated into units of utility by the function u.
(7) A probability distribution p is given over the set of initial nodes WwW, and for
each node t X with o) = N a probability distribution py over A(t) is given.
We think of nature as determining which initial node of the game pertains
and then, perhaps, moving during the course of the game. Nature's choice
of initial node is made according to the probability distribution p. If
called upon to move during the course of the game, say at node t, the
probability that nature takes action a A( is given by pia). In our
pictures, we will represent these probabilities by numbers in curly brackets,
either at the initial nodes of the game, as in figure 11.7 (a few pages further
on), or along the branches leading out of nodes that belong to nature, as
in figure 11.4, (When there is a single initial node for the game, as in
figure 11.4., we will neglect to put the obvious probability 1 in a curly
bracket.)
We make two points about these probabilities. First, it is convention-
ally assumed that all players share the same assessments over nature's
actions. This convention follows from deeply held religious beliefs of
many game theorists. (Recall our discussion of the Harsanyi doctrine in
chapter 3.) Of course one hesitates to criticize another individual's reli-
gion, but to my own mind this convention has little basis in philosophy or
logic. Accordingly; one might prefer, being more general, to have probabil-
ity distributions p and ps, which are indexed by i, reflecting the possibly
different subjective beliefs of each player. For most of this book, we won't
consider examples for which this additional structure will be required, and
so we follow the conventional assumption except when noted. But in fol-
lowing convention on this point, I do not mean to endorse the dogma that
lies behind it.
Second, most treatments of this subject either look at games where W
is a singleton set or at games where nature is never assigned to any node.
The idea is that if W has more than one element, we could draw ina
super-initial node that precedes the nodes of W, give nature the move
at this super-initial node, and have her pick one of the initial nodes from
the original W. Alternatively, in any game where nature is given the move
at some node, we could remove that node by having more initial nodes.
Both ways of doing things are without loss of generality; with either one
(alone), you dont need the other. But we will allow here for both, since
sometimes the pictures are neater one way, and sometimes they are neater
the other.
en = age GP
og OTe
~
11.2. Games in extensive form: Formalities 371
That is it. (That's not enough?) That is how, formally, one describes
an extensive form game.? As noted above, this sort of formalism does put
some restrictions on what you can capture, but a lot of things still can be
represented. Five things deserve special mention here.
Simultaneous moves
Imagine a game with two players, 1 and 2, who must make their
(decisions(simultaneously. Specifically, player 1 must choose between L
and R, whereas player 2 must choose between | and r. Then payoffs are
made; for example, if player 1 chooses L and 2 chooses 1, player 1 receives
2 and player 2 receives 3. These decisions, because they must be made
simultaneously, are each made in ignorance of what the other player is
choosing.
We can represent this in an extensive form game as in figure 11.6(a) or
as in figure 11.6(b). Note that in (a) we have the node for player 1 coming
before the two nodes of player 2, while in (b) we have the node for player
2 coming before the two nodes of player 1. But-in each case, we use an |
-r |informatiory set to record the fact that the player (moving gecond moves &
- withot knowing what the (first mover (did. Note also the positioning :
lof the payoff vector (2,3) in these two figures; in (a) it comes after the
sequence L-1, while in (b) it comes after r-L.
At the risk of beating this fo death, note that figures 11.6(a) and (b)
are both also consistent with the story. Player 1 chooses between L and R
at 9:00.a.M., and player 2 chooses between 1 and r at 9:10 AM. but player 2,
1 2
O oO
2 3
@ -e
ANN YR
1,4 23 32 4,1 1.4 32 23 4,1
(m) (b)
Figure 11.6. Two extensive form representations
of a simultaneous move game.
2 A piece of terminology you might run into is that all the pieces except the last two
{except for payoffs and probability assessments for nature) taken together are referred to as
an extensive form game form.
372 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
-. 5"
~~. 1/2]
ss G ,
Te ~~ wy 2 a
~~ ss ~3 AO
pd AN . 5) os
0Z_s
1720w
Figure 11.7. An extensive form game
with a strange order of moves.
when he chooses, doesnt know what player 1 chose. Insofar as no choices |
are simultaneous, it wouldn't hurt to use physical time to determine prece- |
dence, but precedence in extensive form games isi meant necessarily to
convey the temporal sequence of events. As such, there is no problem in
representing even simultaneous choices of action.
Precedence and information sets
Consider the following situation and the game tree in figure 11.7. The
three participants are called 1, 2, and 3. Either 1 or 2 is asked to choose
first, between giving the move to 3 (by choosing G or G) or ending the
game (by choosing S or ). If 3 is given the move, she can either end
the game (by choosing S') or give the move to 2 or to 1 {by choosing G').
Then, if they get the move, 2 or 1 chooses between two actions (G or S
for 1, and G or 5 for 2). The chance that 1 is asked to move first is 1/2.
(Note that we are using multiple initial nodes in this picture.)
The tricky part of this example is that each of the two initial nodes
belongs to an information set for the player who moves there that also in-
cludes the other node that belongs to that player. In other words, player 1,
if called upon to move, doesnt know whether she is moving first, because
nature started the game with her on the move, or third, because nature
started the game with 2 on the move, who gave the move to 3, who gave
it to 1 and similarly for 2. And 3, if given the move, doesnt know
whether 1 moved first or 2 did.
In the game, there is a well-defined order of moves at the level of
nodes: A clear succession of nodes (and actions) leads to each terminal
rm agg rem dig es
gg
i
11.2. Games in extensive form: Formalities 373
particular, we can say that the initial node labeled w, in the tree precedes
the node labeled z,. But the information set to which w; belongs, namely
1's information set, cannot be said either to precede or to follow 2s or 3's
information set.
For what we will do in this book, there is no need to insist on a prece-
dence order for information sets. But for some theoretical developments
such an ordering of information sets is useful. For this reason, there is a
specialization of the general notion of an extensive form, due to von Neu-
mann, in which information sets can be ordered if you ever encounter
the term an extensive form in the sense of von Neumann, it is (probably)
to this that the author refers.
Perfect recall
Look next at the tree structures in figure 11.8. Each is peculiar. Figure
11.8(a) is peculiar in that player 1 moves first and then, if she gets to move
again, her information set indicates that she forgot what she did. That is,
she is assumed to be unable to distinguish between the three sequences of
actions (I, R), (r, I), and (r, R). We have no problem with her being unable
to distinguish between the second two of these sequences; it is player 2
who chooses between R and L, and it is quite reasonable to suppose that
player 2's choice is not revealed to player 1. But how can player 1 fail
to distinguish between ({, R) and those other two? If she remembers that
she chose [ instead of r, she won't be confused.
{1/3} Arg
1 O
eX 1a
VARA
(n)
Figure 11.8. Two types of forgetful player.
3 . . .
To be precise concerning the development of these ideas, von Neumann's extensive form
came first and was later generalized to games in which information sets may not be ordered
i by precedence.
- (node. (Byt at the level of{information(sets, which is the (evel of fwhat the| to
~> | players are (assumed to (know, the [order of moves can be {uncertain. In
374 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
Figure 11.8(b) is interesting in that player 1 is modeled as making her
first choice aware of which node nature chose to begin the game. This is
indicated by the fact that the two initial nodes are not joined by a dashed
line; each as a singleton set is an information set in its own right. But if
1 chooses d (from either starting point) and then 2 chooses D, 1 moves
again, and the dashed line indicates that 1 seems to have forgotten what
nature did, something she knew previously.
These two examples illustrate that none of the assumptions made sO
far preclude a player from forgetting certain things as the game progresses.
A player is not allowed to forget the fact that she moved previously; as-
sumption (a) concerning information sets precludes this. But a player is
permitted, in general, to forget what she did earlier, and she may forget
things she knew when moving earlier.
In the analysis of many games, it is useful to assume that the players)
i don t forget these two sorts of things. Accordingly, we say that a game has:
lor satisfies perfect recall if players remember what they previously knew
and what they previously did.
Here is how this assumption is written formally.
Definition. Given a game with information sets H , the game is said to satisfy or have
perfect recall if, for any three nodes , , and =" with u(x) = oz) = fz") = 1
such that < = and hz) = F(z"), then
(a) P(z" YNh(z) is a singleton sek. We use to denote the node in this intersection. -
(The case where z = = is definitely not precluded.)
) Let {3} = sz") NP") U {z"}] and let {y} = s(=)N [Py U {z'}]. Then
aly) = a(y)-
Part (a) is, roughly, that players remember everything they knew before. Since
< and are in the same information set, and since precedes z', there
must be some node preceding z at which point the player's information
was just the same as her information at =. And, from those two points, since
she remembers what she did, she must have taken the same action (which is
part [b]).
If this definition is mysterious, the reader who is interested in formalism
should know that this definition is simpler than the one originally given. The
classic reference on games with perfect recall and indeed for the construction
of extensive form games is Kuhn (1953). Kuhn does things a bit differently
than is done here: In particular, his definition of perfect recall is a bit weaker
and even less transparent than our definition. Since Kuhn's definition is what
is needed for his theorem (cf. section 11.4), it is certainly the right definition
mathematically. But because it is a bit harder to understand, we use this
stronger rendition. The restriction on information sets if z < , then
xz & h(z') is sometimes put as part of the definition of perfect recall instead
of being imposed as part of the definition of an extensive form game. It
rE
GG
11.2. Games in extensive form: Formalities 375
is included here as part of the definition of a game because I know of no
useful or interesting examples where it is violated, whereas there are some
interesting examples of games that satisfy it but that violate perfect recall as
defined here; cf. problem 5. It should be noted, finally, that perfect recall as
defined here implies this first restriction on the structure of information sets.
We noted before that, in general, information sets cannot be ordered by
precedence. If a game has perfect recall and if we look at two information
sets for a single player, however, either every node in one has a predecessor
in the other (and not the reverse), or no node in one has a predecessor in
the other. In fact, for any game with perfect recall (or even for a game
in which some given player i has perfect recall), one can construct from
the game tree a decision tree for the player where each choice node by
the player corresponds to one of the player's information sets and where
chance nodes correspond to combinations of actions of other players. The
serious reader may find it helpful to give the details of this construction.
Infinitely many players andfor actions
When there are infinitely many players in the game or infinitely many
actions (including the possibility of infinitely many initial nodes or moves
by nature), then the formal objects given above will not suffice. For exam-
ple, in some games infinitely many players move simultaneously. Having
one move first, a second move second without knowing what the first
did, and so on, will not present a very pleasant looking tree. So, to han-
dle infinities the mathematical notion of an extensive form game must
be tuned up. There is no best or most general way to do the tuning;
for special cases, there are specially designed types of extensive games.
Aumann (1964) should be consulted by the extremely serious reader.
Rigid and well-specified rules
We noted already that there are certain sorts of confusion that we
cannot model with the notion of an extensive form game as described.
There are other situations that would be, at the least, hard to model in the
fashion given above.
Imagine a situation where two firms are linked by a contractual
arrangement; think of the firms as a coal mine and an electric power-gen-
erating firm. The contract specifies, for example, that the electric power-
generating firm may demand each month not more than X tons of coal at
a set price p per ton but the generating firm must pay for at least Y tons
of coal for some Y < X even if it doesn't take the coal. Now imagine that
demand for electricity falls, so much so that the electric power-generating
firm knows that it will not need Y tons of coal. It is willing to pay a price
376 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
higher than p if it can be released from its obligation to buy at least Y
tons. So a meeting is arranged between the two parties to see if they can
come to a mutually agreeable renegotiated contract. We are interested in
modeling the negotiation process.
Who moves first? Who moves second? What officially signifies that a
mutually agreeable deal has been made? In most negotiations these things,
which constitute the protocol of negotiations, are not really specified with
the precision we require for an extensive form game.
Two options are open to us at this point. One is to forego trying to
model the negotiation as an extensive form game and instead use some
principle concerning how we think negotiations will conclude. An exam-
ple of such a principle is: The two will come to an efficient arrangement
(one in which it is impossible for both sides to be made better off) that
splits the difference above the levels of their profits if they have to keep
to the original contract. This approach would move us from noncooper-
ative to cooperative game theory, where one looks for general principles
on which deals will be struck given a description of what players can
achieve if they cooperate and if they don't.
Alternatively, we can stick to the rules of noncooperative game the-
ory, which are that we have to be very precise about the rules of the game.
We might look at the negotiations as a process in which the two make
alternating offers with the honor of making the first offer determined by
a coin flip. We might look at the negotiations as a process in which the .
two must simultaneously make offers until they make offers that are com-
patible (meanwhile living under the strictures of the original contract). In
fact, we will study bargaining protocols of these sorts in chapter 15. The
point for now is that the methodology we are developing requires a very
precise and rigidly specified protocol, which in some instances may be
quite artificial.*
11.3. Games in normal or strategic form
From the example of section 11.1 it should be obvious that some game
situations can be represented by a number of different extensive forms.
Since all these extensive forms represent the same game, we might sus-
pect there is another way to represent the game that is a bit clearer about
the essence of the situation.
* We might hope for results that say the precise protocol doesnt matter. If your hopes
run in that direction, chapter 15 will be somewhat disillusioning.
11.3. Games in normal or strategic form 377
What is common to all the different extensive form representations
hinted at for Jokx versus Beljeau is that they all represent the same strategic
problem for the two sides. Suppose that as owner of Jokx you have decided
to take a vacation in Florida. All decisions concerning Oligopoly must be
made before you return, and you refuse to ruin your vacation by talking
on the phone with the home office. So you decide to leave complete and
unambiguous instructions as to what decisions you want taken regarding
Oligopoly.
That's preity easy you have-to decide whether to proceed with
Oligopoly or not. You will receive no useful information, so there are
really only two possible sets of instructions you might leave:
s1: Proceed to market Oligopoly.
52: Don't do this.
What is more interesting is the similar problem for the management
of Beljeau. If they are headed off for vacation, the instructions they must
leave will concern whether to market Reaganomics or not, contingent on
the results of the market survey. There are four sets of instructions they
could leave:
t1: No matter what the survey says, proceed with Reaganomics.
12: Proceed with Reaganomics if the market will be large, but not if the
market will be small.
3: Proceed with Reaganomics if the market will be small, but not if the
market will be large.
t4: No matter what the survey says, dont proceed with Reaganomics.
Now you may find strategy 3 to be fairly silly. (In fact, at the end of
section 11.1 we already indicated that {2 seems the only sensible thing to
do.) We'll worry about choosing among these four strategies in the next
chapter. For the time being we leave them all, since they represent all the
instructions Beljeau could conceivably leave behind before going off on
vacation.
Look at the extensive form depicted in figure 11.9. The game depicted
there runs as follows. You (Jokx) are heading for Florida, so you select
one of your two strategies. Without knowing what you chose (note the
information set), Beljeau picks one of their four strategies. And then nature
acts to select one of the two market sizes, with payoffs made to each side
accordingly. For example, if you pick s2, Beljeau picks 2, and the market
is large, then you are out of the market and Beljeau learns that the market
ge
378 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations 11.3. Games in normal or strategic form 379
 your two strategies. Each column corresponds to one of Beljeaus four.
Nodes belonging to nature, And in the cells of the matrix, we list your expected contribution and then
: Large (4) Beljeaus for the strategy pair corresponding to the cell.
tl g Small (6 (10,10) In general, a normal or strategic form game is given by: a list of players
ell (-25,-39) i=1,...,J;fori=1,2,...,J,a list of strategies 5; that player might em-
2 Small (al (10,10) ploy; and for each I-tuple of strategies (s;,..., 81), one for each player, the
sl eal (2,0) payoff to each player of that combination of strategies, given by functions
8 Le Small (61 (100,0) us [jn 53 > BR. Just the list of players and the lists of their strategies is
(25,39) sometimes called a normal form game form.
3 4 oe _taree lal (100,0) In moving from an extensive form to the resulting normal form, we
Jokx Si \_Small 61_,. (2,0) > undertake the following two-step procedure. First, for each player i =
Oo Si Large (4) (9120) 1,2,...,Z, the set of strategies for player is given by
 arn S (0-6) ,
ATgE Le (0,120) , S= A(h).
 Small {.6] (0,0) chin
Large {.4} (0,0) )
@<_ Small |.61_, 6) That is, a strategy s; for player i specifies precisely which action the player
Large (4) will take in every information set assigned to that player.
@< Small (6) (0,0) ' Second, (for (every, combination of strategies for the various players,
Sie (0,0) which we will call hereafter a(strategy( profile, one evaluates the (expected
- > (utility for each player, where one is taking expectation(over any frandom-
jess in the initial node or in subsequent moves by nature, using the prob-
ability distributions p and p, that are given as part of the extensive form
Figure 11.9. Another extensive form representation of Jokx vs. Beljeau.
is large and (according to 42) markets Reaganomics. Thus you make $0 game.
and Beljeau makes $120K. Note that we could just as well put Beljeau first ' Consider the extensive form game depicted in figure 11.11. Note that
and you second, using an information set for you to model the notion that player aa wo information sets and prayer 2 has one: a player Ms frst
7 * 0: m set, e nas oO moves; sne Nas oO as W at ner second. ce
you dont know what strategy Beljeau has selected when you select your a vclng te the formula just given for the strategy space of a player, she should
own strategy. . | have four strategies, viz., Aa, Ad, Da, and Dd. But if at her first information
- Onie final step, and we have what is known as the normal or strategic set she chooses D, there is no reason to consider what she would do at the
form of the game. Lets assume that both you and Beljeau are risk neutral second; by her own first action the second is precluded. In a sense, Da and
_ that you evaluate risky prospects according to their expected value. (In , Dd are the same strategies for her.
general, since endpoints in games are evaluated im terms of the players
von Neumann-Morgenstern utility functions, expected payoffs become ex- .
pected utilities.) Then if, say, you(pick(strategy sl and-Beljeau (picks #2,) + . Beljeau's strategy
you stand a 4 probability of getting a contribution of $10,000 and a 6} tl 12 13 t4
probability of a contribution of $2,000. This has an (expected (value of} < si| -11,-19.4 5.24 35,-23.4 41.2,0
$5,200. Similarly, for this pair of strategies, Beljeau has an (expected value
of $4,000. 7
In figure 11-10 we give what is known as the normal or strategic form of
the game. In this case, because there are two players, this is also sometimes
called a bimatrix form game. Each row in the table corresponds to one of
s2| 0,444 0,48 0,-3.6 0,0
Jokx' strategy
1 2 1 0
OQ 0 ~~ 3,1 Aa] 31 4,3
| I I Ad| 24 | 43
1,2 43 2,4 Da 1,2 1,2
Dd| 12 | 1.2
Figure 11.11. An extensive form game and its normal form counterpart.
We can see this as well if we look at the normal form of this game, also
shown in figure 11.11. We have drawn the normal form with four strategies
for player 1. And you will quickly note that the last two rows, corresponding -
to the strategies Da and Dd, are identical. No matter which strategy player 2
uses, these two strategies for player 1 give identical payoffs to each player.
In general, when two strategies by a single player give every player the
same payoff for any combination of strategies by the others, we say that the
two strategies are equivalent, and we sometimes list them only once in the
normal form. This applies generally, but it arises most frequently in the sort
of case shown in figure 11.11 where earlier actions of a player can render
imconsequential her plans at later information sets, because her earlier actions
mean that the later information set will not be reached. To be very precise,
when we drop equivalent stfategies in this fashion, we are creating what is
called the reduced normal form.
On the other hand, there is fio single way to proceed in general from
a normal form game to a corresponding extensive form game. In one
obvious extensive form the players all choose complete strategies simulta-
neously, but often other extensive forms could be constructed from a given
normal form. 
11.4. Mixed strategies and Kuhn's theorem
For reasons that will remain obscure until the next chapter, we con-
sider in this section the possibility that a player might wish to(choose her
Ktrategy(by some(random process.
For games in normal form the construction is easy in principle. Take
a normal form game with finitely many players, each of whom has avail-
able finitely many strategies. Such a game is specified by a list of players
 In fact, some of the early work in the theory of extensive games took on the question:
For a given extensive form game, what other extensive form games are strategically equiv-
alent, in the sense that they give the same (reduced) normal form game? For those of you
who are interested, the classic papers to consult are Dalkey (1953) and Thompson (1952).
fro
grr gn ag iy eg
mrs agen
11.4. Mixed strategies and Kuhn's theorem 381
{1,2,...,I}, (finite) sets of strategies 3; for each player, and payoff func-
tions wu; : IL. 8; R. Let XZ; be the set of probability distributions over
S;. An element og; X; is called a mixed strategy for player i, with the
interpretation that if chooses to play o;, then 7 chooses to take strategy
s; S; with probability o:(s;). We write s; for the mixed strategy (ele-
ment of X;) according to which s; is done with probability one these
are then called pure strategies for player . It is assumed that players, if
they mix, mix independently of one another, so that if players choose the
mixed strategy profile = (oy, ...,07), the probability that the pure strat-
egy profile s = (s,..., sy) actually happens is 1, oi(s;). Thus if players
use the mixed strategy profile o, the expected payoff to player i is
I
uo) = > [Lois | sts).
s=(87 resDE[ 1 S; 7=1
While this is all very simple in principle (and we will have examples in
a moment and also in chapter 12), the constructions just given do rely on the
fact that there are finitely many players, each of whom has a finite number
of (pure) strategies s;. One must be careful with this sort of definition when
there are either uncountably many players or players with uncountably many
strategies or both. Consult Aumann (1964) if you wish to see examples of how
this is done.
The subject of mixed strategies becomes more interesting when we
turn to games in extensive form. Consider the game depicted in figure
11.12(a). In this game, player 1 has two pure strategies and player 2 has
1
I 2
(14) @> (32)
Strategy for player 2
u IL IR LR
Tt
10 5 Ulta |14]32]32
D D
[oe 23 141123 1 41
&
2
2,3) ~ 9c 4.1)
(a) )]
Figure 11.12. A game in extensive and normal form.
382 . Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
I (1/3) L R
1 {1/3} 0 41/3 1} 1/6) 1/6} 1/3
r | 1/34} 1/3 | 2/3 L (2/3) r | 1/2 | 1/6 | 2/3
2/3 1/3 \RG/3 2/3 1/3
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 11.13. Mixed and behaviorally mixed strategies.
four; we can call player 1s two strategies U and D and label player 2s as
IL,lR,rL, and rR, where the first letter says what 2 does if 1 chooses U
and the second says what 2 does if 1 chooses D. We can then translate this
game into the corresponding normal form game shown in figure 11.12(b)
and thereby define mixed strategies just as previously; player 1s mixed
strategies are probability distributions over her pair of possible pure strate-
gies, whereas 2s are probability distributions over his four strategies.
But there is another way to think about mixed strategies for player 2.
Suppose that player 2 chooses to randomize only when necessary. If
player 1 chooses U, then 2 randomizes between | and r, whereas if 1
chooses D, then 2 randomizes between L and R. That is to say, instead
of randomizing over strategies player 2 randomizes over available actions -
at each information set.
Every probability distribution over 2's four pure strategies corresponds
to this sort of randomization over actions at each information set. For
example, suppose that 2 considers the mixed strategy: Play 1L with prob-
ability 1/3, play rR with probability 1 /3, and play rL with probability
1/3. Go. 1R is played with probability zero.) This is the same as: If 1
plays U, play | with probability 1 /3 and r with probability 2/3. And if 1
plays D, play L with probability 2/3 and R with probability 1/3. When
we say that these two are the same, we mean: For any (mixed) strategy
by player 1, whether we think of player 2 randomizing at the outset over
his four strategies or we think of player 2 randomizing as needed at in-
formation sets, the given two mixed strategies for 2 (of the two different
types) lead to the same distribution on outcomes of the game.
How do we know this is true? The proof is implicit in figure 11.13(a)
and (b); we will talk our way through it, leaving the formal details to you.
In figure 11.13(a), we show a joint probability table for player 2's actions
at each of his information sets. For example, the lower left box corre-
sponds to the pure strategy rL, and the number 1/3 there is the 1/3
11.4. Mixed strategies and Kuhn's theorem 383
probability that he chooses rL in the mixed strategy listed above. The
numbers in the right and bottom margins of the table are the marginal
probabilities; the 2/3 along the right margin is the marginal probability
that he will choose r. Hence you can see how we derived the mix-
as-you-go strategy for 2 that corresponds to the listed mixed strategy.
Now imagine that we were trying, for some mixed strategy by player 1,
to work out the probability distribution over final outcomes. Specifically,
suppose that player 1 chooses U with probability a. Then to work out
what will happen, it is natural to write down the probability tree in fig-
ure 11.13(b), showing first the choice of player 1 and then the choice of
player 2. Note well (this is the whole point): The outcome if player 1
chooses U and 2 chooses IL is the same as the outcome if 1 chooses U
and 2 chooses IR; if player 1 chooses U, all that matters is the marginal
distribution of 2s choice of 1 versus r. Similarly, if player 1 chooses
D, it is only the marginal distribution over L and R that is of conse-
quence.
Suppose that instead of the mixed strategy in 11.13(a), player 2 adopted
the mixed strategy shown in 11.13(c). Would it make a difference? Since
the margins on | vs. r and on L vs. & in (a) and (c) are the same, it would
not, at least insofar as all we care about is the distribution over outcomes,
given player 1s choice of strategy. Many mixed strategies for player 2 will
give the same mix-as-you-go strategy.
In general, for a given extensive form game, we could recover the
strategy sets for the players and define mixed strategies as mixtures over
the pure strategies. But, alternatively, we could consider mix-as-you-go
strategies, which are more formally referred to as behaviorally mixed strate-
gies. For each information set h, we let A(A(h)) be the set of probability
distributions over the set of actions A(h) that are available at h. And
for each player 4, a behaviorally mixed strategy for i is an element of
Tlrezun-: AA). The interpretation is that , upon reaching an infor-
mation set h with o(h) = 4, chooses the action to take according to the hth
component in this vector of probability distributions.
So we have a choice in how to construct mixed strategies for an ex-
tensive form game. Which should we use? At least for games with perfect
recall, convenience should be our guide because the choice is without loss
of generality. The following result is known as Kuhn's theorem (and is first
proven in Kuhn [1953)).
Theorem. For an extensive form game with perfect recall, for every mixed strat-
egy, there is a corresponding behaviorally mixed strategy which is equivalent.
And for every behaviorally mixed strategy, there is at least one (and often many)
384 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
equivalent mixed strategy. Equivalent here means leads to the same distri-
bution of outcomes, if we specify strategies for all the players.
This is not a trivial result. In particular, it doesn't hold for games without
perfect recall. If you play contract bridge, you will be able to see this by
doing problem 5.
We care about this because in different sorts of games the two dif-
ferent types of mixed strategies are of varying convenience. For simple
games and for certain analytical results, it is often convenient to deal with
strategies mixed in the normal form. For dealing with complex examples,
it is usually more convenient to deal with behaviorally mixed strategies.
So it is nice to know that the two are equivalent concepts (for games with
perfect recall).
11.5. Bibliographic notes
I'have tried to be relatively more formal and complete in this chapter
than in others, because I dont know any next level textbooks to recom-
mend. The serious reader should instead proceed to the original research
papers on these subjects. References to these were provided in the course
of the chapter. In the other direction, the reader interested in seeing a
slower development of decision trees can consult Holloway (1979), while
a somewhat less formal and annecdotal companion to most of what we will .
do on noncooperative game theory is Dixit and Nalebuff (forthcoming).
References
Aumann, R. 1964. Mixed and Behavior Strategies in Infinite Extensive
Games. In Advances in Game Theory, M. Dresher, L. Shapley, and A.
Tucker, eds., 627-50. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Dalkey, N. 1953. Equivalence of Information Patterns and Essentially De-
terminate Games. In Contributions to the Theory of Games, vol. 2, H.
Kuhn and A. Tucker, eds., 217-45. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.
Dixit, A., and B. Nalebuff. Forthcoming. Thinking Strategically. New York:
W. W. Norton.
Holloway, C. 1979. Decision Making Under Uncertainty: Models and Choices.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
fo prove existence of an equilibrium, the former is more convenient; see the next chapter.
But when we analyze the centipede game with incomplete information in chapter 14, it is
essential that we deal with behaviorally mixed strategies.
11.6. Problems 385
Kuhn, H. 1953. Extensive Games and the Problem of Information. In
Contributions to the Theory of Games, vol. 2, H. Kuhn and A. Tucker,
eds., 193-216. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Thompson, E 1952. Equivalence of Games in Extensive Form. The Rand
Corporation. Mimeo.
11.6. Problems
Be sure to do problem 4. It will return again and again in the sequel.
a 1. Let us complicate the story of Jokx and Beljeau enormously by sup-
posing that both Jokx and Beljeau must decide whether to commission
market surveys that will reveal the size of the market. For Jokx, this sur-
vey will cost $5,000; if they choose to spend this money, Jokx can learn for
sure what the market size will be before they have to decide whether to
proceed with Oligopoly. And Beljeau (which previously was assumed to
have this information coming) now must decide whether to commission a
survey; it will cost them $5,000 as well. Both sides must decide whether
to commission a survey and then whether to proceed with the respective
products without learning what the other has done, both with regard to
taking the survey and then to introducing their product.
(a) Draw decision trees for Jokx and Beljeau in this new situation.
(b) Draw a game free representing the situation for the two. (This is a
tedious exercise.)
() List all the strategies that each side has. (Depending on what you do
with equivalent strategies, they have between six and sixteen apiece.)
(d) Give the reduced normal form of this game. (Again very tedious.)
s 2. What are the extensive and strategic forms of the game if, beginning
with the variation of problem 1, Beljeau must decide whether to become
informed about the size of the market before learning what Jokx does,
but if they decide to become informed, they learn whether Jokx chose to
become informed or not?
a 3. Two firms simultaneously produce quantities of a good, which costs
them $5 per unit to produce. They can produce any quantity between 0
units and 500 units. (To keep the game finite, assume they must select
an integer number of units.) The units produced are then totalled, and a
price for them is set that will clear markets where demand for the good
is given by P = $1000 2Q, where @Q is the total quantity supplied. Each
386 Chapter eleven: Modeling competitive situations
firm gets revenue according to the equilibrium price and the amount that
it sells. What does an extensive form of this game look like? What does
the strategic form of this game look like? How would things change if one
firm, say firm A, got to see how much firm B produced before launching
production itself?
w 4. Consider the following game, which we will call the truth game.
There are two players, called 1 and 2, and a game-master. The game-
master has a coin that is bent in such a way that, flipped randomly, the
coin will come up heads 80% of the time. (The bias of this coin is known
to both players.) The game-master flips this coin, and the outcome of the
coin flip is shown to player 1. Player 1 then makes an announcement to
player 2 about the results of the coin flip; player 1 is allowed to say either
heads or. tails (and nothing else). Player 2, having heard what player
1 says but not having seen the results of the coin flip then must guess what
the result of the coin flip was either heads or tails. That ends the
game. Payoffs are made as follows. For player 2 things are quite simple;
player 2 gets $1 if his guess matches the actual results of the coin flip, and
he gets $0 otherwise. For player 1 things are more complex. She gets $2
if player 2s guess is that the coin came up heads, and $0 if player 2
guesses tails, regardless of how the coin came up. In addition to this,
player 1 gets $1 (more) if what-she (player 1) says to player 2 matches the
results of the coin flip, while she gets $0 more if her message to player 2
is different from the result of the coin flip.
Draw an extensive form representation of this game. Can you draw more
than one extensive form representation? Then convert this extensive form
representation to a normal form representation. (If you wish to test your
intuition, answer: If you were playing this game as player 2, what strategy
would you select? If you were player 1, what would you do? Record your
reasons, and keep them available; later in the book we will analyze this
game according to game-theoretic procedures.)
w 5. If you read and understood sections 11.2 and 11.4 and if you know
the rules of contract bridge, give the details for the following statements.
Consider one hand in the game of contract bridge. Viewed asa four-player
game, this game has perfect recall. But viewed as a two-player game, it
does not. In this respect, viewed as a two-player game, Kuhn's theorem
is false. One way to see this is to note that it would be a huge advantage
to a partnership that sometimes engaged in psych bidding if they could
secretly signal to each other when they were doing so.
apm aren
chapter twelve
Solution concepts for
noncooperative games
Having (modeled a|situation with either an extensive form or a normal
form garie, our next objective is to(analyze the model in order to make
_ predictions about what will happen in the situation modeled. This chapter
concerns the analysis and solution of noncooperative games. It is a
long and complex chapter, and you should expect it to take a number of
readings before it begins to make sense to you (if it ever does).
12.1. Opening remarks
We begin with two opening remarks and an exercise that sets the
stage.
The subject population
| Any (predictions we make about (how a (game (will be played must
- ~ depend on the (characteristics of the {individuals (playing the game. One
would not expect to observe the same behavior from every group of
players.
The theories we will present proceed on the presumption that all the
players in the game are rational (in various senses that we will make
more precise as we go along), that each credits their rivals with rational-
ity, that each believes that all rivals credit their rivals with rationality,
and so forth. Our objective is to predict how people act in gamelike set-
tings, and so one must wonder how useful will be any theory based on
such a strong presumption concerning the rationality of the subjects. Some
players in some situations might fail to meet this assumption. If you are
playing against one of these people, or you suspect that you may be, you
would sometimes be foolish to presume that your rival is rational. We will
see in chapter [3Jan interesting variation on this: If your rival(s) suspect
that you are not rational, or even if they suspect that you suspect that
they suspect that you aren't rational, then the rational actions for you
388 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
can be quite different than if you ignore this possibility. That is to say,
irrational people are out there and their irrationality has a substantial im-
pact in many competitive settings, including an impact on the actions of
rational individuals. We would not be developing a useful theory, either
positive or normative, if we didnt take the(possibility of irrationality into
_ account. We will do this in chapter(13) but for the time being (and with]
apologies for the delay), we will proceed on the assumption that there isnt
significant probability that some player is irrational, or that players think
that others might be irrational, and so on. 
This is still weaker than the formal assumption upon which some of
our arguments will be based, namely that each player is absolutely certain
to be rational, each is absolutely certain that all others are rational, each is
absolutely certain that all others are certain that all the players are rational,
and so on. I would contend (without much argument, presumably) that
the ideal conditions of absolute certainty of rationality are(never met in the]
real world. So insofar as the theory we develop depends on this absolute
certainty and isn't robust to an almost certainty, we have a remarkably
useless theory. We need to pay (attention to (how (robust our theory is to]
EN |the slight (possibilities that some one or more of the players is (irrational, | *
or that one or more suspect that some other(s) might be irrational, and so
on. We will have a few things to say along these lines in what follows, but
this is a difficult subject that nly recently has gotten very much attention.
Some ground rules and cheap-talk
tion of the game should include all(relevant(opportunities for the players. :
"That is, if there is the possibility that players can megotiate and(form/bind-
ing agreements, or, if there is the possibility that one player can(precomumit i
early on to a particular sequence of moves, then this should be!
lin the {extensive form and in the(list of possible. strategies.
One of the hardest things to handle in this regard is the possibility
| that the players can lcommunicate. We can imagine communication of two
different sorts here. One possibility is that players can send signals that
involve a significant expenditure of resources. For this sort of communi-
ication, we follow the policy of trying to build formally into the(model the
\communication possibilities. 
But there is also what is called cheap-talk communication by,
lone or both sides that islcostless but which nonetheless might be(useful in
The ground rules in noncooperative game theory are that the descri "|
coordinating actions. Players can often communicate, and (when players|~
! See especially chapter 17, which is largely given over to this subject.
reflected | 
12.1. Opening remarks 389
- can engage in(cheap-talk, we could @ge(hope to (build a(model with all -
the possibilities. How many speeches could one side make? How many
replies could a second side make? How many iterations could there be in
this speech/counterspeech regime? So it is typical in the analysis of non-
cooperative games to omit such communication possibilities from formal
comes of games; they do so in some important ways in various situations.
And we will want to note this sort of effect when we can. But once again,
our remarks on this point will be very much less than complete. This is
another subject which has only recently begun to receive attention, and
there is no settled conventional wisdom about cheap-talk.
Exercise
The test of the theory we will develop must, in the end, be empirical.
A fair bit of experimental work looks at how various subject populations
act in different types of toy games, and (rather less) empirical work has
been done on how individuals act in the sorts of real life situations we
hope to model and analyze with these tools.
We will not look at this empirical literature, relying instead on your
(no doubt razor-sharp) intuition about how people act in competitive sit-
uations. To give your intuition a fair test (or, rather, to give the theory a
fair test), consider now how you would play a few games. In figure 12.1
are thirteen games in normal form and two games in extensive form, and
following in the text are two more games in verbal form. They are all
two-player games, which is something of a simplification, but they cover
enough ground for most of the points we will make in this chapter.
In all cases, the rules are that you will play the game once and once
only, with no enforceable agreements possible, and with no side-payments
between the two players. The numerical units ought to be thought of as in
utility terms for the players. But, if you prefer, you can think of these as
being small monetary payoffs, in pennies or nickels, say. Your rival will
be someone very much like yourself a fellow student, say, or someone
who is reading this book just as you are.
Before reading on in this chapter, consider each of these games in turn
and answer the following questions:
(2) How would you play as player 1 and as player 2?
(b) What predictions do you make about the play of your opponent? As-
sess a probability distribution for your opponents choice of strategy; e.g.,
in the game in figure 12.1(a), perhaps you assess that your opponent, if
390
Player 1 Player 1
Player 1
Player 1
sl
s2
sl
s2
sl
s2
sl
Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
Player 2 Player 2
al 2 3 1 2 3
43 2,7 04 sl] 410 | 30 1,3
>
55 | 5-1 | 4-2 = s2| 00 | 210 | 103
(a) (b)
Player 2 Player 2
t1 2 t1 2 3
100 | 52 w osl| 100 | 51 | 4-200
>
101 | 20 & s2|10100| 50 | 0-100
(c (d)
Player 2 Player 2
t1 t2 tl t2 t3 t4
1010 | 00 "ql 00 | 00 [100100] 00
00 | 11 Ww os2| 00 | 00 | 00 | 9999
Ea)
(0) = 3 (100,200, 00 | 00 | 00
s4| 00 [100,00] 00 | 00
2
Player 2 Player 2 Player 2
tl t2 tl t2 tl t2
00 |9091| 5 st] 1-1 | Ll ost) 31 | 13
z z
9190 | 00 | & s2| 11 | 11 | & s2| 05 | 42
( (nh (i)
Figure 12.1. Some games.
 eee eg ee et me 7
12.1. Opening remarks 391
Player 2 Player 2
tl t2 tl t2
 sil 0,0 [2040 "o s1| 00 | 2040
: 7
& 52/4020 00 a 5216025) 00
(j) (k)
Player 2 : Player 2
tl t2 t3 t4 t1 12
T sl] 2006 | 35 43 {10-1000 TL si] 55 | -38
> LF
& $2|0,-10000| 51000 63 | 3.20 = 52] 8-3 | 00
n (om
1. U
O22)
17 UN
AWA
GL Oo GD 0000 13)
Figure 12.1, continued. Some more games.
choosing between s1 and s2, will choose s1 with probability 1 and s2 with
probability .9, while if your opponent takes the role of player 2, he will
play t1 with probability .6, {2 with probability .35, and t3 with probability
(05. (This is just an example of the sort of assessment you are asked to
make; my own assessment for this game would be quite different, as you
will see when we get underway.) Of course, your answer to part (b) should
have some connection with your answer to part (a). You might wish to
write down your assessments and planned strategies for each game, with
some notes to yourself about how you came to these assessments. We will
discuss each of these games in turn as the chapter progresses, and you
might wish to compare your assessments with what the theory will say
you ought to have done.
392 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
As you give these assessments, please take special note of the follow-
ing two sorts of situations:
Which individual strategies do you think are extremely unlikely
for your opponent to choose?
In which games do you think there is an obvious way to play,
by which we mean an outcome (strategies for both players) that you
think is very, very likely, and that you think any opponent you might
encounter is likely to think very, very likely.
Note that I haven't tried to quantify extremely and very, very in these
questions. That is for you to do.
Insofar as your predictions and/or your own choice of strategy de-
pend on the specification we made concerning who is your rival, you
might think through what would change if we changed the population
from which your rival will be selected. The ground rules are also apt to
affect your predictions. In particular, consider the following two variations
for the games in figure 12.1:
() How do your predictions change if you can make a cheap-talk speech
to your rival before playing (but he cant talk back to you)? How do your
predictions change if the two of you can exchange cheap-talk?
The two games in verbal form are:
Divide the cities. Following is a list of eleven cities in the United States:
Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Houston, Los Angeles, New
York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and Seattle. I have assigned to each city
a point value from 1 to 100 according to the citys financial and commercial
importance and its quality of life. You will not be told this scale until
the game is over, except that I tell you now that New York has the highest
score, 100, and Seattle has the least, 1. I do think you will find that my
scale is fair. I am going to have you play the following game against a
randomly selected student of the Harvard Graduate School of Business
Administration. Each of you will be asked to list, simultaneously and
without consultation, some subset of these eleven cities. Your list must
contain San Francisco, and your opponents must contain Boston. Then I
will give each of you $100 simply for playing the game. And I will add
to/subtract from that amount as follows: For every city that appears on
one list but not on the other, the person who lists the city will get as many
2 If you are from the Harvard Business School, make it a randomly selected student from
the Stanford Graduate School of Business.
i
12.2. Dominance and iterated dominance for normal form games 393
dollars as that city has points on my scale. For every city that appears on
both lists, I will take from each of you twice as many dollars as the city
has points. Finally, if the two of you manage to partition the cities if
each city appears on one and only one list I will triple your winnings.
Which cities will you list?
Divide the letters. Following is a list of eleven letters: A, B,C, D,E, H, L,
N, FS, T. Each has been assigned a point value from 1 to 100 according to
some random scheme that I will not tell you, except to say that N has been
assigned the highest score of 100 points and T has been assigned 1. I am
going to have you play the following game against a randomly selected
student of the Harvard Business School. Each of you will be asked to
list, simultaneously and without consultation, some subset of these eleven
letters. Your list must contain S, and your opponent's must contain B.
Then I will give each of you $100 simply for playing the game. And I will
add to/subtract from that amount as follows: For every letter that appears
on one list but not on the other, the person who lists the letter will get as
many dollars as that letter has points on my scale. For every letter that
appears on both lists, I will take from each of you twice as many dollars
as the letter has points. Finally, if the two of you manage to partition the
letters if each letter appears on one and only one list I will triple
your winnings. Which letters will you list?
12.2. Dominance and iterated dominance
for normal form games :
Let us begin by looking at the normal form of the Jokx-Beljeau game,
which is reproduced here as figure 12.2. Does this representation suggest
how the game will be played?
)
Beljeau's strategy
o t1 2 t3 t4
&
Esl] -11-194 | 524 | 35-234 | 4120
2
 s2| 0444 0,48 0,-3.6 00
Q
By
Figure 12.2. The normal form representation of Jokx vs. Beljeau.
Player 2 Player 2
tl 2 t3 t1 2 t3
= sii 43 2,7 04 Tosi) 4,10 3,0 1.3
= s2| 55 5-1 4,2 = s2| 00 2,10 10,3
(a) } 0)
Figure 12.3. Two normal form games that are dominance solvable.
The answer to this question is emphatically yes for Beljeau. If Beljeau
anticipates that Jokx will follow strategy sl, then Beljeaus best response
is t2. If Beljeau anticipates that Jokx will follow strategy s2, then Beljeaus
best response is t2. No matter what Jokx does, Beljeaus best response is 2.
Tt stands to reason, then, that we can anticipate t2 from Beljeau.?
You may be straining to come to the obvious corollary conclusion,
namely that if Jokx understands all this (so Jokx knows that Beljeau will
adopt its strategy 12), then Jokx will choose s1. But before doing so, let
us analyze the logic being employed a step at a time. We have in this
example, for Beljeau, a very strong criterion for assessing what it will do;
viz., its best response to Jokx is independent of what Jokx does. Whenever a
player in a game has a strategy that is so clearly optimal as this, we will
assess very high probability that the player will use this strategy, assuming
we have correctly modeled the player's situation.
Consider next the game depicted in figure 12.3(a), which is taken from
figure 12.1(a). If player 1 plays s1, 2's best response is t2. If player 1 plays
52, 2's best response is t1. So we cant come to the strong sort of conclusion
above for player 2. Neither can we come to this sort of conclusion about
player 1: s2 is 1's best response to t1 and t2, but s1 is 1's best response
to t3. Nonetheless, we can arrive at a partial conclusion about player 2:
We can conclude that he won't choose t3. This is so because t2 is better
than t3 no matter what player 1 does. If player 1 chooses sl, then player
2 gets 7 from t2 and only 4 from t3, while if player 1 chooses s2, player 2
gets -1 from t2 and 2 from 13. We cant say for sure what player 2 will
do, but we can be pretty sure about something he won't do.
We are invoking here the criterion of strict dominance. One strategy
for a player is said to dominate strictly another if, no matter what other
players do, the player in question does strictly better with the first than
with the second. When one strategy strictly dominates a second, we will
epee eer eee
3 This should come as no surprise: You will recall that we reached this conclusion back
when we drew the decision tree of Beljeau.
J
12.2. Dominance and iterated dominance for normal form games 395
invariably conclude that the second strategy will not be played (or, if it is,
we wonder why our model of the situation is incorrect).
Note that our first, very strong criterion (which worked for Beljeau)
is an extreme case of strict dominance. It is the case where one strategy
for a player strictly dominates all the others. Since by strict dominance
we assess zero probability that any of the other strategies will be chosen,
we are left concluding that the one strategy that dominates all the others
will be chosen with probability one.
Now we take the next step in Jokx-Beljeau, a step we can take as well
in figure 12.3(a). If we can predict that Beljeau will choose t2, then Jokx
can as well, and Jokx should choose s1. Or in terms of the game in 12.3(a),
if player 1 concludes that player 2 will not choose t3, then s2 is better for
player 1 than is s1. The only reason player 1 would consider sl is if she
thought there was an appreciable chance that player 2 will play t3. Having
concluded that this isnt the case, s2 dominates sl for the strategies that
are left. And, to go yet another step, if player 2 anticipates that player
1 will anticipate that 2 will not play t3, and if 2 anticipates that player 1
will, therefore, select s2, player 2 then will choose t1 over t2. If we think
players will think through the game in this fashion, we predict that the
outcome will be s2 and t1. (How did you say you would play this game?)
We have solved both the Jokx-Beljeau game and the game in figure
12.3(a) by the criterion of successive strict dominance. We eliminate one
strategy for one of the players on the basis of strict dominance. In the
belief that a rational opponent will figure this out, this may allow us to
rule out some of the opponent's strategies on the basis of dominance,
where we only require dominance against strategies not yet eliminated.
And this could take us back to further elimination of strategies of the first
player, and so on. Sometimes, this will end up with a single cell left,
in which case we have figured out how rational opponents will play the
game. '
Be very careful in noting what is meant by rational players here. We
presume, and this seems a reasonably safe prediction, that rational players
will riot play dominated strategies. Bw when we move from dominance
to iterated dominance, we raise the stakes. In a second round of iterated
dominance, we are assuming that players assume their opponents won't
play dominated strategies. That is, players are presumed to believe that
2 You might wonder if this will be path dependent if crossing out successively domi~
nated strategies might lead to different results if crossed out in different orders. The answer
is no, as long as crossing out is done on the basis of strict dominance, i.e, where you only
cross out one strategy if some second strategy is strictly better than the first against every
(remaining) choice by one's opponent(s).
396 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
their opponents are rational. And in a third round, players presume that
their opponents presume that all their opponents are rational. And so on.
As the chain gets longer, the presumptions required grow more dubious;
and we may feel less happy with predictions based on many rounds of
iterated dominance.
Does this require players to be absolutely certain that their opponents
 |are rational? au we( need to be fairly sure that players will not play a
~sdominated strategy is a {fair(certainty that players are rational. If, in the
game in figure 12.3(a), we assess probability .9 that player 2 is rational
(will not play a dominated strategy), then we assess probability .9 or more
that player 2 won't play t3. (This just repeats a definition.) But when we ~~
 move to iterated (dominance, other considerations intrude. Suppose that
the 4 in'the s2-t3 cell of figure 12.3(a) was a 400. Then if player 1
assesses only probability .9 that player 2 is rational, she might choose to
play s1 instead of s2. Or make this payoff a 40 and make the 3 in s1-t1
a 30. Suppose that player 2 is rational. Suppose that player 1 assesses
probability .99 that player 2 is rational. But suppose that player 2 isn't so
sure that player 1 has this high a regard for player 2's rationality. Then
player 2 might well consider that player 1 might play s1 to be safe; at
least player 2 might assess significant probability for this. And player 2
might, therefore, be led to 2 instead of t1.
For a prediction obtained-by iterated dominance, there is some ro- }
bustness in that prediction against the presumption that all players are
certainly rational, all are certain that all are rational, and so on (for as
many steps as there are steps in the chain of iterated dominations). That
is, there is a probability less than one such that if every player believes
that others are rational with at least this probability, each believes that
each believes this with at least this probability, and so on; then we would
still make the prediction that we obtained from iterated dominance. But
(a) we might feel less happy with this sort of assessment if the number of
iterations is large, and (b) the higher the cost of a mistake is, the closer
to one must be this probability. We will return to these points near the
end of this section.
Now look at the game depicted in figure 12.3(b), which is reproduced
from 12.1(b). Can we do anything with dominance here? It would seem
not; no one strategy strictly dominates another. But, under the assumption
that player 2 is a subjective expected value maximizer, we can rule out 3.
Why? Because no matter what probability distribution player 2 assesses for
what player 1 will do, one of t1 or t2 (or both) is better than t3. Sometimes
t1 is better than t3 (if s1 has probability greater than .3) and sometimes t2
is better (if s1 has probability less than .7). But t3 is never even tied for
12.2. Dominance and iterated dominance for normal form games 397
best of all. And, if we accept this argument and cross out 3 (or, more to
the point, if we think that player 1 accepts this argument and crosses out
t3), then we can proceed to cross out s2, and thus settle on s1-t1 as the
solution.
This is strict dominance of one strategy by a combination of other
strategies. It is more difficult to find in general than strict dominance of
one strategy by a second, but it seems legitimate to apply whenever we
can. Two remarks about this are in order: If the prizes in the game were
in units of millions of dollars, and if player 2 is risk averse, player 2 might
prefer the sure $3 million to gambling. But we're assuming that either
players are risk neutral or payoffs are in von Neumann-Morgenstern utility
units, so this won't be a problem in theory. Secondly, we put the argument
above as: Player 2, for any assessment about what player 1 might do,
will choose either t1 or {2 as the strategy that maximizes expected utility.
One could pose a different argument leading to the same conclusion: If
player 2 randomizes by flipping a coin, playing t1 if heads and t2 if tails,
then player 2 has a strategy that gives (an expected utility of) 5 if player 1
chooses s1 and 5 if 1 chooses s2, which strictly dominates 3. That is, 3 is
dominated by a mixture of t1 and t2. I prefer the first line of argument,
but the two come to the same thing.
Now look at the game in figure 12.4(a), reproduced from figure 12.1(c).
No strategy strictly dominates another. But s1 weakly dominates s2; s1 is as
good as s2 against t1 and is better against t2. In general, one strategy for
a player weakly dominates a second if against any strategies by the other
players the player does as well with the first strategy as with the second,
Player 2 Player 2
tl 2 t1 2 t3
sl] 10,0 52 sl} 10,0 51 |4,-200
Player 1
Player 1
s2| 10,1 2,0 s2| 10,100 | 50 | 0-100
(a) (b)
Figure 12.4. Examples of weak dominance.
5 To be precise, in two-player games the two arguments certainly come to the same thing.
In more-than-two-player games, they come to the same thing if a player is allowed to as-
sess that the strategies chosen by his rivals might be correlated. If, however, players in a
more-than-two-player game are presumed to assess that rivals choices of strategy are inde-
pendently distributed, then my preferred phrasing of the test is stronger. If you know about
the separating hyperplane theorem, you can prove all this for yourself.
398 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
and against some combination of strategies by the other players, the player
does strictly better with the first. Any player who maximizes expected
utility and assigns strictly positive probability to every possible strategy
combination by others will strictly prefer a weakly dominant strategy to
the strategy that it dominates.
Applying (weal dominance(successively can be(problematic, however.
Look at figure 12.4(b), reproduced from figure 12.1(d). While s1 weakly
dominates s2, it ceases to do so if the strictly dominated strategy t3 is
eliminated first; once t3 is eliminated, player 1 is completely indifferent
between sl and s2. Player 2 would certainly like to encourage player 1 to
select s2, so perhaps billboards put up by player 2 saying that s2 is safe
would be in order.* 
The use of (successive) weak dominance is not as noncontroversial
as the use of (successive) strict dominance, in part because of examples
such as 12.4(b).5 Despite such examples, economists tend to use succes-
sive weak dominance when they can. And when (as sometimes happens)
all strategies except one for each player are eliminated by successive dom-
inance, weak or strict, the game is said to be dominance solvable.
How does weak dominance interact with less-than-complete certainty
that the players are rational? in two ways, depending on who is trying
to guess whether his rivals are rational. Suppose that some given player, call
him 7, has a given strategy that is weakly dominated. Then if 1 is less
than completely certain that his opponents are rational, he may not wish to
preclude them doing anything at all. That is, his assessment about his rivals
actions puts positive probability on every possibility. In this case s will never
maximize i's expected utility, even weakly, and we have a good argument {0
conclude that / won't use s. But this argument presupposes that 4 is rational.
And if some other player i is worried even a bit about the rationality of /,
then i might not want to count on i avoiding s. Indeed, since s for ' is
4 It is also in player 1's interest that player 2 thinks that 1 will pick s2, so we might also
imagine that player 1 would be renting space on available billboards, to convince player 2
that she will pick s2. But player 2, if he is sceptical, may wonder about this; it is in the inter-
ests of player 1 to mislead 2 into thinking that 1 will play 52 even if player 1 fully intends to
play s1, sinceby this means player 1 encourages the play of t1. How would you, as player
2, treat some pregame cheap-talk by player 1 that she fully intends to play s2?
 What does this example tell you about path independence and iterated weak domi-
nance?
5 Remember to review as we go along what you had to say about these games when you
did the exercise at the start of this chapter. My experience with student populations, albeit
informally tabulated, is that in the game in figure 12.4(b), 52-1 is the modal response, despite
the logic of weak domination. Admittedly, this is a very special game. But see below for
a more robust example.
6 Some quite interesting games are dominance solvable. See, for example, the discussion
of the Cournot game in section 12.8 and Rubinsteins bargaining game in chapter 15.
12.3. Backwards induction 399
only weakly dominated, it seems more likely that a less than fully rational 7
might not see this argument. Accordingly, if s must be deleted in some chain
of iterated dominance and if others doubt the rationality of i, the chain is
more suspicious.
12.3. Backwards induction in games of
complete and perfect information
So far we've discussed dominance and weak dominance in the context
of normal form games. These criteria have important manifestations as
well in extensive form games. Consider the extensive form game in figure
12.5(a), reproduced from figure 12.1(n). What predictions did you make
about this game?
Most people predict that the outcome of this game will be that player 1
is very likely to choose D and player 2 is likely to respond with I. The
argument supporting this prediction runs as follows: If player 1 chooses
D, then player 2 is faced with a choice of I, which nets 1, or r, which
nets 0. The dominating choice is I, and so we predict that if 1 chooses D,
2 (presuming 2 is rational) will choose I. And if player 1 believes that 2
is rational, 1 will replicate this logic, and she will choose D, which (she
expects) will net 3, instead of the 2 she gets from U.
This, it turns out, is an argument equivalent to successive weak dom-
ination. In figure 12.5(b), we have the normal form game that corresponds
to the extensive form game in figure 12.5(a). In this normal form, 1 for
player 2 weakly dominates 7. And once we eliminate r for player 2, D is
the dominant choice for player 1. Note that the first step in this progression
is weak domination only; if player 1 chooses U, ! and r do equally well.
10-2 win
@2 Player 2
D 1 r
2 woul 22 | 22
1 r =
= D 3,1 0,0
31D On
(a) (bh
Figure 12.5. A simple extensive form game
and its normal form counterpart.
400 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
It is sometimes maintained that the argument for the extensive form
game is a bit more convincing than the corresponding argument of weak
dominance for the normal form game. The logic for this assertion is that
if we think of players 1 and 2 selecting strategies simultaneously and
independently, then we might conceivably imagine player 2 choosing r, if
he is absolutely certain that player 1 will choose U. But in the extensive
form game, player 2 doesnt have this luxury. If he is given the move,
player 2 knows that player 1 chose D, and he, therefore, knows that his
choice will be of consequence.
Whether you find the two arguments equally compelling or you find
the extensive form version more compelling, the connection should be
obvious. And we can generalize this substantially. A game of complete and
perfect information is an extensive form game in which every action node
is, by itself, an information set. Think of any such game, and suppose
that the tree has only a finite number of nodes. Then we can look at any
next-to-final node one whose successors are all terminal nodes. (Since
the tree is finite, there must be at least one such. Provide a proof, if you
wish.) Whoever has the move at that node, we can quickly decide how
the player will act there; he will select whichever of the terminal node
successors gives him the highest utility. (What if there is a tie among the
terminal successors in terms of his utility? We will ignore this unhappy
possibility, which complicates.matters without adding much insight.) By
weak domination, this player will never adopt a strategy that calls for
him to take any other action at this next-to-final node. Now look for any
node all of whose successors are either terminal nodes or the next-to-final
node we just analyzed. Again, there must be one such. We can now solve
the game from this point on (again assuming there are no ties), and so
on. Calling any node that we have solved a solved node, as long as there
are unsolved nodes, at least one unsolved node has successors that are
all either solved or terminal, and we can proceed to solve that node next.
Eventually every node in the game will be solved, and we will have a
predicted solution for the game.
If the foregoing verbal description was less than completely trans-
parent, you will do well to create and solve an example. Remember the
ground rules: Every action node must be, on its own, an information set;
there must be (only) finitely many nodes; and ties in payoffs of players
are to be avoided. (In case you've forgotten, remember as well that game
trees may not have cycles.)
And note how this is just iterated weak dominance, strengthened (if
you find it more compelling) because when a player is called upon to
move at a given node, he knows that his choice will make a difference.
12.3. Backwards induction 401
La? a La2ala?2a
S QQ p00 1s Gb B>QB>G>
A
0 9% 97 9 98
13 9% 100 99 101
fy
Figure 12.6. Rosenthal's centipede game.
The procedure sketched above is sometimes called(backwards(induc-
tion. One of the first results in game theory was, essentially, that finite
games of complete and perfect information are dominance solvable by
this backwards induction procedure, at least as long as ties are ruled out.
An application of this result will indicate some of the limitations of non-
cooperative game theory. The rules of chess make it a finite game of
complete and perfect information.? Hence we conclude that chess is dom-
inance solvable. Either white has a forced win, or black does, or the game,
played optimally, must end in a tie. The game tree for chess is, however,
a bit too large for practical application of the backwards induction proce-
dure. So despite the fact that chess must have a solution, it remains an
interesting puzzle how to play the game.
Before departing this subject, one further example may be of interest
 the so-called centipede game, popularized by Rosenthal (1981) and de-
picted in figure 12.6. If we apply backwards induction to this game, we
see that at the next-to-final node player 2 will surely choose D, taking 101
instead of 100 and leaving player 1 with 98 instead of with 100. Hence at
the next-to-next-to-final node player 1 will choose D, taking 99 instead of
the 98 she would get by choosing A and letting 2 choose D. This leaves
2 with 99, and so 2 a node earlier chooses D and takes 100. And so on
 going back up the tree, players 1 and 2 always take D- instead of A,
winding up with 1 choosing D at the first node in the game for payoffs of
one apiece. (Game theorists, like economists, are not the best of linguists.
Moving up the tree usually means moving in the direction of the tree's
roots. Sorry about that.)
Since there are such lovely payoffs out at the end of the tree, this
+ outcome seems rather a shame. More to the point, based on irregularly
| gathered evidence, it is a poor prediction. Asked to play this this game, one
7 The original proof of this result was for two-player zero sum games, where-the sum of
the two players payoffs at each terminal node is zero. In this case, ties are irrelevant.
Ifa particular position recurs three times, the game is drawn.
 We will return to the example of chess at the very end of the book.
402 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
typically finds even rather sophisticated players moving a fair ways out
to the end before one player or the other chooses D.
There are two points to make in this regard. First, the prediction that
player 1 will choose D to start the game is based on 200 rounds of iterated
dominance. It is rather hard to believe that players are so sure of their
opponent's rationality and their opponent's certainty of theirs, and so on,
that we can trust to a prediction so based. Second, suppose that you, as
player 2, are absolutely certain that your opponent is rational, and that
your opponent is certain that you are, and so on, for as many iterations
as this takes. So you are certain that your opponent will begin the game
with D. And then, despite all your certainties, your opponent chooses to
start the game with A. What do you think then? You have pretty good
evidence that your initial hypothesis was wrong. But to justify that your
follow-on choice should be D, you have to believe ex post that your theory
still holds (with very high probability). After all, if your opponent isnt
rational, or doesnt think you are, or isn't sure that you think he is, ...
then maybe it is better to try A and see how far out the tree you can get.
And now put yourself in the position of player 1. Just think what havoc
you can play in the mind of your opponent by choosing A. And look at
all those big payoffs (for both of you!) out at the end of the tree. Shouldn't
you give A a shot? :
This is an example to which we will return several times, so for the
time being, simply note that many rounds of iterated dominance is some-
times a bit too much to believe. And iterated dominance can be especially
unbelievable in extensive form games, where a wrong prediction early
in the game may lead players to reexamine their faith in the maintained
hypothesis that all the players (and especially the one who did the wrong
thing) are rational.
12.4. Nash equilibrium
In the previous two sections, we attempted to predict the outcomes
of games by asking the question: What actions by the players can we
rule out? This may seem a rather indirect way to get at the question
of what players will do, and it may leave us well short of a positive
prediction. Nonetheless, that question is a model of straightforward logic
when compared with what we take on for the next four sections.
Consider the games in figure 12.7, which are reproduced from figure
12.1(e,f,g). Recall the second subsidiary question that you were asked in
the exercise at the start of this chapter: In these games, is there an obvious
way to play the game, an outcome that you think is very, very likely, and
12.4. Nash equilibrium 403
Player 2 Player 2
tl t2 1 2
5 s1| 1010 | 00 "5 sl) 00 | 9091
> >
Ss 00 | 11 = go 9190 | 00
(a) (b)
Player 2
tl 2 t3 t4
sil 00 0,0 [100,100 00
s2i 00 0,0 0,0 | 9999
Player 1
s31100,100} 00 0,0 0,0
sa! 00 [100,100] 00 0,0
(c)
Figure 12.7. Three normal form games.
that (you would expect, with high probability) your rivals would think is
very likely?
The typical responses are a definite yes for the game in 12.7(a), namely
the outcome s1-t1, a definite no for the game in 12.7(b), and a conditional
maybe for the game in 12.7(c). Regarding the last game, the answer I have
heard typically runs as follows: If the players are unable to communicate,
then s2-t4 seems very likely, although perhaps it is not very, very likely.
The reason for this is that players will recognize that it is in their mutual
interest to coordinate their actions, and while s2-t4 is not the absolutely
best outcome for the two players, it seems the safest or clearest way
to coordinate. If the players can engage in cheap-talk before the game is
played, on the other hand, then one of s1-t3 or s3-t1 or s4-t2 is very, very
likely to be the outcome, although there is no way to know which until
after the cheap-talk is heard. That is, the players will certainly coordinate
their actions; their interests are not in the least opposed. And they will
use the opportunity of cheap-talk to coordinate on one of the three best
outcomes.
Looking at the game in figure 12.7(a), and perhaps as well at the
game in figure 12.7(c), we are using our intuition to say that there is an
404 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
obvious way to play this particular game. On a case-by-case basis, we
can explain why these outcomes are obvious, although what is obvious
may depend on context on whether players can engage in cheap-talk,
for example. Even though our intuition may only be engaged on a game-
by-game basis, there is a general formal test that we can pose for any
candidate obvious way to play: If this strategy profile is obvious, so
that (we expect, with high probability) all the players will figure this out,
then it ought to be that players, in their own best interests, carry out their
part of this profile. Put differently, what each player is meant to do ought
to be a best response to what all the other players are meant to do. This
suggests the following formal definition. We pose the definition for the
context of a finite player normal form game, where the players are indexed
by i=1,...,1, their (respective) available strategy sets are denoted by S;,
and for s = (sy,...,57) II; Sj, wis) is i's payoff if the strategy profile
s is played.
Definition. A strategy profile = (3y,..., 31) is a Nash equilibrium if for each
player and s; S;,
u;(3) > ui(8y, (EER) 854, iy 8441, cen ,81).
Or, in words, a Nash equilibrium is a strategy profile in which each
player's part is as good a response to what the others are meant to do
as any other strategy available to that player.
This definition is given for normal form games, but the same basic
concept applies to extensive form games the easiest way to make the
translation is to say that a strategy profile for an extensive form game
is a Nash equilibrium if it corresponds to a Nash equilibrium as defined
above in the corresponding normal form game. This translation hides
some interesting facets of equilibria in extensive form games, which we
get to only in section 12.7. Until then we will stick for the most part to
normal form games.
The contention is that being a Nash equilibrium is a necessary condi-
tion for an obvious way to play the game, if an obvious way to play the
game exists. And, indeed, in the games in figure 12.7(a,c), our candidate
obvious ways to play are all Nash equilibria. But note carefully that
(a) Being a Nash equilibrium is certainly not sufficient for a strategy profile
to be the obvious way to play a given game. In the game in figure 12.7(a),
52-12 is another Nash equilibrium, and we would hardly call it the obvious
way to play this game.
12.4. Nash equilibrium 405
(b) There is no reason to suppose that every game admits an obvious way
to play. For example, if players 1 and 2 are unable to communicate, the
game in figure 12.7(b) possesses no obvious solution, although it has two
Nash equilibria, namely s2-t1 and s1-t2.%
In the great majority of the applications of noncooperative game the-
ory to economics, the mode of analysis is equilibrium analysis. And in
many of those analyses, the analyst identifies a Nash equilibrium (and
sometimes more than one) and proclaims it (them?) as the solution. I
wish to stress that this practice is sloppy at best and probably a good deal
worse. We advance the formal concept of a Nash equilibrium in a much
narrower spirit: This formal concept is an answer to the question: If there
is an obvious way to play the game, what properties must that solution
possess? Given our loose definition of an obvious way to play the game
~ it is something all the players can figure out, and all expect the others
can figure out it is hard to see how some outcome that is not a Nash
equilibrium could ever qualify.
But this is a very weak question, and it is clear that having the answer
Nash equilibrium is pretty thin gruel if what we are after is a way to
solve games. All we have is a test of solutions derived by some other
means. Some obvious questions arise.
(a) If Nash equilibrium is only one answer to this question, what more
can be said? Can we sharpen this necessary condition? In this regard,
note that a Nash equilibrium can involve weakly dominated strategies.
For example, in the game in figure 12.5(b), U-r is a Nash equilibrium,
even though 1 weakly dominates r. Insofar as we believe that players
will avoid weakly dominated strategies, we could add to our necessary
condition that the solution should be a Nash equilibrium in strategies
that are undominated, even weakly. Accepting this (although wait until
section 12.7 before doing so), is there still more to say?
(b) What are the means by which we are to identify obvious ways to play
a (given) game?
(c) What would lead one to imagine that a given game admits an obvious
way to play? This question is closely related to (b) in that if we know
10 In fact, as we will discover momentarily, this game has a third Nash equilibrium, which
is also not an obvious way to play.
1 And, I'm sory to say, in later chapters I will be somewhat sloppy in just this fashion.
406 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
why this sort of solution might exist, we would probably have a good clue
to what it might be.
(d) What can one say about games that do not admit a solution? And
what, if anything, does the notion of Nash equilibrium say concerning
such games?
Make no mistake there ar
-?" | possess solutions. The game in figure 12.1() is a good case in point, at
least if played mder conditions of no communication. The game in figure
112.1(k) is another. And the game in figure 12.1()) is especially interesting
with regard to question (d) above. In discussing this game with students,
1 have found that most, cast in the role of player 2, choose t3, and most
expect that player 2 will choose t3. Accordingly, most students cast in the
role of player 1 choose s2, and most students cast in the role of player 2
expect player 1 to choose 2. But because of those large negative payoffs
for player 2 in all the other columns, player 2 must be very sure what
player 1 is going to do before moving from t3. That is to say, the standards
of very, very sure are raised when the consequences of being wrong
are dire. While I would guess that in eighty percent of the times 1 have
had students play this game, s2-t3 was the outcome, it is still not quite
sobvious enough to qualify ag an obvious way to play the game, given
the consequences of being wrong. 12 This game does not admit an obvious
way to play.
The point is that this game has Nash equilibria, three of them in fact.
One is s1-t1, and a second is s2-t4. The third is an equilibrium in mixed
strategies, something which we will introduce in the next section, but for
the time being take my word for it: In no Nash equilibrium of this game
is 13 played. Indeed, t3 is the only strategy that is unplayed in some
Nash equilibrium. So in answer to question (d) above: When the game
doesnt admit an obvious way to play, looking at its Nash equilibria can
give precisely the wrong answer. The concept of Nash equilibrium should
have no command on our attention when the game doesnt admit of a
solution.
This leaves us with questions (a), (b), and (c). We will get to those
questions in a bit, but before doing so, we chase down a bit of esoterica
concerning the notion of a Nash equilibrium.
12 And, indeed, my very casual empirical sense is that there is enough play of s1 by player 1
(between ten and twenty percent) to make t3 the optimal strategy for player 2. It is certainly
what I would do, playing this game.
13 For another example, see the end of section 12.6 for a game with a unique Nash equi-
librium which, nonetheless, is not what one normally sees when the game is played.
e [games that, mlcertain(contexts, do at]
rar
12.5. Equilibria in mixed strategies 407
12.5. Equilibria in mixed strategies
Some games dont have Nash equilibria. At least, they don't have
equilibria if we stick to the definition given (loosely) above. Consider the
games in figure 12.8 reproduced from figure 12.1(h) and (@).** In both these
games sl-tl isn't a Nash equilibrium, because if player 1 is choosing sl,
then player 2 would wish to move to t2. Af s1-t2, player 1 wishes to move
to s2. At s2-t2, player 2 takes us back to t1. And at s2-t1, player 1 wishes
to shift to s1, which exhausts all the possibilities for a Nash equilibrium
in these games.
Despite what was just said, these two games do have Nash equilibria.
What was just shown is that no pure strategy profile is a Nash equilibrium.
But consider the game of figure 12.8(b), and imagine that player 1 plays sl
with probability .6 and s2 with probability 4. Then player 2, by playing
t1, will net expected value 2.6. And playing t2 will net 2.6 for player 2.
And playing any mixed strategy will net expected value 2.6. So every
strategy by player 2, mixed and pure, is a best response to this strategy
by player 1. In particular, one best response is the mixed strategy where
player 2 plays tl with probability .5 and t2 with probability .5. And this
strategy causes player 1 to net expected value 2 from sl and 2 from s2
and 2 from any mixture of s1 and s2. So, in particular, playing sl with
probability .6 and s2 with probability 4 is a best response to player 2's
strategy. We have a mixed strategy profile (that is, a mixed strategy for
each player) such that each players strategy is a best response to what
the other is playing. Hence we have a Nash equilibrium. Similarly in the
game of figure 12.8(a), it is an equilibrium for both players to mix with
probability 1/2 for each of their respective strategies.
In these examples, players randomize among all their strategies. So
you dont get the wrong idea about this, consider the game in figure 12.1(1).
Player 2 Player 2
1 t2 tl t2
Tosl) 1-1 | 11 si] 31 13
w w
7 z
= s20 -11 | 1-1 = s21 05 4,2
(a) (b)
Figure 12.8. Two games with only mixed strategy equilibria.
14 The game in figure 12.8(a) is called matching pennies, after the childrens game.
408 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
We have already remarked that this game has two, Nash equilibria, s1-
tl and s2-t4. Because these equilibria do not involve any randomization,
they are called pure strategy equilibria. Now consider the following pair
of strategies. Player 1 plays s1 with probability 9000/9001 and s2 with
probability 1/9001, and Player 2 plays t1 with probability 1/101 and t2
with probability 100/101. Given player 2's strategy, player 1 nets:
(200)(1/101) + (3)(100/101) + (4)(0) + (0)(0) = 500/101 from s1; and
(0)(1/101) + (5)(100/101) + (6)(0) + (3)(0) = 500/101 from s2.
So player 1 is content to play the mixed strategy. And player 2, against
player 1's strategy, nets:
(6)(9000/9001) + (10000)(1/9001) = 44000/9001 from t1;
(5)(9000/9001) + (1000)(1/9001) = 44000/9001 from +2;
(3)(9000/9001) + (3)(1/9001) = 27003/9001 from t3; and
(~1000)(9000/9001) + (20)(1/9001) = 8,999,980/9001 from t4.
So player 2 is indifferent between strategies t1 and t2, and strictly prefers
these two to t3 and t4. The range of best responses for player 2 (to player
U's strategy), then, is any mixed strategy that puts zero probability on t3-
and t4. And our strategy profile has player 2 playing precisely this sort of
mixed strategy.
Note that in this sort of equilibrium, the probabilities used by the
players to randomize are determined not by their own payoffs but by the
payoffs of the other players. If, for example, in figure 12.8(b) we changed
the 1 that player 2 gets from s1-t1 to a 2, then the Nash equilibrium would
be for player 2 to stick with the .5-5 randomization and for player 1
to change to playing s1 with probability .75 and s2 with probability .25.
The point of randomizing is to keep the other player(s) just indifferent
between the strategies that the other player is randomizing among. One
randomizes to keep ones rival guessing and not because of any direct
benefit to oneself. Put another way, in a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
each player has no positive incentive to randomize according to the called-
for mixing probabilities; as long as the other player is fulfilling his part of
the equilibrium, there are many best responses for the first.
For this reason, many people find the idea of a mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium incredible. Are we to believe that individuals faced with real
economic decisions decide what to do by flipping a coin? And if we believe
12.5. Equilibria in mixed strategies 409
that, are we further to believe that individuals will bother to perform
just the right randomization, when doing so is not particularly to their
advantage? Nothing said so far should be taken to imply that the answer
is yes. Remember that being a Nash equilibrium is necessary for the
obvious way to play the game, if an obvious way to play exists. It is in
the eyes of the players (or the analyst) whether mixed strategies ever can
constitute the obvious way to play the game.
In some cases, it doesnt seem unreasonable to suspect that players use
randomized strategies. When playing poker, for example, good players
will randomize (bluff) to avoid becoming predictable. In games where
one player checks on the other in cases of auditing or quality inspection,
to take two examples a policy of random checking is often employed.
Still, if you conclude for yourself that mixed strategy equilibria are
often not very intuitive and (therefore) not candidates for the solution
of a given game, you won't get too much of an argument here.
But, in any case, having the notion of mixed equilibrium around is
useful in one respect. It gives a rather nice mathematical result:
Proposition. Every finite player, finite strategy game has at least one Nash
equilibrium, if we admit mixed strategy equilibria as well as pure. :
This result can be generalized to classes of games with infinitely many
players and/or infinitely many strategies under certain conditions. We
won't be concerned with such extensions here.
The proposition is rather easy to prove if you recall Kakutanis fixed
point theorem from chapter 6. Let = 1,...,I index the players, let 5; be the
(pure) strategy space for player , and let X; be the space of mixed strategies
for player (Le., Xi: is the space of probability distributions on S;). Write
Z=T[,, Z:;thatis, is the space of mixed strategy profiles.
For each o = (gy,...,0r) X, define !
He) ={6 = (61,...,61) Xliis a
best response to (o3,...,0i_1,0:4,...,01) for each i}.
That is, (c) gives the vector correspondence of best responses by the players
to o. We leave as an exercise the proof that is upper semi-continuous and
convex-valued. Then by Kakutanis fixed point theorem, there is some o
5 There is a counterargument to this: Good players randomly decide when to bluff in
order to be unpredictable in the future. This is different from the argument in a randomized
strategy, where a player randomizes for current purposes only. Put differently, in the last
hand of poker you will ever play, will you choose what to do based on the flip of a coin?
410 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
such that o (g). Which then, by the definition of , makes a Nash
equilibrium.
The use of mixed strategies is troubling to much of the laity and even to
some game theorists; do we really think that players will choose their actions
by rolling dice? Owing to this, there have been attempts to domesticate
the concept. The most prevalent is an argument that mixed strategies are
an artifice of an unnaturally coarse model of reality. That is, in any real
application, each player has many items of personal preference known to
himself and unknown by others things like what side of the bed he got out
of, his exact tolerance for risk, etc. One would not wish to build that much
detail into a model; the model would become intractable. But that detail is
really there. And the detail is what determines how an individual chooses
between strategies. What maintains the equilibrium is that each player, trying
to decide what the other will do, feels that he faces the equilibrium probability
distribution over the opponent's (or opponents) strategies. The individual
can make a definite choice between the strategies over which he is supposed
to randomize based on his personal factors. He can't predict what the other
side will do, because he doesnt know the actual values of the others personal
factors. The mathematical results that support this philosophical position are
known as purification theorems. A classic reference on this subject is Harsanyi
(1973); Aumann et al. (1983) is also recommended to the interested reader.
12.6. Why might there be an
obvious way to play a given game?
We've said that if there is an obvious way to play the game, then it -
is necessary that this is a Nash equilibrium. But we've also said that the
only claim that the concept of Nash equilibrium has on our attention is
predicated on there being an obvious way to play the game. And we've
seen several examples of games without an obvious way to play. So if we
think that there is some reason to pay attention to the notion of a Nash
equilibrium, we had better give reasons why some games might seem (to
the players and to the analyst) to be endowed with a solution.
We have, of course, seen examples of games that seem to have this
sort of solution. The Jokx-Beljeau game and the games in figure 12.7(a)
and (c) would be two such, in the case of 12.7(c) depending on what the
players can say to one another. Games that are dominance solvable would
be another class of games with obvious solutions, at least if the number
of rounds of iterated dominance required is not too large: The games
in figure 12.3(2) and 12.5 would seem to qualify, although the game in
figure 12.6 would not. What is it about these games and others like them?
There is no single answer to this question, and in many cases the
answer, such as it is, can only be given informally. This is why the formal
notion of a Nash equilibrium is useful; as a necessary condition for any
12.6. Why might there be an obvious way to play a given game? 411
candidate solution, the concept applies no matter what story is believed
to be behind the existence of the solution. The formal notion provides a
useful test for solutions that others may suggest to you, and it gives us
something of a formal language with which to discuss matters. But this
utility of the formal concept doesnt mean that one can do without the
story about why a game in question does have a solution. So we turn
now to some of the stories that are told in the literature.
Preplay negotiation
One means to the existence of an obvious way to play is(explicit b
a (negotiation (cheap-talk among the player:
fhe game. If preplay negotiations take place,
players will come to an agreement, Nor can we say what agreement will be
reached. But, if the players do negotiate and they do reach an agreement,
then we would expect the agreed-to action to be self-enforcing in the
sense that each individual player, expecting
part of the agreement, does not have an incentive to deviate. That is, we
will want the agreement to be a Nash equilibrium.
s, conducted prior to play of
we cannot guarantee that the
the others to carry out their
There is an important caveat to add here. If players can engage in pre-
move beyond the possibilities sug-
play negotiation, they might be able to
gested by the formal rules of the game,
especially if doing so will make
everyone better off. We could model this possibility by putting within the
formal rules of the game all these possibilities. But some sorts of possibilities
are sometimes modeled indirectly; the possibilities are not included in the
formal model of the game, but the solution concept is changed to reflect their
possibility. The most famous of these is Aumanns correlated equilibrium.
Aumann (1974) considers what will happen if the players are able to build
various sorts of mechanical coordinating devices or employ a disinterested
party who will act as a coordinator. For example, consider the two-player
game depicted in figure 12.9. This game has a single mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium, in which both players have expected payoff 3.75. Now imagine
that, via preplay negotiation, the players agree to the following scheme. Some
third party will roll a six-sided die. If the die comes up with one or two spots
Player 2
1 t2
Tost] 44 3,5
@
=
& s2| 53 0,0
Figure 12.9. A game with a correlated equilibrium.
412 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
up, player 1 is told to play s2. If it comes up three through six, this third
party tells player 1 to play sl. At the same time, if the die comes up one
through four, player 2 is told to play t1, while five or six causes player 2 to be
instructed to play t2. Each player is told only what to play and not how many
spots came up (precisely). This arrangement is self-enforcing: If player 1is
told to play s2, she knows that player 2 was told to play t1, and s2 is a best
response to t1. While if player 1 is told to play sl, she assesses probability 1/2
that player 2 was instructed to play t1 and 1/2 that player 2 was instructed
to play t2. Assuming 2 carries out his instructions, sl is a best response. A
similar argument applies for 2. The point is that the roll of the die and the
intervention of this third party allow 1 and 2 to correlate their actions in
a self-enforcing manner. And in this correlated equilibrium, each player has
an expected payoff of 4, which is more than either gets in the unique Nash
equilibrium of this game. Can we maintain that the two players can engage
in preplay negotiation but they cannot obtain the services of a third party
for this:purpose? If they can correlate their actions in this fashion, then the
range of self-enforcing agreements is larger than the set of Nash equilibria,
which presumes independent selection of actions. On all these points, see
Aumann (1974). And for even fancier devices of this sort, see Forges (1986)
and Myerson (1986).
Convention
Consider the game in figure 12.7(b), played under the following con-
ditions: There is a large population of players who are matched randomly
at random times and who at those times must play this game. (Moreover,
players are randomly assigned positions in the game; a given individ- -
ual will sometimes be put in the position of player 1 and sometimes in
the position of player 2.) The players, when matched, cannot communi-
cate. In this case, it is not hard to imagine that some convention will be
developed concerning how to play this game say, always play s2-t1.
This convention is no more likely, on the face of things, than the reverse.
By the same token (taking a slightly more complex example), there is no
reason why red means stop and green means go on traffic lights. This is
convention, and a lot of good outcomes on the roads result.
Interesting equilibria by convention sometimes are tied to seem-
ingly irrelevant signals or historical summaries. By seemingly irrelevant
I mean: These things do not affect the range of strategies a player has, or
players payoffs from various strategy profiles. But these things become
relevant to the play of the game because convention makes them relevant.
Traffic lights are a classic example. Or consider playing the game in fig-
ure 12.1()) in a large population, with random matchings of players, but
where the distinguishing labels of player 1 and player 2 are absent, so
players cannot use those labels to coordinate. Imagine that each player
carries with himself a summary of how well he has fared in the past 
12.6. Why might there be an obvious way to play a given game? 413
say the sum total of all his winnings in these games. And imagine two
different societies, distinguished by the following two conventions: In
the first society, when two players meet, the one who has fared less well
in the past is given the edge in this encounter. That is, if player 1 has fared
less well in the past, we play s2-t1. (If the players have done precisely as
well in the past, convention is silent as to what happens.) In the second
society, instead of noblesse oblige, the reverse holds: Whichever party has
fared better in the past is given the edge. One might argue which is the
better society /convention. But both conventions serve at least the purpose
of getting players to a Nash equilibrium. (For analysis of this sort of thing,
see Rosenthal and Landau [1979].)
Learned behavior
A variation on the convention stories concerns learned behavior. Go
back to the game in figure 12.7(b), and consider a pair of players who
play this game a number of times. We might not expect them to be able
to coordinate their actions on the first round of play or on the second, but
it is not hard to imagine that after a few interactions some modus vivendi
will spring up between them. (Suppose that the players have constant
roles. That is, one individual is always player 1 and the other is player 2.
It is then interesting to ask: Given that the difference in payoffs is only 1,
versus a loss of 90 if coordination fails, will players tend to stick with one
coordinated solution, or will they learn to alternate? Or, put another way,
if the 91s were both 1s, we might expect players to learn to alternate. But
what about intermediate cases, such as the game in figure 12.1[j]? And
what will happen in the game in figure 12.1[k]?)
An early manifestation of learned behavior stories were models of
fictitious play. Imagine two players playing a normal form game with
the following decision rules. Begin with any strategy at all. Then, in each
round of play, choose whatever strategy is best against the average play
of your rival in previous rounds. That is, if in one hundred rounds of
play your rival has chosen s1 39 times, s2 22 times, s3 16 times, and s4
23 times, then you play whatever is best against the mixed strategy (by
your opponent) of (.39, .22, .16, .23). If both players act and learn in this
fashion, will they settle down to some equilibrium? (If they do, it is clear
that this will have to be a Nash equilibrium.) It turns out that this sort of
behavior does not necessarily lead to an equilibrium; a famous example
of Shapley (1964) establishes this. But one can still wonder to what extent
learning by the players can lead them to situations in which each is fairly
sure what the others are doing and acting in his own best interests in
response reinforces what others think they know about the actions of the
414 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
first. For one development of this sort of story, especially in the context of
extensive form games, see Fudenberg and Kreps (1989).
Although it will make more sense after chapter 14, note that a prob-
lem with the learned behavior story, insofar as it is meant to apply to a
pair of players who play the same game repeatedly, is that the repeated
play by itself can enlarge the set of possible Nash equilibria. (If you don't
understand this remark, dont panic; wait for chapter 14.) To assume that
players play the same game with the same opponents over and over and
they thereby learn some static Nash equilibrium of the game may re-
quire that players are myopic to a certain extent. The story works a bit
better if there is a group of individuals who are randomly matched, but
then we come to a gray area between learned behavior-and convention.
Focal points and principles
The final story we tell about where solutions to given games might
come from is related to the stories in the previous two subsections. We can
introduce this story by returning to the games in figure 12.7(a) and (c). In
the game in 12.7(2), it seems clear why s1-t1 is the solution, even though
there is another Nash equilibrium; s1-t1 gives both players the most they
can get in this game, and the players can see that this doesn't put their
interests in opposition. Even if the players have never spoken and are
not allowed to speak, it seems pretty clear that each will realize this (at
least, with high probability) and act accordingly. Note well the quotation
marks around accordingly, since it is only accordingly if we make the leap
for the two players simultaneously, or rather if we believe that each player,
making the leap, simultaneously believes that his opponent is making the
corresponding leap.
In 12.7(c), if the players cangiot(communicate, it is xopthe{ optimality |
of s2-t4 that commends itself, but the (uniqueness of this(mode of (coor-|
dinating. It just seems likely that each player, looking at this game and
thinking about how coordination might be achieved, will see this unique-
ness as his best hope (and expect that the other side will see this as well).
Now consider the two verbal games from the first section. Take the
game with the eleven cities first. This game has an enormous number of
Nash equilibria, even if we restrict attention to pure strategies. Since San
Francisco and Boston are preassigned, it has 512 pure strategy equilibria
(the 512 partitions of the other nine cities). Moreover, each of these is a
strict equilibrium; the players have positive incentive not to deviate in the
slightest. Accordingly, you might think that playing this game leads to
massive confusion. But it hasn't done so when I've had it played by stu-
dents from Stanford University. Over eighty percent of the students (who
_ players for reasons of (symmetry @r(optimality
. (principle like those two. Context, the identity of the players, their back-|
12.6. Why might there be an obvious way fo play a given game? 415
are U.S. nationals or otherwise long-time residents of the U.S.) asked have
given the same list of cities, and rarely has anyone's list deviated from this
by more than one. For Stanford students, this list is Dallas, Denver, Hous-
ton, Los Angeles, Seattle, and San Francisco. It is evident what is going on
here; students use an east-west division of the United States to divide the
cities. There are eleven cities, so students typically expect that they should
get five or six. New York is said to have the highest value and Seattle the
lowest, and it is clear to whom these two cities belong, so it is typically
felt that equity considerations should lead the western list to have six.
And, rather nicely, the east-west principle leads to just a five-six division.
This doesnt always work. By changing the list of cities, one can make
things much less nice. For one thing, when one of the participants in this
game (when I've played it with students) is from outside the United States
and one is from the U.S., the U.S. resident has worried about how much
geography the other student knows. (These worries are only allowed to be
expressed after the game is played, since a worry, properly phrased, gives
the game away: One student once wondered aloud beforehand whether,
since geography was such a tricky thing, whether his rival knew the order
of the English alphabet) Or if one removes Atlanta and Philadelphia
from the list and adds Phoenix and San Diego, play becomes much less
predictable, even for U.S. residents.
And, of course, the fact that these are cities is crucial. If the game
involves not cities but a list of letters, then alphabetical order is the over-
whelming choice for division: The list with T always takes S, I, and N,
very often L, and almost never H. Again, one can confuse matters eas-
ily. Make N (the 100 point letter) the sixth letter in order, and things get
touchy. Have one list begin with A and the second with C, and confu-
sion results. Whatever is going on here only goes on in some cases. But,
crucially, when it does, players tend to know that it is doing so.
The point is that in many games an|equilibrium(suggests (itself to the|
opsome other (qualitative -
grounds, and other such fuzzy factors play a huge role in this. This is
the sense in which this is akin to convention or learned behavior: Al-
though it is learning about how people think in general, rather than
learning about how people act conventionally in a specific situation or
how person X acts in this situation, it is still a (manifestation of socially! -
(driven(expectations and( behavior. The equilibria that people sometimes,
just naturally focus upon are called focal points or (focal (equilibria, and we/~
- will refer here to the(organizing (principle (equity, uniqueness, geography, L
alphabetical order) as the focal principle.
416 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
Game theorists have not done a good job of formalizing what consti-
tutes a good focal principle, and these ideas remain informal and impre-
cise. The best (perhaps the only really good) discussion of these ideas can
be found in Schelling (1980).
A nonstory
There are stories then, about why a(game(might possess a {solution |
in the sense used here. There could be(preplay negotiation; it could be the;
- result of convention@r(learned (behavior; and it could simply be that the
~ solution i5(focal. At the start of this subsection we added, the game might
be(dominance(solvable, which is a good story, as(long as one does} need |
+ to(invoke(too(many (rounds of (jterated dominance:
We close this section with a different story, one that is sometimes told
and which when heard should be regarded with scepticism. This is the
story that strategy profile X is the only Nash equilibrium, and so it must be
the obvious way to play the game. I contend, however, that uniqueness!
of the equilibrium alone is not a convincing story.
To see why, consider the following variation on the game in fig-
ure 12.7(a). First, change the two 10s both to 100s. Now it seems even
more obvious that the solution is s1-t1. But add the following compli-
cation: Player 1 chooses both a row (either sl or s2) and a nonnegative
integer. That is, player 1's strategy space is {s1,s2} x {0,1,2,...}. Player
a
2 chooses a column (either t1 or t2) and a nonnegative integer. If player 1 -
chooses s2 or player 2 chooses t2, payoffs are just as before. But if player
1 chooses s1 and player 2 chooses t1, then whoever named the greater in-
teger gets 101 and the other gets 100. If the integers named are identical,
then each gets 99. If you think about this game, you will see that it has
only one Nash equilibrium, s2-t2. And even with all this greatest integer
stuff, I rather doubt that s2-t2 is the solution. I would predict, with a
fair degree of assurance, that the outcome of the game will be partially
described by s1-t1; I have no particular prediction to make about how the
greatest integer stuff will resolve. This, then, is a game in which there is no
solution, but where there is a very good and reliable partial solution,
at least to my mind. And this partial solution involves outcomes that
are part of no Nash equilibrium.
You may be unhappy with this example because of the very strange
nature of the game; name a large integer is not the stuff of many realistic
1 You will also hear that in a given game profile X is the only refined equilibrium for one
of the refinements that will be given in the next section, and hence X must be the obvious
way to play the game. Absent any supporting arguments, this is if anything less convincing
than the story for plain Nash equilibria.
12.7. Refinements of Nash equilibrium 417
applications, and the one penny differences are not significant. We can
think of this as really two games combined: The first is the game in figure
12.7(a) but with 99s instead of 10s. This game has two Nash equilibria
and one quite obvious way to play. And the second is a strange game
that is played only if we get the 99s equilibrium in the first game, a game
where the stakes are one and two pennies, which has no Nash equilibrium
at all, and which clearly has no obvious way to play. If we decompose
the original game into these two pieces, then there is no reason to think
that the presence of this strange second piece affects the reasonableness of
playing the 99 equilibrium in the first piece.
Having set up this straw argument, let us demolish it: This is pre-
cisely the point. The decomposition of this game into two pieces is not
something done formally; it is something we did based on intution of how
the game will be played. When formal criteria such as the uniqueness of
equilibria support ones intuition, or even where the uniqueness of the
equilibrium seems intuitively to be a focal principle that is likely to appeal
to the particular players in the particular situation, then well and good.
The formal criterion by itself, however, is inadequate.
In case you are still unhappy, we can make a slightly weaker point
with the centipede game of figure 12.6. This game has more than one
Nash equilibrium. But every Nash equilibrium of this game leads to the
same outcome, namely player 1 playing D at the initial node of the game
(proving this is a nice exercise). So if one is inclined to believe that any
game with a unique Nash equilibrium outcome must have that outcome as
obvious, then one believes that the obvious outcome to the centipede game
is that player 1 plays D to begin, which we asserted before and continue
to assert is not so obvious at all. 
12.7. Refinements of Nash equilibrium
If being a Nash equilibrium is # necessary condition for some strategy
profile to be the obvious way to play a particular game, perhaps there
are other, stronger tests that ought to be passed. For example, we have
already remarked on one weakness of the Nash equilibrium concept in
section 12.3, namely that a Nash equilibrium can have a player using a
weakly dominated strategy. One might wish to say, therefore, that a better
necessary condition for a solution is that it be a Nash equilibrium with
the additional refinement that no weakly dominated strategy is played with
positive probability. (We will comment on this particular refinement of
Nash equilibrium in a moment. For now consider it an example of what
we might try to do.)
418 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
The general program of requiring more of a solution than just that
it be a Nash equilibrium is known in the literature as the program of per-
_ fecting or refining Nash equilibrium. The literature on this subject runs in
two veins; one can base refinements on arguments that are derived from
considerations of the normal form of the game, as in the case of weak dom-
inance, or one can base refinements on extensive form considerations. We
have already noted a connection between weak dominance in the normal
form and backwards induction in extensive | form games of complete and
perfect information, so you can expect a close connection between these
two veins. In this section, we will move back and forth between the two
veins, although emphasis will be on the extensive form, on grounds that
extensive form considerations are more intuitive Throughout, when we
look at extensive form games, we will consider only games with perfect
recall, so that Kuhn's theorem applies.
This is a very long and involved section. 1 have divided it into num-
bered subsections, so that it seems less of an endless mass. Certainly try to
get through subsections 12.7.1 and 12.7.2. The remainder of this section is
increasingly optional, although some things discussed later in the book
(especially in chapters 13 and 17) depend on these later subsections.
1 give two final warnings: First, there is no settled conventional wis-
dom about refinements of Nash equilibrium. Indeed, there is much con-
troversy about which refinements are reasonable and which not. What
follows inevitably reflects my personal biases and my own way of view-
ing Nash equilibrium and noncooperative game theory, a fact that I will
attempt to make clear by extensive use of the pronoun I. Of course, you
get a strong dose of my personal philosophy throughout this book, any-
way, but this particular subject is one in which opinions are rather broadly
distributed, and my opinions are a bit extreme. Second, to develop fully
my philosophy on these things, I need some tools that will be given in the
next chapter. Hence in this section I ask a number of questions to which
I can, for now, give only cryptic answers. The final section of chapter 13
will provide more satisfactory answers to the questions that are asked but
not really answered here.
12.7.1. Weak dominance
We already sketched our first refinement: For games in normal form,
look only at Nash equilibria that do not involve the play of weakly dom-
inated strategies. I find this refinement fairly noncontroversial except in
17 My assertion that extensive form considerations are more intuitive is not unanimously
held. )
ite
12.7.1. Refinements weak dominance 419
Player 2
tl t2
Ssl| 100 | 52
=
& s2| 1011 | 20
Figure 12.10. Refining with weak dominance.
very special and extreme examples (such as the game in figure 12.1[d]),
and I would be suspicious of any solution that involved the play of a
weakly dominated strategy.
Since I view this refinement as noncontroversial, it makes a good place
to begin to discuss the root of all controversy concerning refinements.
Consider the game in figure 12.10. This is a variation on the game in
figure 12.1(c), but with player 2's payoff improved in the s2-41 cell. Just
as in the game from 12.1(c), s1 weakly dominates s2, and so the solution
by iterated weak dominance is 51-12. Note that this is a Nash equilibrium.
So is s2-t1. But 2-1 involves the play of a weakly dominated strategy, so
we would refine it away. -Of course, the problem with this is that s2-t1
is better for both players than is s1-2.
Now with reference to this particular game, I am quite willing to en-
tertain the hypothesis that there is no solution, especially if the players
cant communicate. But suppose the players can engage in preplay nego-
tiation. Shouldn't we then expect them to settle on s2-t1? And doesnt
this mean that the weak dominance criterion isnt a good refinement?
The argument against player 1 playing the weakly dominated strategy
s2 is that player 1, if she isn't sure that player 2 will play tl, doesnt
optimize with s2. If player 1 assesses any probability at all, however
small, that player 2 will choose t2, then s1 gives a higher expected utility.
But the point of preplay negotiation is that player 2 lays to rest the fears
of player 1 on this score. Player 1 is given assurances about player 2's be-
havior. If there is no preplay communication, one can mount a similar
d My suspicions would rot be provoked by equilibria in weakly dominated strategies for
certain games with infinitely many strategies. In very natural games with infinitely many
strategies, all the Nash equilibria involve weakly dominated strategies. See, for example,
the discussion of Bertrand equilibrium in section 12.8. This is something of a mathematical
artifact of games with infinitely many strategies; hence it is not cause for serious concern.
18 But the argument, even with preplay communication, is not as simple as this. Player 2
is as much at risk (or more) at the profile s2-t1: What if player 1 plays s1? So we must also
consider whether player 2's fears are laid to rest by preplay communication. To repeat from
footnote 4, even if player 1 has every intention of playing s1, she also has every incentive
420 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
argument: If s2-t1 is advanced as the solution, then player 1 is supposed
to think that player 2 recognizes this. And if player 2 recognizes this, then
player 2 will play t1. Which leads player 1 to dismiss both her fears and
the argument against playing s2. And once that argument is dismissed,
there is nothing wrong with s2-t1 being the solution.
The problem here is one of complete confidence in a solution versus
being very, very sure, but not certain, that players will see how to play the
game and act accordingly. If players are completely certain, then nothing
is wrong with playing a weakly dominated strategy. If they are only very,
very sure, then they would rationally avoid weakly dominated strategies.
So the question comes down to: Is Nash equilibrium appropriate for cases
where players are very nearly certain or must it be reserved for cases of
complete certainty? If the latter, then the weak-dominance refinement is on
weak ground. And even if the former, this refinement is on weak ground
in those (perhaps rare) instances with complete certainty.
I prefer to think that there is never complete certainty in the sorts of
situations one models with games, and so the appropriate theory is one
that involves nearly certain players who still dont rule out entirely any
possible action by their opponents. Given this, weak dominance seems a
useful refinment of Nash equilibrium.
And, I hasten to add, in the particular example of figure 12.10, my
position would be that there is no obvious solution; changing the pay-
offs from figure 12.1(c) in this manner gives us a game that is hard to .
play, despite the fact that it has a unique equilibrium in undominated
strategies. The usual refrain applies: Nash equilibrium, now refined by
weak dominance, is a necessary condition for a solution when one
exists.
The tension just observed is the hallmark of all the literature on re-
finements. For normal form games, one is concerned with how strategies
perform if ones opponents take actions that have zero probability in
the equilibrium; one has to reason about the relative likelihood of things
that one feels are not going to happen with any significant probability. In
terms of extensive form games, this tension takes the following form: Most
refinements that are based on extensive form considerations are keyed to
what will happen out of equilibrium that is, at points in the game
tree that will not be reached if the equilibrium is played. But how can we
reason about what will happen conditional on things that are not meant
to happen in the first place? If this question seems cryptic now, keep it
to convince player 2 that she will play s2 (so player 2 will respond with t1). If player 2 is
intelligently sceptical about what he hears, player 1 may have a hard time reassuring him
that she really, truly intends to play s2.
12.7.2. Refinements subgame perfection 421
firmly in mind as we continue through this section. It will be a constantly
nagging counterpoint to everything that follows.
12.7.2. Subgame perfection (and iterated weak dominance)
Now we move to, extensive games. Recall first the game in fig-
ure 12.1(n), reproduced (and turned on its side) in figure 12.01). In this
game are(two(Nash equilibria: U-r and D-1. Let us be precise about this.
First, why is U-r an equilibrium? Because if player 2 is choosing r, then
player 1 prefers U to D. And given that player 1 is choosing U, player 2
doesn't care which action he takes. They both give payoff 2, since player 2
won't get the opportunity to move. The profile D-1 is also an equilibrium
because, if player 2 is choosing 1, then player 1 prefers D to U, while if
player 1 is choosing D, then player 2 prefers 1 to r.
1 2
9
s15 <9 2 DC TTT
rats
 :
E03
Nu
sl : #4
2 yd : (2,0,-1000)
 3:
NE i _-~ (2.0,-10000)
s2 :
6 Lm Om
 Ay (1,63)
(2,3,20)
Figure 12.11. Subgame perfection.
1
1599 Y 5D
422 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
This is a good time to make an important observation and set some
terminology about Nash equilibria in extensive form games, based on the
example of U-r. If player 1 chooses U, then player 2's information set
(which is a single node) is not reached. We say that player 2's information
set is out-of-equilibrium or off the path of play. In this case, what player 2
does there is inconsequential to player 2's expected payoff, since there is
no chance (given the strategy of the other player) that player 2's choice
will matter. To be a bit imprecise, the choice of action of a player at an
information set that is off the path of play is unrestricted by the criterion of
Nash equilibrium, since that choice cannot affect the payoff of the player
who moves there. But the strategy of a player at an out-of-equilibrium
information set can affect what other players choose at in-equilibrium infor-
mation sets, since those players, in evaluating the value to them of other
strategies they might employ, have to take into account what will happen
if they cause a previously out-of-equilibrium information sef to be reached.
In the U-r equilibrium, player 1 doesnt choose D because of what player 2
does at player 2's out-of-equilibrium information set.
| While both U-r and D-1 are Nash equilibria, we argued before that
Ur is 10% a very sensible prediction. If player 2 is given the move, it
seems reas6nable to suppose that 2 will choose 1. We saw before that this
argument could be cast as a special case of weak dominance, but now let{
us pose a different refinement for extensive form games that also captures 8
this argument as a special case. ..
To do so, consider the games in figures 12.11(b) and (c). Note that
in the game in figure 12.11(b), U-r-R is a Nash equilibrium. Given that
player 1 chooses U, the action of player 2 at his information set is uncon-
strained. And given that player 2 is choosing 1, U and R are best choices
for player 1. And in the game in figure 12.11(c), U-s2-t3 is a Nash equi-
librium. The actions of players 9 and 3 are unconstrained; given player 1
chooses U, their information sets are off the path of play. And given that
they choose s2 and t3, respectively, player 1 prefers U.
1 wish to focus on the fact that in each of these games what (follows|<
(from the (decision(node of playex(2 is a (game in its (own(right. That isi
to say, take the node of player 2, which we call , and all its successor
nodes, the set S(t). First, node is an information set as a singleton set.
Second, every node that follows t is in an information set that involves
only nodes that are successors to . So if any successor node to t is ever
 To be precise, this is true of any information set that is off the path of play even if the
player who moves there does everything possible to get play to go there. That is, the infor-
mation set must be off the path of play by virtue of what others are doing and not simply
because the player in question, at an earlier move, is moving away from that information set.
12.7.2. Refinements subgame perfection 423
reached, the player who moves at that node will know that node had
been reached earlier. We make the following definition. Recall that for
any given node , h(t) denotes the information set that contains .
Definition. A proper subgame of an extensive form game is a node t and all
its successors S(t) that have the properties: h(t) = {t}, and for all '
: = {t}; 8,
h(t") C S(). f v
Suppose we have a solution to an extensive form game. We will
think of this as a behavior strategy a prescription of how each player will
act at each information set in the game. As always, a solution is meant to
be a prescription for actions such that every player is very nearly certain
that this is how others will act, and every player is nearly certain that
others are nearly certain about this. And suppose this game has a proper
subgame. Then if the subgame is reached in the course of play, players
will be very, very sure what their opponents are doing in the subgame.
Because this is a proper subgame, players will be able to evaluate how well
they do in the game for the various actions they might take, conditional on
the subgame being reached. And it wouldn't be sensible for them to take
actions in the subgame which, given what others are doing, give them less
expected utility in the subgame than the best they can do. Before moving
to examples, we give the formal definition.
Definition. A subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for an extensive form game
is a Nash equilibrium for the game that, moreover, gives a Nash equilibrium in
every proper subgame of the game.
As examples, consider the games in figure 12.11. Take 12.11(a) first
and _the Nash equilibrium U-r. This is fictisubgame perfect, because | int the| 
s proper (subgame that begins with _player(2s node, the! choice of(r is @Dt| 
an/equilibrium. That is, starting from his node, player 2 gets 1 from 1!
~>iand 0 from 1, and go(conditional upon (getting (to this node, 2 (prefers 1.
Take the game in 12.11(b) and the Nash equilibrium U-+-R. Tn the sub-
game that begins with the choice of D by 1, r-R is not a Nash equilibrium.
Player 1's choice of R is a best response in the subgame, if we assume that
2 is playing r. But against R, in the subgame player 2 prefers | to r. Note
well: Player 2 doesn't care about 1 versus r in the entire game if player 1
begins with U, since then player 2's choice is irrelevant. But if player 2
is put on the move, player 2 knows that his choice is in fact relevant.
And given that player 2 is expecting player 1 to play R later on, the better
choice is now L. Since r-R is not a Nash equilibrium in the proper subgame
beginning with 2's node, U-r-R is not a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium.
424 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
And take the game in 12.11(c) and the Nash equilibrium U-s2-t3. In the
subgame beginning with player 2's node, s2-t3 is not a Nash equilibrium.
And so U-s2-t3 is not subgame perfect.
(In games with(complete and(perfect information, the notion of(sub-
ye game perfection _applies with a (vengeance: Since every(node is, as a(sin-
 gleton set, an (information set, (every/node (begins a proper (subgame. It
is straightforward to see, for example, that in a finite game of complete
and perfect information, if the rollback procedure (i.e., iterated weak dom-
inance) generates no ties, then the strategy profile obtained by rolling back
is also the unique subgame perfect equilibrium.
In most applications of game theory to economics, subgame perfec-
tion is accepted as an entirely reasonable refinement of Nash equilibrium.
More than that, when a given game has a unique subgame perfect equi-
Librium, it is usually held that this uniqueness is a convincing reason to
conclude that this equilibrium is the solution of the game. The reader
will realize that I most certainly do not ascribe to the second assertion; an
example has already been given of a game with a unique Nash equilibrium
that, I contend, would almost never be played. And we have an(exam-
|=
|
fo
or ear i a | mgr
12.7.3. Refinements sequential equilibrium 425
What is going on here? The short answer is that application of sub-
game perfection requires two things: (1) The game must have a solution
in all parts of the game tree, including those parts of the game that this
solution says are unlikely to be reached. For the game in figure 12.11(c),
the outcome U isnt a full solution in this sense, since this outcome doesnt
say what will happen if 2 is given the move. (And as I maintained before,
I dont find any readily apparent solution to the subgame that starts with
player 2's node.) (2) One must assume that players act in a way that max-
imizes the payoffs ascribed to them by the model given their conjectures
about the actions of their opponents, even in parts of the game that are
unlikely to be reached if the solution is correct. In out-of-equilibrium
subgames, the solution is clearly disproved. Yet in applying subgame
perfection we are meant to maintain faith in the validity of the solution
in whatever remains. In games such as the centipede game, this is a bit
hard to accept.
Or to give a still shorter answer, with subgame perfection one as-
sumes that we can reason with confidence about things that will happen
conditional on things that shouldn't have happened. This assumption
should at least be cause for concern.
ple of a game of complete and perfect information, namely the (centipede; -
iN game, in which I dot(find the unique subgame perfect equilibrium to +
f These short answers dont nearly do justice to this basic point of the
- ibe the (obvious(solution. But, beyond this, I would contend that there are
, philosophy of refinements. To give a better answer, though, requires a
games for which the outcome is fairly clear, and that outcome, while an
equilibrium outcome, is not part of a subgame perfect equilibrium.
The game in figure 12.11(c) is such a game. In case you dont recognize
it, the game between 2 and 3 beginning at 2's node is the same as the
normal form game in figure 12.1(1). When we examined that normal form
game, we concluded (or, rather, I asserted) that it admits no obvious way
to play where the standards for an obvious way to play are necessarily
very high, since the penalty for being wrong (for player 3 in the game as
depicted here) is enormous. My experience with this game, though, leads
me to assess a very high probability that player 3 will pick 3 and so, if
1 were player 1, 1 would find the choice of U to be fairly obvious. And
I would expect most reasonable people put in the role of player 1 would
on similar grounds pick U. I comfortably predict that the outcome of this
game will be that U is chosen and the game ends.
Notwithstanding this, as we remarked earlier (and you are asked to
verify in problem 3), the only Nash equilibria for the subgame involve the
play of t1, 2, and t4. If 3 is playing t3 with zero probability, as he must in
any equilibrium in the subgame, then 1 will play D. So in every subgame
perfect equilibrium of this game (and there are three of them), player 1
chooses D.
substantial digression, especially for the reader for whom this is the first
pass through the common types of Nash equilibrium refinements. Hence
we will leave matters of this sort here, to be picked up in the last section
of chapter 13.
12.7.3. Sequential equilibrium
Throughout this subsection, we continue to work with extensive form
games with perfect recall. ,
Consider the game depicted in figure 12.12(a). One Nash equilib-
rium of the game is player 1 chooses D; player 2 chooses a; player 3
chooses L. Note why this is a Nash equilibrium. Player 1's choice is op-
timal given player 2's choice of a and 3's choice of L. Player 3, given 1's
choice of D, concludes (when given the move) that she is at the left-hand
node in her information set, from which L is optimal. And player 2's
choice is optimal because it is irrelevant given that player 1 is choosing
D, player 2s information set (which consists of a single node) is off the
path of play.
As we saw above, one has to wonder about choices made off the
** This example is originally due to Selten (1975).
426 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
1 ow (2,6)
J
To 2 0-2 B30
b| , I
@ roe e @-eeeee
VAAN UNCON
444 11,0 5,50) 2.22) 01D G2 1,3) 1,59
(a) (b)
Figure 12.12. Two extensive form games.
path of play. And there is reason to wonder about player 2s choice in
this instance. Player 2, if he is given the move and if he maintains the
hypothesis that player 3 will choose L, ought to choose d. Choosing
action a nets 3, while d nets 5 if player 3 chooses L. But if 2 is choosing
d instead of a, then player 1 would do better with A than with D. And
if player 1 is supposed to choose A and 2 to choose d, then player 3, put
on the move, should conclude that she is at the right-hand node in her
information set, which leads her to choose K, which then causes 2 to go
back to a. (Although now, if 3 is choosing R and 2 is choosing a, player 1
should chodse A, and we have a second Nash equilibrium.)
As before, in the equilibrium D-a-L the off-the-path play of a is suspi-
cious. Accordingly, we might try to pose a refinement of Nash equilibrium
that eliminates this equilibrium as a potential solution. Subgame perfec-
tion as a formal criterion doesnt help us in this game, because the game
has no proper subgames. Except for the initial node, only player 2s node
is a single-node information set, and one of its successors is joined in
an information set to a node that isn't one of its successors. But while
subgame perfection doesnt apply, the spirit of subgame perfection seems
clear enough here: A player, given the move and assessing that other play-
ers will (subsequently) conform to the equilibrium prescription, should choose
optimally, even if this player is given the move unexpectedly. 3
Before trying to formalize this into a new refinement of Nash equilib-
rium, consider the game in figure 12.12(b). Here we have a Nash equilib-
rium where player 1 chooses A and 2 chooses 1. This is an equilibrium:
Given 2 is choosing 1, 1 prefers A to both L and R, whereas if 1 is choos-
ing A, 2's choice is off the path of play and so unrestricted. But is 2's
choice reasonable? Once again, the formal criterion of subgame perfec-
tion is no help. Since 7s information set contains two nodes, there are no
proper subgames with which to work. And there is a technical difficulty in
applying the spirit of subgame perfection to 2's choice: We would like to
12.7.3. Refinements sequential equilibrium 427
evaluate the ex post expected payoff to 2 of choosing r or 1, given that 2 is
given the opportunity to move. But we can't evaluate 2's expected payoff
ex post because we dont know what odds 2 would assess for being at the
left-hand or right-hand node in his information set. We cant use Bayes
rule and player 1's equilibrium strategy to get that ex post assessment,
because player 2 assesses zero probability ex ante that he will be given
the move by player 1. But surely this shouldn't matter: No matter what
assessment player 2 makes concerning which node he is at in his information set,
+ is better than I. (And if player 2 chooses 1, then player 1 should choose L.)
i The notion of a (sequential (equilibrium is meant to cover these two ex-|
amples. A sequential equilibrium consists of(two(pieces. The first piece
is, as in any Nash equilibrium, a (strategy (profile, which (thinking in terms| 
of behavior strategies) prescribes for every information set probability
(distribution over the (actions available. We will use 7 to denote a typical
Strategy profile, with 7 denoting the behavior strategy of player i.
The second piece of a sequential equilibrium is a (system of (beliefs, <
denoted by pu. Beliefs assign to every information set h in the game a
probability (distribution over the {nodes z h, with thelinterpretation that)
| these are th beliefs of player u(h) {about (where & his(information(set hed, <-
|given that information set h has been reached. Formally, p is a function
from the set of decision nodes X of the game tree to [0,1], such that for
every information set h H, 3p p(@) = 1.
To take an example, the game in figure 12.12(a) has three information
sets. The first, belonging to player 1, has a single node; so 1's beliefs are
necessarily that she is at this node with probability one, given that she is
given the move. The second, belonging to player 2, also has a single node,
so again the only possible beliefs put probability one on that single node.
But the third, belonging to player 3, has two nodes, and beliefs for this
information set would prescribe the probabilities that player 3 attaches to
these two nodes. Or, for the game in figure 12.12(b), it is the two-node
information set of player 2 for which beliefs are nontrivial.
Lt Roughly speaking, a(sequential(equilibrium is a(profile of( strategies =!
Co and beliefs u such that starting from every information set h in the game
tree player (h)(plays (optimally from theri@y. given that (what has(tran- +
| spired( previously is given by{ u(h) and what will transpire at subsequent
nodes belonging to other players is given by =. This condition is called
sequential rationality.
To see sequential rationality in action, consider first the game in fig-
ure 12.12(a), the strategy profile where player 1 chooses D, 2 chooses a,
and 3 chooses L, and the beliefs where player 3 at her information set as-
sesses probability 1 that she is at the left-hand node. (As noted above, the
beliefs of players 1 and 2 are trivial.) Player 1's choice is optimal given
her trivial beliefs. Player 3's choice is optimal given her beliefs; if she
| assesses probability one that she is at the left-hand node, then L nets her
4 units while R nets her 1. (Note that 3's choice of L is optimal given any
beliefs that assign probability 2/5 or more to her being at the left-hand
node.) But player 2's strategy is not sequentially rational; his beliefs are
trivially given, and if he maintains the hypothesis that 3 will play L, then
he obtains 5 from choosing d and only 3 from choosing a.
And consider the game in figure 12.12(b), the strategy profile where
player 1 plays A and player 2 plays 1, and beliefs by player 2 that the
left-hand node in his information set has (conditional) probability . It
doesnt matter what is; player 2's choice of 1 is not sequentially rational.
Given a, he nets expected utility o+3(10) by playing 1 and 2a+5(1 a)
by playing 1. Since the second amount exceeds the first for any a, there
is no way that a choice of 1 by player 2 can be sequentially rational, and
so A-l is not the strategy profile part of any sequential equilibrium.
We are looking here at some very simple examples; do not be misled
by their simplicity. In some games there are information sets with more
than one node and with actions by other players following; in these games
both beliefs (about what has happened so far) and the strategy profile
(about what will happen in the future) come into play in checking for
sequential rationality. For example, in the game in figure 12.13, suppose
we specified that player 1 plays L, player 2 plays d, and player 3 plays D.
And for player 2 (who is the only player with a nontrivial information
set), we specify beliefs that put probability .3 on the topmost node in his
information set. Then d is not sequentially rational for 2: If he chooses d,
he nets (.3)(@) + (.7)(2) = 2.6, while u nets (3)[(0)(2) + (V(B)] + (7X1) =
Note well how player 3's choice of D affects the second computation; if
player 3's part of the strategy profile were to play D with probability .5
and U with probability .5, we would calculate that the consequences of u
for player 2 are
(INE) + (BB) + (71) =2.2
which is less than what 2 expects to get from d, given his beliefs. Thus,
with this change in player 3's strategy and holding 2's beliefs fixed, 2's
action becomes sequentially rational. On the other hand, if we maintain
this change in player 3's strategy and modify 2's beliefs so that he assesses,
say, probability .7 that he is at the topmost node in his information set,
then (fixing 3's strategy) his choice of d is once again not sequentially
rational. (Work this out!)
12.7.3. Refinements sequential equilibrium 429
u 3,2,0)
7 rs 2
1,99) ~~ (1842) (682)
4,1,1)
S
(-8,2,3)
Figure 12.13. An extensive form game.
Sequential rationality is one part of the definition of a sequential equi-|
librium. In addition, we want beliefs and strategies to make sense together.
"For example, suppose in the game in figure 12.12(a), player 1 chooses A,
player 2 chooses d, and player 3 chooses L. Moreover, player 3's beliefs at
her information set are that she is at the left-hand node with probability
-95. You can easily check that each player's part of the strategy is sequen-
tially rational. Yet this isn't even a Nash equilibrium, let alone any sort
of refinement of Nash equilibrium. The problem is that player 3's beliefs
are crazy given player 1's and 2's supposed strategies. If the game begins
with the play of A followed by d, then player 3 ought to believe given
the move that she is at the right-hand node in her information set with
probability one. Bayes rule would certainly tell her this.
At a minimum, we would want to insist that the strategy profile =|
and the beliefs p are consistent at the level of Bayes rule in the following |
sense: Given the strategy profile 7, for any information set h that will be |
reached with positive probability (if players use the strategies given by =)
| beliefs at h are computed from the strategies via Bayes rule. |
(In case you are a bit rusty concerning applications of Bayes rule, let
me work an example. Consider the game in figure 12.12(a) and suppose
player 1 chooses A with probability 1/3 and D with probability 2/3, and
player 2 chooses a with probability 1/4 and d with probability 3/4. Then,
in the course of play, we will come to the left-hand node of player 3's
information set with (prior) probability 2/3 and the right-hand node with
(prior) probability (1/3)3/4) = 1/4. That is, there is prior probability
11/12 that player 3 will be given the opportunity to move (and 1/12 that
the game will end without 3's information set being reached). By applying
Bayes rule, therefore, player 3's beliefs upon being given the move should
be that she is at the left-hand node with probability (2/3)/(11/12) = 8/11
and at the right-hand node with probability (1/4)/(11/12) = 3/11.)
430 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
| Bu Bayes rule will riobapply to information sets that are not reached
with Positive probability in the course of play. And it is precisely at such
information sets that beliefs are important. So we might want to insist
on rather more consistency than just consistency with Bayes rule when it
applies. Suppose, for example, that the game in figure 12.12(a) is modified
as follows: Player 4 begins the game, choosing either to end the game
(action E) or give player 1 the move (action G), after which the game is
just as in 12.12(a). For the strategy profile where 4 chooses E, 1 chooses D,
9 chooses a and 3 chooses R, player 3's information set is not reached with
positive probability; player 4, at the start of the game, sees to that. But
should we then allow player 3 to have any beliefs at all? Or should 3,
given the move, believe that while it is patent that 4 must have chosen G,
player 1 is still likely to have picked D, and so her (player 3's) beliefs
should put probability one on the left-hand node in her information set?
Let us set some terminology. A behavior strategy profile 7 is said to be
strictly mixed if every action at every information set is taken with positive
probability. Given a strictly mixed strategy profile =, every information
set h will be reached with positive probability, and so Bayes rule can be
used to define a unique (strictly positive) system of beliefs p that is Bayes
consistent with =. :
Definitions. A strategy profile m and beliefs p are said to be consistent in
the sense of sequential equilibrium if there is a sequence of strictly mixed strat-
egy profiles {my} such that, for pn the strictly positive beliefs that are Bayes -
consistent with 75, the limit of the vector (Tn, pm) in m0 d5 (0, w.A
A sequential equilibrium is a strategy profile w and a system of beliefs pn
that are consistent with each other in the sense above and that satisfy sequential
\ rationality at every information set.
4
The notion of consistency that is given above may look innocuous, if it
doesnt look completely mysterious, but it isnt innocuous at all. (It may
well be completely mysterious.) Rather a lot of bodies are buried in this
definition of consistency. One can try to unearth the bodies, to see what
the definition entails, and in the problem set, give you a few exercises that
will help you do this. (See also the discussion at the end of chapter 13.)
The restrictions implicit in this notion of consistency are held by many
to be too severe. Insofar as this is so, one can keep sequential rational-
ity and try to find a less restrictive way of tying together strategies and
2 Gee problem 7.
2175 those of you who don't know what a limit is, I apologize, but there is no other way
to do this.
12.7.3. Refinements sequential equilibrium 431
beliefs.f In particular, you will find in the literature an alternative equilib-
rium notion called perfect Bayes equilibrium, which is the conjunction of se-
quential rationality (for some beliefs) and weaker notions of consistency
Sequential equilibria are well-behaved:
Proposition. Every sequential equilibrium is a subgame perfect equilibrium.
You will be asked to prove this in the problems.
Clearly, since I attacked the credibility of subgame perfection in the
{ previous subsection, I must be willing to attack the credibility of sequential
! equilibrium as well. And indeed I am, although I will hold off on my attack
i until the next chapter, noting here that the attack when it comes will be
| an attack on both consistency and sequential rationality.
One reason for attacking the refinements of sequential and subgame per-
fect equilibrium is easy to give here. Suppose we modify the game in figure
12.12(b) so that player 1's choice of action is done in two stages; first she
chooses between A and not A, and if she chooses not A, then she chooses
between L and R. This is depicted in figure 12.14. Note that this extensive
form is strategically equivalent to the extensive form in figure 12.12(b), in the
sense that the two generate the same reduced normal form game. But in this
second extensive form, player 1's second decision node does begin a proper
subgame. And then, in any subgame perfect equilibrium, player 1 will choose
L and player 2 will choose I. That is, in this form of the game, not A-L-r is
the unique subgame perfect equilibrium. The same sort of thing is true about
sequential equilibrium. If we change the payoff for player 2 in the event
of Rr in figure 12.12(b) from 5 to 1, then A-l is a sequential equilibrium
(2,6)
ANCUN
on 32 (13) A135)
Figure 12.14. A strategically equivalent representation
of the game in figure 12.12(b).
f However some of the reasons for doubting this notion of consistency are also reasons
for doubting sequential rationality. For an argument along these lines, see Kreps and Ramey
(1987).
22 The notion of perfect Bayes equilibrium was developed contemporaneously with sequen-
tial equilibrium, but it has only recently been formalized; see Fudenberg and Tirole (1988).
432 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
strategy in the game as depicted in figure 12.12(b), but it would not be part
of a sequential equilibrium if we broke player 1s choice among A, L, and R
into two pieces as in figure 12.14. (Show this.)
It is not considered desirable to be able to change the set of refined equi-
libria by changing from one extensive form game to another that is strategi-
cally equivalent; this is construed as a weakness of the subgame perfection
and of sequential equilibrium refinements. But in their defense remember
that these refinements are advanced as necessary conditions for a solution
to the game in question. Sufficiency is not implied by meeting these refined
tests, so that meeting a test in one game form but not another (if the games
are strategically equivalent) is likely to be an indication that the equilibrium
in question is not a good candidate for the solution of the given game.
12.7.4. Restrictions on out-of-equilibrium beliefs
Roughly put, a sequential equilibrium adds to the notion of a Nash
' equilibrium the requirement that actions taken off the path of play must
be rationalized by some beliefs about what has happened up to the point
where the actions must be taken. This is only a rough paraphrase, because
the consistency of beliefs with the strategy profile does restrict somewhat
what range of beliefs can be held. But the rough paraphrase captures the
original intent of this refinement.
What the bare notion of a sequential equilibrium does not captute,
however, are various considerations concerning which beliefs are more or
less reasonable. The game in figure 12.15, reproduced (and turned on
its side) from figure 12.1(0), provides one example of this.2 Consider the
Nash equilibrium where player 1 chooses U and player 2 chooses x. (Check
that this is a Nash equilibrium.) We have to wonder whether 2s choice
of r is reasonable; after all, this is a choice of action that is off the path of
play if player 1 is meant to choose U. Is this choice of action sequentially
rational? Yes, if player 2 holds beliefs that he is equally likely to be at
either of the two nodes in his information set, then r is better than L
i 6D
Figure 12.15. An extensive form game.
3 This game is due to Kohlberg and Mertens (1986).
12.7.4. Refinements restrictions on beliefs 433
Coin is heads
(3,1) ~ heads" "Heads" 1 / "Tails" heads ,- (2,1)
~L9 eads O a om
0) <aaee | 4) re)
a
: {
tails ;
12
(2,0) "heads" } "Heads" 1 "Tails" heads, (3,0)
__ e- 50 
(0,1) ails" . , 5 "tails" G1)
Coin is tail
Figure 12.16. The truth game in extensive form.
So we come down to the question: Is it reasonable to suppose that
2 will hold beliefs that make r better than 1, given that 2 expects that 1
will choose U? The argument against this is quite simple: Player 1 by
choosing U can guarantee herself 2. If 1 chooses R, then the best she can
do is 1. If she chooses L, on the other hand, she has a chance of obtaining
5. Shouldnt 2 conclude on this basis, if he is given the move, that player 1
must have chosen L, in an attempt to get the 5? If he concludes this, then
he should believe that he is at the topmost node of his information set
with probability (close to) one, which would mandate a choice of | instead
of r. (And if he is going to choose I, then player 1 will shift from U to L.)
What we have done in this example is to reason what a players beliefs
should be at an information set that is off the path of play. In so doing,
we see that a particular sequential equilibrium can only be sustained with
beliefs that are not so intuitively sensible. The argument in this example
can be made pretty sharply. In the game, U strictly dominates R. So it
seems ridiculous for player 1 to be supposed to be choosing R, even as
an out-of-equilibrium choice. Even if 2 supposes at first that U will
be selected, faced with the irrefutable evidence that L or R was selected
(namely, being asked to move), 2 ought to conclude that it was L that was
chosen after all, which then informs 2s beliefs at his information set.
A somewhat trickier example is given in figure 12.16. This is the
truth game of problem 4 in chapter 11. (If you did that problem, you
can check your answer now.) Consider, in this game, the following Nash
equilibrium: Regardless of the result of the coin flip, player 1 says it was
Tails. Player 2 responds heads if player 1 says Tails and player 2
responds tails if player 1 says Heads.
4 But see subsection 12.7.6 in which a counterargument will be given.
434 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
Let's first check that this is a Nash equilibrium. For player 1, given
that player 2 will respond to Tails with heads and to Heads with
tails, it is more important to say Tails and get the response heads
than (if the coin flip is in fact Heads) to tell the truth. And for player
2, if player 1 is meant to say Tails no matter what the results of the
coin flip are, then hearing Tails signifies nothing; the chances that the
flip was in fact Heads is the same .8 as in the prior. Thus heads in
response to Tails is optimal. While tails in response to Heads is a
best response in the sense that any action taken off the path of play is a
best response; since player 1 is meant to say Tails there is zero prior
probability that player 2 will have to respond to Heads, and thus all
responses to Heads are equally good.
As you can imagine by now, we want to think hard about 2's off-
the-path response to Heads; is it a sensible response? We can ask, for
example, whether player 2 might hold any beliefs having heard Heads
that would make a response of tails sequentially rational. That is, have
we described the strategy profile part of a sequential equilibrium? The
answers to these questions are yes. If player 2, having heard Heads,
believes that the chances the coin was in fact Heads are below .5, then
tails is the sequentially rational response.
So we are led to ask, Are these beliefs sensible? If player 2 expects
player 1 to say Tails and player 1 unexpectedly says Heads, is it sen-
sible for player 2. to infer that there is a 50% or greater chance that the |
coin flip came up Tails? An argument to say that this is not sensible runs:
Player 1 has more incentive to say Heads when the coin flip is Heads
than when it is Tails, since player 1 gets a unit of payoff for telling the
truth. Whatever conjecture player 1 might make about player 2's responses
to Heads and to Tails, player 1 seems no less apt to say Heads when
the flip is Heads than when it is Tails, or to say Tails when the flip is
Tails instead of when it is Heads. Hence if player 2 hears Heads, it
seems sensible to conclude that it is no less likely that the result of the flip
was Heads than in the prior assessment of .8 for Heads. But if 2's beliefs
reflect this, if 2 assesses probability .8 or more that the coin was Heads
if she hears Heads from 1, then we cant sustain a response by him of
tails to Heads, and our equilibrium is destroyed.
Tn both these examples, the mode of analysis takes the following form:
An equilibrium is given, with at least some actions taken at information
sets that are not reached if the equilibrium is followed. Hence, in the
usual fashion, those actions are not constrained by the criterion of Nash
25 And these beliefs are consistent in the sense given in the previous subsection.
12.7.4. Refinements restrictions on beliefs 435
equilibrium. Moreover, we can sustain or rationalize those actions for
some beliefs by the player who takes the action. But the beliefs necessary
to sustain the actions seem unintuitive or unreasonable. One would wish
to formalize what makes a system of beliefs unreasonable; certainly one
would wish to be more formal than we have. But this can be done. For
example, ?
We will restrict attention to a particular class of extensive form games,
known as signaling games. These games have two players called 1 and 2.
Nature moves first, selecting one of a number T' of possible initial nodes ac-
cording to a strictly positive probability distribution p. Player 1 is informed
of nature's choice and sends a signal to player 2 about this; the set of signals
available to player 1 is denoted by S. Player 2 then takes an action a in re-
sponse to this signal, not knowing which t T was chosen by nature, drawn
from some set A. Player 1's utility is given by u(t, s, a), and player 2's is given
by w(t, s,a), both as functions of nature's choice t, 1s signal s, and 2's re-
sponse a. Note that the truth game is an example of a signaling game, where
T = {Heads, Tails}, = {Heads, Tails}, and A = {heads, tails"}.
An equilibrium for a general signaling game consists of (behavior) strate-
gies for players 1 and 2. We use m to denote 1's strategy, where m(s;) is
interpreted as the probability that player 1 sends message s if nature chooses
t. We require that .om(s;9) =1 for each . And we use m; to denote 2's
strategy; m(a;s) gives the probability that 2 chooses action a having heard
signal s, where }, , m(a;s) =1 for each s is required.
A signal s is along the path of play if > er p(t)m(s;t) > 0. That is,
there is some circumstance in which s is sent by 1. For any such signal s
we can use Bayes rule to compute 2's beliefs about given 2 hears s. She
assesses probability
_ pE)ymis; 1)
ultls) = Sap PETG) mE)
And a pair of strategies (m,m) is a Nash equilibrium if ,
(a) For each t, if m(s;t) > 0, then s maximizes Deca ult, s',a)mla;s") (in
5)
(b) For each s that is along the path of play, m(a; 5) > 0 implies that a
maximizes yr ot, s,a)ut|s) in a, where p is computed as above from
m by Bayes rule
Moreover, 7; and m, are part of a sequential equilibrium if (a) and (b)
above hold and if, moreover, for any s that is not along the path of play, there
 ee 
26 Read on at your own risk. What follows will be referred to only in optional reading in
chapter 17. But if you plan to be an economic theorist of virtually any stripe, you will have
some need to be conversant with what follows, at least until fashions in economic theory
change. .
436 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
are some beliefs 1:([s) such that (b) holds. Of course, these beliefs must agree
with those that are computed by Bayes rule and are the beliefs part of the
sequential equilibrium. (One can verify that the restrictions of consistency do
not restrict the off-the-path beliefs.)
Now suppose we have sequential equilibrium strategies m and m;. (That
is, some beliefs off the path rationalize the off-the-path prescriptions of ,.)
We will examine whether the beliefs accompanying these strategies are intu-
itively sensible.
Suppose for some t T and s and s' 5,
min uz, s,a) > maxu(t,s, a).
aA aA
Then we would know that any sirategy that involved 1 sending s if nature
picks t is strictly dominated by a strategy where 1 sends s instead. It doesnt
matter how 2 responds to s or s'; whatever his (contingent) response, 1 does
strictly better with s than with s'. Accordingly, we would wish to restrict
2's beliefs so in the event of 5s being sent he doesnt put any weight on 
12.7.5. Refinements trembling-hand perfection 437
she says Tails, which is the truth, and 2 responds with heads. The best
1 can do if she says Heads is 2. So, at this equilibrium, s = Heads is
equilibrium dominated at = tails. Hence to pass the test, we have to be able
to sustain 2's reaction to 5s = Heads with beliefs that put zero weight on
t = tails given Heads. And this, as we noted in our informal arguments,
we cannot do.
For comparison with the literature, you should know that the test of equi-
librium domination is referred to in the literature as the intuitive criterion
on grounds that it is such an intuitive test that it surely must be passed by any
reasonable solution. Notwithstanding this bit of editorializing by its inven-
tors, the justification for using the equilibrium domination test in applications
is deservedly quite controversial. I will not try to recount the arguments for
and against here; instead I give references at the end of this chapter. How-
ever, so that you can better consume the literature, it is useful to know at
least one further thing (which is also covered in the references given below):
The test of equilibrium domination is often further strengthened; when you
find mention of divine or universally divine equilibria, the author is invoking
one of these strengthenings. .
being nature's choice. Why (this logic goes) would 1 send s' if nature picks :
t, when the strictly dominant s is available? Formally,
12.7.5. Trembling-hand perfection
Sequential equilibrium strategies m and wm, fail the test of dominated messages
if for some t, s, and s' as above, it is impossible to sustain 2's equilibrivm response
to 5 with beliefs that put zero conditional probability on given s. In the previous few subsections we worked with extensive form games.
Now we turn back to considerations based on the normal form.
We have stated numerous times that a solution to a given game is
advanced as a strategy profile in which we and, more to the point, all
the players have a lot of confidence as a prediction about how everyone
will play. What we haven't done, in any complete or rigorous sense, is
to say what explanation might be offered for some player deviating from
this solution. One could tell many stories (and we will see a few of them
; at the end of the next chapter), but the simplest is that {players sometimes
J | make(mistakes. A player(faced ( (with a (choice of several(actions, one of |<
' which he(means to play, might through inattention gra &lip of the hand
| . (or the pen, or the tongue) {ake another.
Now if the probability of these mistakes is significant, we wouldn't;
have that much faith in our solution as a nearly certain prediction. But
since mistakes do happen, we would probably wish to dismiss predictions |
that aren't safe against the risk of a mistake.
The standard example of an equilibrium in weakly dominated strate-
gies provides the simplest example. Take the game in figure 12.1(c). The
profile s2-t1 is a Nash equilibrium; player 1 is happy with s2 as long as
there is no chance of t2. But if there is any chance of 2, and in particular
if there is some chance, however small, of player 2 playing t2 by mistake,
' then s2 is not optimal. It may be nearly optimal, but a truly cautious
(Note that since s' is dominatd given , it can't be that m(s;t) > 0. Hence if
s' is along the path of play, beliefs conditional on s' computed by Bayes rule
will put zero probability on to begin with. This test will be more restrictive
than the simple sequential equilibrium test only if s is off the path.)
This test does not apply to the truth game, since no message is dominated
by another, no matter what nature does to start the game.? But we can for-
mulate a stronger test that does work for the truth game. Fixing equilibrium
strategies m and 7, for each t T let u*(t) = maxes Dinca ult, s,a)mla; 8); i
that is, u*(t) gives player 1's conditional expected payoff in the equilibrium,
conditional on nature picking # to start the game. Then say that s' is equilib-
rium dominated at t if v*() > maxsea u(t, s, a). That is, maybe no alternative
. signal s dominates s as before, but the best that can be had by sending s'
is dominated by what 1 gefs in the equilibrium, conditional on .
i
3)
Sequential equilibrium strategies m and m, fail the test of equilibrium domination
if for some and s' that is equilibrium dominated at t, it is impossible to sustain i
2's equilibrium response to s' with beliefs that put zero conditional probability on |
|
|
b
i
}
given s'.
The equilibrium where 1 sends the signal Tails no matter what she learns
about the coin flip fails this test. To see this, note that in this equilibrium, if the
coin flip comes up tails, then player 1 will get a payoff of 3 in the equilibrium;
9 However see problem 12.
438 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative gares
player 1, worried that player 2 might slip, would opt for s1. And player 2,
understanding this, responds with 2. : BE
We capture this idea with the following formal definition. Fix an I
player normal form game with finitely many strategies for each player.
Let S; be the set of strategies available to player i, for i =1,...,I. Let
%; denote the set of mixed strategies available to player 4, with typical
element o;. Let o = (oy,...,01) denote a typical mixed strategy profile.
Let 3 denote the set of strictly mixed strategies for n each eT is
a mixed strategy that attaches positive probability to each pure strategy
in 5.
Definition. A Nash equilibrium profile o = (%,...,07) is (trembling-hand)
perfect (in the Normal form) if there is for each player i a sequence of strictly
mixed strategies {0%}, such that
(a) lity oo 0 = o* for each i, and
(b) for each i and n = 1,2,..., ot is a best response against the profile of
strategies
1 im1 dsl I
 (Oh yoi ont sO),
which we hereafter write as 07".
The key to this definition is that the o, must all be strictly mixed. Player
i intends to play o, and he assumes that his fellow players intend to play
o%. But his fellow players, or so the story goes, are susceptible to making
mistakes. If they intend to play , in fact they play o7* for large n, a
profile in which any combination of actions by i's opponents is possible,
but in which i's opponents are nearly sure to be playing according to
their intentions. (The last assertion follows from [a].) And the equilibrium
condition is that what i intends to do (if he doesn't slip) must be a best
response against what his opponents actually do (which is [b]), and not
simply against what they intend to do (which is the Nash criterion).
We can say lots of things about this definition. First, why is there this
limit in n? If players make mistakes, it would seem that we should have
functions 7 : $9 3, which give as a function of the intentions of j
the actual (mistakes-included) play of j. We want j to be local it
shouldn't move too far in translating js intentions into js actual actions.
But players play against a definite, nonvanishing chance of errors; not
against this fancy vanishing sequence. One is queasy, however, to fix ad
hoc functions ?. We are looking for necessary conditions, remember. If
12.7.5. Refinements trembling-hand perfection 439
in the context of a particular game, we knew something about the precise
technology of errors, then we could sharpen our necessary condition
by building into our model this technology. (For an example, read on.)
This definition imposes the minimal requirement (for our story) that our
solution can be rationalized by some technology of errors, no matter how
small we think the possibility of errors is.
Second, we require that each * is optimal against ot for each n.
Although this wasnt made explicit, it is implicit that ot is made up of
independent mixed strategies by i's opponents. This means, in particular,
that the chances (and type) of an error by one of 4's opponents is inde-
pendent of errors by other opponents. The assumption of independent
errors is conventionally made, but depending on what one thinks of as
the reason errors are made, one might wish to allow correlation in errors.
Fancy versions of trembling-hand perfection allow for this.
Third, it is implicit in this definition that all the players have the same
notions about how their fellow players slip, when those fellow players do
slip. That is to say, for each player j a single sequence of strictly mixed
strategies of, is used to form the test for the intended o*, for each i.
One can, once again, think of modifications that would remove this implicit
assumption.
Fourth, the definition refers to this as (trembling-hand) perfection.
Note the parenthetical modifier. The originator of this concept, Selten
(1975), uses the simple name perfection without the modifier. But to dis-
tinguish from Seltens earlier (1965) concept of subgame perfection, con-
vention has been to use the modifier trembling-hand, which refers to
slips of the hands that act.
Fifth, we motivated this notion by an example of an equilibrium in
a weakly dominated strategy. And you should find it easy to prove,
for two-player games, that no weakly dominated strategy is ever part
of a trembling-hand perfect equilibrium.* But trembling-hand perfection
doesnt extend to exclude strategies that are excluded by iterated weak
dominance. For an example, take the normal form game depicted in figure
12.17(a). Note that Ba for player 1 is weakly dominated by Bb. Having
removed Ba, Y weakly dominates X. And if player 2 is playing Y, then
player 1 chooses Bb. Nonetheless, A-X is a trembling-hand perfect Nash
equilibrium: There is no question that if player 2 is playing a strategy
close to choosing X for sure, player 1 is doing the best that she can
k There is an analogous statement for games with more than two players that you can fry
to dope out on your own. For a hint, go back to the early sections of this chapter and find
references to separating hyperplanes.
440 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
Player 2
X Y
I BB 2 y b
Al 01] 01 O > @@ (2,3)
5 A X a
>Ba -1,2 1,0
= Bb| -12 | 23 0,1 1,2) (1,0
(a) bh
Figure 12.17. A game in normal and extensive form.
with A. And against the strictly mixed strategy where 1 plays A with
probability 1 2/n, Ba with probability 1/n, and Bb with probabilty 1/n,
X for player 2 nets for himself a payoff of (1)(12/n)+(2)(1/n)+@)(1/n) =
1+ 2/n, while Y nets (1)(1 2/n) + /n) + 3X1/n) = 1+1/n. So X
is better. Letting n go to infinity, we pass the test of trembling-hand
perfection.
Sixth (and finally), the definition refers to (trembling-hand) perfection
(in the normal form), where now you should note the second parenthetical
modifier. Consider the extensive form game in figure 12.17(b). This game
is an extensive form version of the game in 12.17(a). Note that it is a game
of complete and perfect information, so it has a solution by backwards -
induction, which (of course) is its solution by iterated weak dominance:
Bb-Y. This is, of course, the unique subgame perfect equilibrium. Hence
.we conclude from the previous paragraph that trembling-hand perfection
does not imply subgame perfection.
However, think a moment about those mistakes that players are meant
to be making. Player 1 has two opportunities to make a mistake, at least in
the extensive form game. If either by intent or by mistake player 1 chooses
B and 2 replies with Y, then it is clearly a further mistake for player 1 to
choose a. If we imagine that, whatever player 1 does at the start of the
game, she is much more likely to choose b than a if the game gets out
that far, then 2 should intend to choose Y, and 1 should intend to choose
B. What happened to our previous argument that A-X is trembling-hand
perfect? To make that argument, we needed the chances of Ba by mistake
to be of the same order of magnitude as Bb by mistake. But if we think
that Ba compounds two mistakes and Bb only one, and if (in consequence)
we think that Ba must be much less likely than Bb, even if both are very
unlikely (because 1 intends to choose A), then we cant sustain the choice
of X by 2.
 ee sg er
12.7.5. Refinements trembling-hand perfection 441
Proceed formally as follows. For any extensive form game, think of
constructing a new extensive form game in which every information set of
every player in the game belongs to a distinct player; that is, there are as
many players in this new normal form game as there are information sets.
Letting h denote a typical information set and thus a player in this new
extensive form game, in this new extensive form game we let h's payoff
function be precisely the payoffs of (h) in the original game. Think of
the following story: Player may control more than one information
set, but he assigns his decision-making authority at each one to a different
agent. These agents of all have the same payoffs as 4, so they act in his
interests. But we regard each as an individual player. And then we pass
to the normal form of this new extensive form game, which is called the
agent normal form of the original extensive form game.
And now look for trembling-hand perfect equilibria of the agent nor-
mal form game. Since we implicitly assumed in the definition of. trembling-
hand perfection that players tremble independently, we would, by apply-
ing that definition to the agent normal form, be assuming that the various
agents of a given player tremble independently; and thus in terms of
the original extensive form, we are assuming that a mistake at one infor-
mation set by does not affect the chances of a mistake at any other. In
particular, in terms of the example in figure 12.17(b), even if 1's first agent
intends A, Ba by 1's two agents must be much less likely than Bb, because
b by 1's second agent is a second mistake.
Selten (1975) reserves the term (trembling-hand) perfect equilibrium
for this version of the definition perfection in the agent-normal form.
We follow Selten in this regard and use the second modifier in the nor-
mal form to denote perfection where one doesnt use the agent-normal
form of an extensive form game. You are asked to prove the following in
problem 13: ,
Proposition. Every (trembling-hand) perfect Nash equilibrium of a given exten-
sive form game is a sequential equilibrium, and hence it is subgame perfect.
One can also show that every (finite) extensive form game has a trembling-
hand perfect equilibrium; indeed, every finite normal form game has an
equilibrium that is trembling-hand perfect in the normal form. This is a
bit harder to show.
* And still harder to show, but demonstrating the close connection between normal form
and extensive form refinements, for most extensive form games most of the sequential
equilibria are trembling-hand perfect. You'll need to consult Kreps and Wilson (1982) to see
what this means precisely.
442 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
12.7.6. Proper equilibria and stable sets of equilibria
Reconsider (once again) the game from figure 12.1(0), reproduced in
this section as figure 12.15. The equilibrium U-r is, as we noted previously,
sequential; it is also trembling-hand perfect. We argued earlier that as a
sequential equilibrium it was not too sensible; to support the play of r by 2,
2 must hold beliefs that he is at the node that follows R with probability
1/4 or more. But R is dominated by U for 1 (and L is not). Hence it didnt
seem reasonable for 2 to hold these out-of-equilibrium beliefs.
Now that we have a story concerning why one might see off-the-path
play, namely such play results from mistakes, we can further investigate
this argument. Myerson (1978) presents a strengthening of perfection,
called properness, which throws doubt on this argument.
Myerson reasons as follows: If player 2 is playing 1, then player 1
nets 0 from L and 1 from R. Of course, playing U and getting a payoff
of 2 is best of all for 1. But given 2's supposed play of r, the play of L
is a bigger mistake for player 1 than the play of R, in the sense that it
is more costly. If we assume that players are more likely to make smaller
mistakes than bigger, it might be reasonable to assume that player 2, put
on the move, thinks it at least as likely that 1 erred with R as that 1 erred
with L. And, in this case, player 2 optimally responds with r.
I will not give here the precise definition of Myersons properness.
Roughly, it is like trembling-hand perfection, with the addition that one
assumes that if one strategy by a given player is a bigger mistake than -
a second (as measured by expected payoffs at the supposed solution),
then the first of these strategies is much less likely to be played by mistake.
Properness, then, takes the basic notion of trembling-hand perfection and
adds to it a notion of which mistakes are more or less likely to be made.
Proper equilibria are defined for the normal form of a given game (al-
though one could adapt the definition for the agent normal form). As
we see in the example of figure 12.15, there are games solvable by iterated
dominance, where equilibria other than the solution so derived are proper.
The mathematically most complex weapon in the arsenal of Nash re-
finements is Kohlberg and Mertens (1986) concept of stability. Kohlberg and
Mertens, noting earlier efforts, including those sketched above, construct the
following wish list for a solution concept:
(1) Every (finite) game should have a solution.
(2) The solution should be trembling-hand perfect.
(3) The solution should depend only on the reduced normal form of the game.
Changing the extensive form should not matter, if no strategic changes are
thereby entailed.
12.8. Reprise: Classic duopoly 443
(4) Players should never be playing (weakly) dominated strategies.
(5) Any solution should survive iterated application of dominance.
They show by example that these requirements cannot possibly be met by any
solution concept that prescribes a single strategy profile, and they argue that
the appropriate response to this difficulty is to move to a set-valued solution
concept; that is, a set of strategy profiles comprises a solution. This leads to
modification of (2) and (5); (2) is written: Every solution should contain a
perfect equilibrium. And (5) becomes: The solution of a game should contain
the solution of a game derived by the deletion of dominated strategies in the
first game. And they add a sixth requirement:
(6) The solution (which is now a set of strategy profiles) should be topologi-
cally connected.
Perfection, as we noted above, fails on requirements (3) and (5). Proper-
ness (defined for the normal form) fails (5). Kohlberg and Mertens, by moving
to a set-valued solution concept, provide a number of (quite complex) formal
definitions that meet various subsets of these desiderata; stability is used to
denote a concept that meets requirements (1), (3), (4), and (5). Very roughly
put, the nature of these definitions is that a solution should be stable against
a very large class of perturbations to the game; that is, a solution is a set of
strategy profiles so that, if one perturbs the game a bit (so that, say, all the
players are slightly susceptible to trembling in some manner), then the per-
turbed game has an equilibrium that is close to some profile in the solution.
I will not attempt to give even a summary formal treatment of this.
Consult either the paper by Kohlberg and Mertens (1986) or the book of van
Damme (1987). In addition, you can consult Banks and Sobel (1987) or Cho
and Kreps (1987) for connections between stability and the sort of refinement
posed in 12.7.4, based on restrictions on out-of-equilibrium beliefs.
12.8. Reprise: Classic duopoly
Now that we know all about game theory and Nash equilibria, we can
complete our treatment of the classic models of duopoly. We left things
in a state of bewilderment concerning the origins of all those different
sorts of conjectures and with a suggestion that the rules of competition
might help us resolve that bewilderment. More specifically, we suggested
that, for example, Cournot conjectures made sense in the following sort of
situation:
Two producers work in isolation preparing the quantity they bring to market.
These quantities are decided upon with a foreknowledge of this market structure
and with knowledge of the characteristics of demand, but neither side gets to see
how much the other is producing. Each producer brings the quantity it produced
to a central marketplace, where it is handed over to a state sales commission
444 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
that sets price so that the total amount brought to market is just demanded at the
set price.
The point we made before is that if competition has this sort of structure,
then it is sensible to hold to the (Cournot) conjecture that one producer
will react to a change in the level of output of its rival by holding fixed
its quantity, since the first producer must fix its quantity without seeing
precisely what its rival has done.
On the other hand, the following structure of competition was meant
to justify von Stackelberg conjectures:
We have the same two producers as above, and the same state sales commission,
but one producer is able to produce its quantity first. That is, this producer brings
to the market a quantity x, which the second producer observes. And then the
second producer decides on an amount x, to produce, knowing that price will be
set so that the market clears at total quantity x; + x.
Now the structure of competition makes it reasonable to suppose that
the second producer will take as given the quantity decision of the first
producer, since this quantity decision is in fact fixed, and optimize. And
the first producer, realizing this, picks its quantity accordingly.
And, on a third hand, we considered the following competitive struc-
ture as justifying Bertrand conjectures:
Things work much differently in this case. The two producers, independently,
call the state sales commission and give a price at which each is willing to sell.
The state sales commission investigates market demand at those prices and then
calls the two producers, telling them how much they are obligated to bring to the
market. -
Now Bertrand conjectures are sensible, because firms must fix their prices
simultaneously, without any opportunity to react to what their opponents
do.
Of course, each of these three stories describes an extensive form
game between the two firms. In the first, the first producer selects a quan-
tity, and then the second producer selects a quantity without knowing
what the first producer has done. We have the extensive form game de-
picted in figure 12.18(a). (A complication here and in the rest of this
section is that each firm has infinitely many actions it can take; infinitely
many quantities can be selected in this case. But one can be careful about
the formalities and nothing untoward will happen.) The von Stackelberg
game is just like the Cournot game, except that the second firm sees the
action of the first before picking its quantity; we have the game depicted
12.8. Reprise: Classic duopoly 445
Quantity choice Quantity choice
by first firm by first firm
_
o7
o=="+
0
//
ply
MI
WN
Quantity choice
by second firm
Quantity choice
by second firm
(a) Cournot (b) von Stackelberg
Price choice by
first firm
Price choice by
second firm
() Bertrand
Figure 12.18. The Cournot, von Stackelberg,
and Bertrand extensive form games.
in figure 12.18(b). And the Bertrand game is just like the Cournot game,
except now price is the action chosen by each firm.
Actually, there is one complication in the Bertrand game. In our anal-
ysis in chapter 10, we didnt say precisely how demand would be allocated
446 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
between the two firms if they charged the same price. To make up a game,
we need to specify payoffs for every terminal node, and the firms payoffs
will, in places, depend on how they divide the market when they charge
the same price. It is customary, and we will follow custom in this, to as-
sume that the market divides symmetrically half of demand going to
each firm.
Somewhat naturally, we find that the Cournot, Bertrand, and von
Stackelberg equilibria (in conjectures) are Nash equilibria of the respective
games. In fact, holding to the parameterization of linear demand P =
A X and constant unit costs k, we can say the following:
Concerning Cournot, the Cournot equilibrium is the unique Nash equilib-
rium, and the game is even dominance solvable. To see this, note that no
firm would. ever produce more than A k, because to do so would drive
prices below % and profits below zero for sure. Indeed, firms would never
produce more than (A k)/2, because whatever (nonnegative) amount
your rival produces, you are better off with (4 k)/2 than with some
higher amount. But if your rival will never go above (4 k)/2, then you
would never produce less than (4 k)/4, nor would your rival, since
(against any amount less or equal to (4 k)/2, (A k)/4 is better than
anything less. And if your rival won't go less than (A k)/4, you will
never go more than 3(4 k)/8. (Check my math here.) The same is
true for your rival, and if your rival won't go above 3(4 k)/8, you will
never go less than 5(4 k)/16. And so on, until everything is eliminated
except (A k)/3 for both of you. This takes infinitely many iterations of
dominance, because there are infinitely many other strategies to get rid of.
But in the end, only the Cournot quantities of (4 k)/3 for each of you
survive.
Concerning Bertrand, again we have a unique Nash equilibrium (where
each firm charges P = k). The argument we gave in chapter 10 is easily
adapted to show this. One notices in this regard an extraordinary thing:
The strategy of naming the price k is weakly dominated by a strategy
of naming any other higher price. Note why this is so. Naming P =k
means profits of zero no matter what your opponent does. Naming, say,
P =k+1 could mean positive profits, if your opponent names this price
or one higher, and P = k +1 can never lead to negative profits. (Of
course, it leads to zero profits if your opponent follows the equilibrium
strategy of naming P = k.) The unique Nash equilibrium involves.weakly
27 This argument transcends the specific parameterization we've used. But pressing this
argument to its utmost generality is not to my mind very interesting; for reasons to be given
in just a bit, I don't find the Cournot game all that interesting.
os a nt mi
12.8. Reprise: Classic duopoly 447
dominated strategies. This sort of thing sometimes happens with games
that have infinitely many strategies, and, if you are unduly concerned
about it (now that I've mentioned it), it would be a good idea to prove for
yourself that it won't happen if the range of available prices that can be
charged is finite say prices must be in integer multiples of one penny.
Concerning von Stackelberg, there are many Nash equilibria in this game.
For example, the second producer could adopt the strategy: Produce
A k x; units if z; # 0, and produce (4 k)/2 if z, = 0. One best
response for the first producer to this is to set z; = 0: The first producer
makes zero profits, but given the second producers strategy, it cant do
any better. And given that the first producer sets z; = 0, the second pro-
ducers strategy is a best response; what it does for any =; that isn't zero
is out-of-equilibrium, and it is doing the optimal thing against the chosen
z;. But, if you followed section 12.7, you will see immediately that this
Nash equilibrium isn't subgame perfect. In any subgame that begins with
a choice of z; different from zero, the second producer doesnt optimize
by choosing @; = A k z;. Indeed, the von Stackelberg game is a game
of complete and perfect information, and we can use backwards induction
to show that the unique equilibrium so obtained (and that is subgame
perfect) is the von Stackelberg equilibrium we computed in chapter 10.
You should be clear on why this is: In our analysis of von Stackelberg, we
assumed that the second firm would react optimally to firm 1s choice of
quantity, no matter what that quantity was. But this is just an expression
of backwards induction (or subgame perfection).
The three games given above don't come close to exhausting the
possibilities. For example,
Back to our two producers who produce quantities independently. But now they
call the state marketing commission in advance, saying how much they plan to
bring. And if one says it will bring more than the other, the second is given
permission by the state marketing commission to bring up to the amount being
brought by the first.
Or how about the following very complex situation.
The two producers must first install capacity for production. Capacity is costly,
coming at a cost of ky > 0 per unit capacity installed. Capacity is installed by
the two simultaneously and independently. Then each sees how much capacity
the other installed. And then each calls the state marketing commission and
quotes a price at which it is willing to sell. Production is possible up to the level
of capacity, at an additional marginal cost of ko 2 0 per unit. No production
448 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
beyond the level of capacity is possible. If a capacity constraint does bind when
prices are named, the state marketing commission rations demand by some system
or other. This good is resalable among consumers, and all consumers are aware
of market demand conditions.
If you like a challenge, try to find all the subgame perfect equilibria for
these two games.
And we can go on from here. We can consider all sorts of variations
of these stories including: choices of technologies prior to selection of
quantities or of prices; installation of capacity when capacity can only be
installed at a finite rate; considerations of how much information to reveal
to ones opponent about demand conditions or ones own cost function, if
there is initial uncertainty about these things, and so on, and on. Starting
in the late 1970s, there was an enormous amount of work of this sort,
where the objective was to use these sorts of oligopoly games to chase
down how competitors would fare in equilibrium under different struc-
tural conditions. In all of these, the rivals eventually had to compete, and
the model of competition more often than not was one of the three given
above. So when you see a paper that says the firms compete Cournot
style, the author usually means that the firms select quantities simulta-
neously and independently, and price is set so that markets clear. When
firms compete Bertrand style, they name prices simultaneously. When
the competition is von Stackelberg, with one leader and (possibly many)
followers, the leader chooses quantity first (usually), and then the others
react with optimal quantity responses (usually simultaneously if there is
more than one follower, although sometimes you'll see one firm pick its
quantity, then a second, then a third, and so on). In the problems, you
will get a taste of these sorts of game-theoretic models of oligopoly.
So finally we come to the big question of chapter 10: Which of the
classic models of duopoly is correct? The obvious response at this point
is it depends on the details of competition. For real-life oligopolists, there-
fore, the answer seems to be that none of the models for the structure of
competition given above is very realistic, so the classic models explained
in this fashion don't give us much guidance. For one thing, firms dont
name quantity or price once and for all; they name price or set quantity
one day and can reset either the next, reacting perhaps to what their rivals
did the previous day. This dynamic character of competition in oligopoly
makes an enormous difference to the set of possible equilibria, whether
28 Be forewarned that the second game does give a very nice answer: The unique equilib-
rium is the Cournot equilibrium for costs k; + k;. But showing this is quite difficult. See
Kreps and Scheinkman (1983) for the details.
12.9. Bibliographic notes 449
the oligopolists set quantities on a given day, or name prices on a given
day, or do some of each. It is to this sort of complication that we turn in
chapter 14. 
Before leaving this topic again, let me anticipate chapter 14 and offer a
word in defense of the classic models of duopoly. The games described
above are not necessary for the predictions of the classic models to be valid.
It suffices for those predictions that rivals have the right sorts of conjectures
about their opponents and that an equilibrium is reached. These game-
theoretic models say why those sorts of conjectures might be reasonable,
but there is nothing to prevent players from holding particular conjectures
even if those conjectures are unjustified by the structure of competition.
Indeed, we'll see in chapter 14 that adding dynamic considerations to the
structure of competition leads us back to having to wave our hands about
the origins of the conjectures that players hold. In the end, the test of
the classic models must be empirical; this sort of theory may be useful for
refining the empirical predictions that we will test, but one shouldn't reject
a prediction on grounds that there is reason to doubt the best theoretical
model one can think of to justify the prediction.
12.9. Bibliographic notes
Many references have been scattered throughout this chapter that I
will not repeat here. Some of the basic ideas in this chapter such as
dominance, dominance solvability, and Nash equilibrium are covered in
many venerated textbooks, and I will not attempt to provide references
to those. Other topics that have been covered here are the subject of on-
going research, so references I might provide are apt to become dated
quite quickly. With those caveats in place, I would recommend the fol-
lowing partial reading list to anyone interested in beginning to pursue
these ideas.
For the use of dominance and iterated dominance criteria, begin with
Bernheim (1984) and Pearce (1984).
Correlated equilibrium was only mentioned in passing, but the serious
student should certainly consult Aumann (1974).
The various rationales for Nash equilibrium are scattered in many
places. But Schelling (1980) is an absolute must-read for anyone interested
in noncooperative game theory. Schelling is more verbal and less mathe-
matical than most of what you will see in the literature of game theory, but
his book bursts with ideas that await higher levels of formalization. As
for models of learned behavior, my favorite (predictably) is Fudenberg
and Kreps (1989).
450 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
Concerning refinements of Nash equilibrium, van Damme (1987) pre-
sents a unified and up-to-date treatment. The subject was pioneered by
Selten (1965, 1975), who defined subgame perfection and (trembling-hand)
perfection. Myersons properness (1978) came next. Sequential equilib-
rium is analyzed in Kreps and Wilson (1982), stability is developed by
Kohlberg and Mertens (1986), and perfect Bayes equilibrium is defined in
Fudenberg and Tirole (1988). The literature on formal restrictions on out-
of-equilibrium beliefs was begun by McLennan (1985); Banks and Sobel
(1987) and Cho and Kreps (1987) present analyses along the lines sketched
in 12.7.4. Objections to refinements based on the equilibrium domination
are given in Okuno-Fujiwara and Postlewaite (1986).
References
Aumann, R. 1974. Subjectivity and Correlation in Randomized Strate-
gies. Journal of Mathematical Economics 1:67-96.
Aumann, R., Y. Katznelson, R. Radner, R. Rosenthal, and B. Weiss. 1983.
Approximate Purification of Mixed Strategies. Mathematics of Oper-
ations Reseach 8:327-41.
Banks, J., and J. Sobel. 1987. Equilibrium Selection in Signaling Games.
Econometrica 55:647-62.
Bernheim, D. 1984. Rationalizable Strategic Behavior. Econometrica 52:1007-
28. :
Cho, I-k., and D. Kreps. 1987. Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria. ~
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102:179-221.
Forges, F. 1986. An Approach to Communication Equilibria. Econometrica
54:1375-86.
Fudenberg, D. and D. Kreps. 1989. A Theory of Learning, Experimentation,
and Equilibrium in Games. Stanford University. Mimeo.
Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole. 1988. Perfect Bayesian and Sequential Equi-
librium. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Mimeo.
Harsanyi, J. 1973. Games with Randomly Disturbed Payoffs: A New
Rationale for Mixed-Strategy Equilibrium Points. In ternational Journal
of Game Theory 2:1-23.
Kohlberg, E., and J.-F. Mertens. 1986. On the Strategic Stability of Equi-
libria. Econometrica 54:1003-38.
Kreps, D., and G. Ramey. 1987. Structural Consistency, Consistency, and
Sequential Rationality. Econometrica 55:1331-48.
Kreps, D.,and J. Scheinkman. 1983. Quantity Precommitment and Bertrand
Competition Yield Cournot Outcomes. Bell Journal of Economics 14:326
37.
12.10. Problems 451
Kreps, D., and R. Wilson. 1982. Sequential Equilibrium. Econometrica
50:863-94.
McLennan, A. 1985. Justifiable Beliefs in Sequential Equilibrium. Econo-
metrica 53:889-904.
Myerson, R. 1978. Refinements of the Nash Equilibrium Concept. Inter-
national Journal of Game Theory 7:73-80.
. 1986. Multistage Games with Communication. Econometrica
54:322-58.
Okuno-Fujiwara, M., and A. Postlewaite. 1986. Forward Induction and
Equilibrium Refinements. University of Pennsylvania. Mimeo.
Pearce, D. 1984. Rationalizable Strategic Behavior and the Problem of
Perfection. Econometrica 52:1029-50.
Rosenthal, R. 1981. Games of Perfect Information, Predatory Pricing, and
the Chain-store Paradox. Journal of Economic Theory 25:92-100.
Rosenthal, R., and H. Landau. 1979. A Game Theoretic Analysis of Bar-
gaining with Reputations. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 20:233-
55.
Selten, R. 1965. Spieltheoretische Behandlung eines Oligopolmodells mit
Nachfragetragheit. Zeitschrift fiir die gesamte Staatswissenschaft 121:301~
24.
. 1975. Re-examination of the Perfectness Concept for Equilib-
rium Points in Extensive Games. International Journal of Game Theory
4:25-55.
Schelling, T. 1980. The Strategy of Conflict, 2d ed. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press.
Shapley, L. 1964. Some Topics in Two-Person Games. In Advances in
Game Theory, M. Dresher, L. Shapley, and A. Tucker, eds., 627-50.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Van Damme, E. 1987. Stability and Perfection of Nash Equilibrium. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag.
12.10. Problems
a 1. Prove that in any game of complete and perfect information with
finitely many nodes, there is always at least one decision node whose
immediate successors all are terminal nodes.
uw 2. Prove that if a game is dominance solvable, then the solution so
determined is a Nash equilibrium. Prove that if a game is dominance
452 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
solvable using only strict dominance at each step, this solution is the only
Nash equilibrium that the game possesses.
a 3. For the game in figure 12.1(1), we gave in the text two pure and
one mixed strategy equilibria. Show that this game possesses no other
equilibria, either mixed or pure.
a4. Prove that in the centipede game (figure 12.6), every Nash equilibrium
begins with player 1 playing D with probability one.
a 5. A correlated equilibrium for a two-player normal form game can be
thought of as a probability distribution over the space of strategy profiles
such that for each player and for each of the player's pure strategies (that
have positive probability) the strategy is a best-response given the player's
opponent chooses according to the conditional distribution on the oppo-
nents strategies, conditional on the strategy for the first player. Find all
the correlated equilibria for the game in figure 12.9.
a 6. (a) For the game in figure 12.13, let a be the probability assessed by 2
that he is at the topmost node in his information set, given that he is given
the move, and let be the probability he assesses that player 3 chooses
U. For which pairs of o and .is the choice of u by player 2 sequentially
rational?
(b) For this game, what is the set of all sequential equilibria?
a7. Consider an extensive form game in which no player ever moves more
than once along any path through the game tree. (If you wish, take the
simple case of a game in which each player has a single information set.)
Suppose we have behavior strategies 7 and beliefs p that are Bayes con-
sistent in the sense: Given the strategy profile =, for any information set A
that will be reached with positive probability (if players use the strategies
given by =) beliefs at h are computed from the strategies via Bayes rule.
Prove: If 7 is sequentially rational given pn at every information set that
is reached with positive probability given =, then = is a Nash equilibrium
for the game. Is the requirement that no player ever moves more than
once necessary? (Hint: the answer to the last question depends on your
precise definition of sequential rationality.)
For the converse, suppose we have a Nash equilibrium = for a given ex-
tensive form game. Compute beliefs at information sets that are reached
with positive probability given nr by Bayes rule. Show that at these in-
formation sets 7 and the beliefs computed are sequentially rational.
em se et 4 erat 3 ree
12.10. Problems 453
Problems 8 and 9 concern the notion of consistency in sequential equilibria. They
are for the pathologically mathematically addicted only.
= 8. Fix a strategy for an extensive form game and beliefs u that are
consistent with m in the sense of sequential equilibrium.
(a) In any proper subgame of the game, we can speak of applying Bayes
rule within the subgame at information sets A in the subgame that are
reached with positive probability, conditional on the subgame being reached.
Prove that 4 is consistent with Bayes rule in every proper subgame, in
just this fashion.
(b) Define an almost-proper subgame to be an information set and all
the successor nodes to nodes in A, which will be denoted S(h), with
the property that if S(h) and 2 h(z), then # S(h). For an
almost-proper subgame whose root is h, given a specification of beliefs
over nodes in A and a strategy profile 7, one can use Bayes rule to
compute beliefs on information sets in S(h) that are reached if 7 is played,
conditional on A being reached according to beliefs x on h. Show that
pv is consistent with Bayes rule in every almost-proper subgame in this
sense.
m9. Fix a (finite) extensive form game and a behavior strategy w for the
game. For simplicity, consider games without moves by nature. Define
a w-labeling of the game as a pair of functions x : A {0,1,...} and
: A (0,00), where A is the set of actions for the game, such that (a)
#(a) = 0 if and only if (a) > 0 and (b) (a) = (a) if x(a) = 0. (Follow
the convention that every action is taken at a single information set in the
tree.) Given a w-labeling, define two new functions X : X ' {0,1,..}
and : X (0,00), where X is the set of decision nodes, as follows: If
is the initial node, Mz) = 0 and (z) = 1. (Recall that there is a single
initial node, since we've assumed no moves by nature) Otherwise, A(z)
is the sum of all x(a) for actions a that lead from the initial node to x,
and {(z) is the product of the {(a) for the same sequence of actions. For a
given information set &, let A(R) = miNzep; Ax). And for a node z h,
let p(x) =0 if A(x) > Ah) and let u(x) be given by
fw
2 (a haw AR} &(z)
if Mz) = A(R).
(a) Prove that for any m-labeling, if we define yu in this fashion, pis
consistent with 7 in the sense of sequential equilibrium.
454 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
(b) (Very hard!) Prove that if 4 and 7 are consistent in the sense of
sequential equilibrium, then there is a w-labeling such that u is obtained
by the procedure above from this labeling.
In other words, this labeling procedure characterizes all the beliefs that
are consistent with a given 7. (If you are very ambitious, you might try
to modify things so that moves by nature are allowed.)
a 10. Prove that every sequential equilibrium is a subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium. (If you prove that it is a Nash equilibrium, you are 90% of
the way there.)
a 11. Consider the class of signaling games given in subsection 12.7.4.
Prove that any beliefs that are Bayes consistent with a given strategy profile
are consistent in the sense of sequential equilibrium. (Don't use problem
9 unless you've proven it.)
u 12. Consider the truth game of figure 12.16.
(a) The sequential equilibrium in which player 1 always says Tails fails
the test of equilibrium domination. Find an equilibrium that passes this
test. "
(b) Write out this game in normal form. Show that the game is dominance
solvable, if we allow dominance in mixed strategies. Can you modify the
payoffs of the game so that it is not dominance solvable but still equilib-
rium domination is effective in eliminating a sequential equilibrium?
= 13. Prove that every trembling-hand perfect equilibrium (for the agent
normal form) is sequential. Show by example that the converse is false.
The remaining problems in this chapter concern game-theoretic variations on the
classic models of oligopoly. They are primarily about those models and so relate
move to material in other chapters, but they could not have been posed until we
had covered Nash equilibria and subgame perfection.
a 14. Prove that in the Bertrand game, if prices must be charged in integer
multiples of a penny, then there is always at least one Nash equilibrium
in which players do not use weakly dominated strategies.
#15. Mr. X and Ms. Y have entered into the following contractual arrange-
ment with D. M. Kreps. Between now and the end of next week, each will
install a certain amount of capacity for the manufacture of square based
tri-prong slot poiuyts. Then Kreps will assume control of the capacity pro-
vided to him and produce and sell poiuyts. Demand for poiuyts is given
12.10. Problems 455
by the demand function D = 10 P. (To keep matters simple, assume that
production takes place for a single period.) The marginal cost of produc-
tion of poiuyts is zero up to the total level of capacity that Mr. X and Ms.
Y install. That is, if Mr. X installs capacity k; and Ms. Y installs capacity
k,, then Kreps can produce up to kg + ky poiuyts and sell them, at zero
additional cost. Kreps can, however, produce less if he s0 chooses.
The contract signed by X, Y, and Kreps calls for Kreps to act in the best
interests of X and Y. (He receives a small fixed fee for doing so, which you
may ignore.) So that there is no ambiguity about what are the best interests
of X and Y, the contract calls for Kreps to set output so that gross profits
(= revenue) are maximized. (Kreps, who knows a lot about linear demand
systems and zero marginal cost production functions, can be counted on
to do this.) These gross profits are split between X and Y in proportion to
the capacities they build. That is, if ks; = 2k;, then X receives two-thirds
of the gross profits and Y receives one-third. :
Capacity is costly for X and Y. Precisely, there is a constant marginal cost of
2 per unit of installed capacity. Hence Xs net from the entire arrangement,
if he installs k;, Y installs k,, and Kreps produces Q < ks +ky, is
ky
Tory 0 - QQ 2kg,
and similarly for Y.
(a) Suppose that X and Y collude in terms of the capacities they install.
That is, k, and k, are set to maximize the sum of the net profits of X
and Y from this arrangement. (Assume, for the sake of definiteness, that
ks = ky.) What capacities will X and Y install? '
(b) (Good luck!) Unhappily, X and Y cannot (or do not) collude. They
install capacity levels k, and k, Cournot style, choosing their capacity
levels simultaneously and independently. What is (or are) the equilibrium
(or equilibria) in this instance?
(0) If demand is P = A Q and the marginal cost of capacity is r, can
you find any values of A and r such that the total amount of capacity
installed in an equilibrium exceeds A? ,
m 16. Since you know all about perfect competition, monopoly, and oligopoly, we
can find out how various types of firms might feel about uncertainty concerning
the prices of its factors of production and output. Consider a profit-maximizing
456 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
firm that produces a single good from several factors. The firm is charac-
terized by a production function y = f(z,..., Zz), where y is the level of
output obtainable from factor inputs ,..., Zn. We will use p to denote
the price of the output good, and w; to denote the price of factor input <.
When there is uncertainty a priori about these prices, the firm is allowed
to choose its production plan after any uncertainty in prices resolves.
(a) Suppose that the firm is competitive in all its markets. That is, it
takes prices p,wi,...,Wn as given. Consider two possible price vectors,
(p,wi,..., wy) and @,wi,...,w,), and let (@",w{,..., wy) be the simple
average of the two: p" = (p+p)/2, wi = (w; +w}y)/2, etc. Let 7 be the
firm's level of profits in case of the prices p, wy,...; n be the firm's profits
in case of p/,w!,...; and 7" be the firm's profits in case of p",wf,....
Show that 7 < (wr +7')/2. (That is, the firm, in terms of expected profits,
is risk seeking in the prices it faces.)
(b) Now we suppose that the firm is a monopolist in its product mar-
ket, but is competitive in all its factor markets. Hence the firm itself
determines p,p, etc. Suppose that it makes profits m when facing fac-
tor prices (wy,..., ws), m when facing (w},..., wy), and 7 when facing
Ww, ..., wy, where wf = (w; + w})/2. Can we say that 7" < (m +7)/2?
Provide a ptoof, if so. If you need to make a further assumption to get
this result, state the assumption and say why you need it. If there is no
hope of getting this result, indicate why that is.
() Finally, consider this question in the context of a von Stackelberg
duopoly. Two firms produce an undifferentiated commodity for which
demand is given by P= A X, where P is price and X is total supply.
Demand is unchanging. Each firm has production technology with a fixed
cost F for producing anything at all, and a (constant) variable cost for
producing every unit. Note well that the fixed cost F' can be avoided by
producing zero. Firm 1 moves first, deciding whether to produce anything
and, if it does produce, the amount =; that it will supply. Firm 2 sees the
decisions of firm 1, and then it decides whether to produce anything at all
and, if so, how much. (In cases where firm 2 is indifferent between two
courses of action, you may assume that it acts in a way that maximizes
the profits of firm 1.) The firms regard the factor costs F' and c as given
to them; their actions do not affect those costs.
Is the result analogous to the result in part (a) of this problem (and in part
(b), if it is correct there) correct in this case for firm 1? That is, for all (Fc)
and (F',), is the firm's average of profits given those two levels of costs
at least as large as its level of profits when costs are ((F'+ F")/2,(c+c')/2)?
12.10. Problems 457
If so, can you conjecture how general the general proposition at work here
is? If not, can you succinctly state what went wrong? (One way to do this
is to give the general proposition in a fashion that applies to those cases
[(@) and, perhaps, (b)] where the result is true, and fails to apply in this
case.)
w 17. Part (a) should be easy. Part (b) will introduce you to how uncertainty
might be handled in the classic models. Part (c) foreshadows some developments
to come, and you might well miss the point of it now.
(a) Consider a duopoly where the two firms in question produce an un-
differentiated product. Demand for the product is given by P = 4 X,
where X is the total output of the two firms. Each firm has a simple cost
function: T'C;(z;) = ;z; where the subscript refers to the firm, x; is the
firm's output, and ; is a constant with 0 < ; < A. The firms compete
Cournot style. What is the equilibrium? Give equilibrium price, levels of
output, and profits. (You may assume that 4 +; > 2, and A+ Cc > 2
throughout this problem, although if you want a real challenge, try doing
the entire problem without this assumption.)
(b) Now suppose that while the two firms are described as above, firm
2 is uncertain about the cost function of firm 1. Specifically, ; takes on
one of a finite number of values, namely cy, cy... , cn With probabilities
P1y---,Pn. Firm 2 holds this probability assessment when it chooses its
level of output z,; firm 1 when it chooses x; knows the value of , (and
is allowed to condition its level of z; on ;). Otherwise, the two engage
in Cournot competition. By this we mean: An equilibrium is a quantity
Z, output by firm 2 and, for each level of firm 1's costs, a quantity #:(c;),
such that firm 2, believing that firm 1's output will be given by the function
1, maximizes its expected profits with output level 2,, and firm 1, believing
that firm 2 will have output 2, and knowing that its own costs are given
by ;, would choose to produce Z;(c;).
(c) Suppose the setting is as in (b), but prior to the selection of z; and z,,
firm 1 is able to provide irrefutable evidence to firm 2 concerning its cost
structure if it chooses to do so. What do you think will happen in this
case?
 18. Now reconsider problem 17, assuming that the two duopolists pro-
duce differentiated commodities. (It will be good enough to assume that
demand is given by the demand system in problem 20.) Consider also
what happens if the two engage in Bertrand competition in this case.
819. Xyllip is a controlled substance that, by law, can be produced by only
458 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
two companies, ABC Chemical and XYZ Pharmaceutical. The production
of Xyllip for each firm involves combinations of kapitose and legume ac-
cording to the production function
X = E22,
where X is the level of Xyllip output, k is the level of kapitose input, and
| is the level of legume input. (It will be okay to assume that these two
firms produce only Xyllip; this isnt really true, but taking into account
their other products wouldn't change the answers you'd get) The two
firms are price takers in the markets for kapitose and legume, each of
which sell for $1 for purposes of this problem. There are no fixed costs
in the production of Xyllip. Demand for Xyllip is given by the demand
function P=14X.
(a) As a warm-up exercise: ABC and XYZ act as Cournot duopolists in
the sale of Xyllip. That is, you can assume that they simultaneously and
independently name quantities they will supply to the market, and price
is set so that markets clear. What is the equilibrium in the Xyllip market
in this case? :
A third firma, Kinetiks, has found a way to synthesize a chemical known
as Legusude. Kinetiks holds 4 patent on this process, and it is the only
firm capable of producing Legusude. Legusude has only one possible use;
it can be used in place of legume in the production of Xyllip. If one uses
Legusude instead of legume, the production function for Xyllip is given
by
X= E22,
where now L is Legusude input to the production process. We will dis-
cuss fixed costs in the manufacture of Xyllip from Legusude (and kapi-
tose) in a moment. The production of Legusude is (for simplicity) very
simple; Kinetiks can make as much Legusude as it wishes at zero marginal
cost. (There are some fixed costs in the manufacture of Legusude, but you
should ignore them throughout.)
Kinetiks has announced that they are willing to supply Legusude to ABC
and to XYZ. Kinetiks is not allowed to produce Xyllip, so its only market
for selling Legusude is to ABC and XYZ.
To produce Xyllip from Legusude instead of from legume, ABC and/or
XYZ must convert their production processes. This is a straightforward
12.10. Problems 459
operation, but involves a fixed cost incurred by any firm that converts; the
fixed cost is $1. If a firm (or both) converts so that it can use Legusude,
it retains the option of using legume if the price of legume is below that
of Legusude. But even if the firm that has converted uses legume, it must
pay the fixed cost.
Imagine the following sequence of events, after Kinetiks has announced
its ability to produce Legusude. ABC and XYZ must simultaneously and
independently decide whether to convert their production processes so
that they can utilize Legusude. This is an irrevocable decision: If a firm
decides to convert, it thereafter incurs the fixed cost of $1. The conversion
decisions of the two firms are observed by all participants, and then (if
either of the firms has decided to convert), Kinetiks announces a price at
which it is willing to sell Legusude. There can be no bargaining over price
between Kinetiks and ABC and/or XYZ. But, at the same time, Kinetiks
is required by law to set a single price and sell as much Legusude at that
price as anyone wishes to buy. The price being charged by Kinetiks is
observed by all participants, and then ABC and XYZ simultaneously and
independently engage in production of Xyllip; that is, once production
conditions are known for the two firms, they compete Cournot style.
(b) Give an extensive form representation of this game, using the sort
of symbolic pictures of figure 12.18.
(c) We are interested in knowing what the subgame perfect equilibria (or, if
there is only one, equilibrium) of this game are. To this end, suppose that
in stage 1, ABC and XYZ both convert and then Kinetiks announces price
q for Legusude. What is the outcome in the final stage of Cournot com-
petition between ABC and XYZ? Given this, what price should Kinetiks
name for Legusude, if both firms have converted?
(d) Repeat step (c) for the case where the game begins with ABC deciding
to convert and XYZ deciding not to convert.
(e) What are the subgame perfect equilibria (or equilibrium) of this exten-
sive form game?
(B) Suppose that you are the CEO of Kinetiks. What might you do to change
the rules of this strategic interaction so that you do better than you do
in ()? You should not answer this question by saying that you should
go into the production of Xyllip; that is forbidden. But you should try to
invent plausible changes in the rules of the game and then investigate
their consequences for the profits of Kinetiks.
460 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
a 20. Consider a two-firm industry where each firm has a single output,
and the outputs of the two firms are reasonably close substitutes for one
another. More precisely, if z; is the level of output of firm 1 and =, the
level of output of firm 2, then the price that firm 1 gets in the market is
py = 10 x; .5x,, while firm 2 gets price p; = 10 z; 571.
Firm 2 has a very simple technology in which every unit produced has
constant marginal cost 2. Firm 1 will soon have a constant marginal cost
technology, but first must choose which technology to install. In fact, firm
1 has a choice of four technologies. The first technology has fixed costs
of 12 and a constant marginal cost of 1. The second has fixed costs of
8.1 and a constant marginal cost of 2. For the third, fixed costs are 5
and marginal costs are 3. For the fourth, fixed costs are 2.7 and marginal
costs are 4. Firm 1 must select which of these four technologies to install;
having done so, the two firms will compete in duopolistic fashion.
(a) Imagine that the sequence of events and competitive variables are:
Firm 1 chooses one of the four technologies to install; firm 2 sees which
technology firm 1 has chosen; firms 1 and 2 then simultaneously and
independently choose output quantities. (That is, they engage in Cournot
competition.) What are the Nash equilibria of this game, including the
technology selection stage? If you find more than one equilibrium, do you
find any one of them particularly persuasive, and why?
(b) Suppose that the sequence of events and competitive variables are: .
Firm 1 chooses one of the four technologies to install; firm 2 sees which
technology firm 1 has chosen; firms 1 and 2 then simultaneously and inde-
pendently choose prices that they quote. (That is, they engage in Bertrand
competition. Please recall that these products are differentiated, so it isnt
the case that Bertrand competition must lead to zero profits.) What are the
Nash equilibria of this game, including the technology selection stage? If
you find more than one equilibrium, do you find any one of them partic-
ularly persuasive, and why?
(c) Imagine that the sequence of events and competitive variables are: Firm
1 chooses one of the four technologies to install; firm 2 does not see which
technology firm 1 has chosen; firms 1 and 2 then simultaneously and in-
dependently choose quantities to output. (That is, they engage in Cournot
competition.) What are the Nash equilibria of this game, including the
technology selection stage? If you find more than one equilibrium, do you
find any one of them particularly persuasive, and why?
(d) Suppose that the sequence of events and competitive variables are:
12.10. Problems 461
Firm 1 chooses one of the four technologies to install; firm 2 does not see
which technology firm 1 has chosen; firms 1 and 2 then simultaneously
and independently choose prices that they quote. (That is, they engage in
Bertrand competition.) What are the Nash equilibria of this game, includ-
ing the technology selection stage? If you find more than one equilibrium,
do you find any one of them particularly persuasive, and why?
Throughout this problem, restrict yourself to pure strategy Nash equilibria
only. You will probably find the results a bit surprising. Can you explain
what is going on here? .
& 21. Imagine an N firm oligopoly for nominally differentiated goods.
That is, each of the N firms produces a product that looks different
from the products of its competitors, but that really isn't any different.
However, each firm is able to fool some of the buying public. Specifically,
each of the N firms (which are identical and have zero marginal cost of
production) has a captive market consumers who will buy only from
that firm. The demand generated by each of these captive markets is given
by the demand function P, = A%,, where x,, is the amount supplied to
this captive market and P, is the price of the production of firm n. There
is also a group of intelligent consumers who realize that the products are
really undifferentiated. These consumers are represented by the demand
curve P= AX/B, where P is the price of goods sold to these consumers
and X is their demand. (If z, > A or X/B > A, then the prices in the
respective markets are zero. Prices do not become negative.)
Firms compete Cournot style. Each firm n supplies a total quantity X,,
which is divided between its loyal customers and the customers who are
willing to buy from any firm. If we let x, be the part of X, that goes
to loyal customers, then the price of good n is necessarily P, = A z,,.
The price that goes to the shoppers is P= A (3, (Xn zn) /B. Inan
equilibrium, P, > P, and if X,, > z,, then P, = P. (That is, a firm can
charge a higher than market price for its own output, but then it will
sell only to its own loyal customers.) By Cournot competition, we mean
that each firm n assumes that the other firms will hold fixed their total
amounts of output.
(a) For a given vector of output quantities by the firms, (X;,...,Xy), is
there a unique set of equilibrium prices (and a division of the output of
each firm) that meets the conditions given above for equilibrium? If so,
how do you find those prices? If not, can you characterize all the market
equilibria?
462 Chapter twelve: Solution concepts for noncooperative games
(b) Find as many Cournot equilibria as you can for this model, as a function
of the parameters N and B. (WARNING: Do not assume that solutions
of first-order conditions are necessarily global maxima.)
chapter thirteen
Incomplete information
and irrationality
In this chapter we present a methodological innovation, the notion of a
game of incomplete information, which has been extremely useful in the mod-
eling of all sorts of economic phenomena. As an example of this sort of
application, we discuss again the problem of entry deterrence in monopoly.
We use games of incomplete information to model situations in which one
or more of the players is suspected of being irrational. And with this tool
at our disposal, we return a final time to questions concerning refinements
of Nash equilibrium.
13.1. Games of incomplete information
The following story provides an excellent example of what we are
after. Imagine two individuals, whom we will call (without much imagi-
nation) player 1 and player 2. Player 2 unhappily is something of a bully;
he likes to pick fights with cowards. But he is equally averse to picking
a fight with someone with courage; he will pick a fight with someone
only if he assesses probability .5 or more that this individual is a coward.
(He is indifferent between picking and not picking a fight at the assess-
ment 5.) He considers picking a fight with player 1, but he is uncertain
whether player 1 is a coward or is brave. He initially assesses probabil-
ity .8 that player 1 is brave and .2 that player 1 is a coward (these being
the only possibilities), and so it seems that he will not pick a fight with
this individual.
Before deciding whether to pick a fight with player 1, player 2 gets
a signal about player 1's disposition that may be of value, namely what
player 1 will have for breakfast. Player 1 will have one of two breakfasts:
beer or quiche. If player 1 is brave, then she prefers a breakfast of beer to
a breakfast of quiche. If player 1 is a coward, she prefers quiche to beer.
So, it might seem, player 2 should observe what player 1 has for breakfast
and conclude: If 1 has quiche, she is certainly a coward; pick a fight. But if
464 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
she has beer, she is certainly brave; avoid a fight. But complicating this is
the fact that whether brave or a coward player 1 prefers that player 2 not
pick a fight with her, and she cares more about this than she does about
the type of breakfast she has. And player 1 realizes that player 2 is lurking
at the street corner, watching carefully what player 1 has for breakfast.
We wish to create a game theoretic model of this situation to analyze
what player 1 should have for breakfast and how player 2 should re-
act to this signal. The difficulty we encounter is that player 2 is uncertain
about some of the characteristics of player 1: What are player 1's disposi-
tions in terms of a fight? Or, equivalently, what are player 1's preferences
concerning breakfast? And we haven't said much about how player 1 re-
gards all this. Does player 1 know that player 2 is uncertain about player
1's tastes? The last line of the previous paragraph seems to indicate that
this, at least, is so. But this leads to more questions. For example, does
player 1 know precisely what odds player 2 assesses that player 1 is brave?
In answer to these questions, consider the models of this situation
given by the games in figures 13.1(a) and 13.1(b). Start with 13.1(a). Here
we have modeled the situation as follows. Nature determines whether
player 1 is brave or is a coward, with probability .8 that 1 is brave. Player 1
knows her own temperment, and player 1 must choose (perhaps contin-
gent on her temperment) which breakfast to have. Player 2 observes this
breakfast choice but not the initial choice of nature and then must decide
whether to pick a fight with player 1 or not. Then payoffs are made. Note
that player 2's payoffs are designed so that player 2 gets one unit of utility
if he picks a fight with a coward or avoids a fight with a brave opponent,
and player 2 gets zero if he does the wrong thing. Thus, as we said
before, player 2 will pick the fight if he assesses probability more than .5
that his opponent is a coward; he avoids the fight if this assessment is
below .5; and he is indifferent at the assessment .5. Player 1 gets two units
of utility" if she avoids the fight, to which is added one unit of utility if
she has her preferred breakfast (depending on her disposition, which is
determined by nature).
In this model, we have used a move by nature to capture the idea that
player 2 is uncertain about the characteristics of player 1. Nature begins
the game by selecting those characteristics. This selection of characteristics
is known to player 1, and (please note carefully) player 1 is aware as well of
player 2's initial uncertainty and assessment. Moreover, player 2 is aware
of the fact that player 1 is aware of these things, and so on.
Compare this model with the extensive form game in figure 13.1(b).
Here are four initial nodes, which we label bo, bp, co, and cp. The first
letter in these labels refers to the type of player 1 either brave or a
13.1. Games of incomplete information 465
1is a coward
 A ~-Lg Beer J Quiche oo A)
2, Ooms |, 2p a
Don't Don't = (3,0)
a ott Beer 1 yu Quen FE 0)
(31) = Don't Soren
lis rave
(0,1) w_Fight _ Fight _ (1,1)
TT, Beer 0 co o
0 ome | A Ny Quiche H 3,0)
(1,0) <_Fight Fight 0,0)
T= - + 2gbo uct. TE 0,0)
GD eer Sean
0,1) ht Fight 1,1
Ee, Beer | Quiche ee (1D
20 "Don't ! fH 1d ar cp Don't = 3,0)
(1,0) <=_Fight : | Fight 0,0)
Te er O cuit o
GD Dont ~~ 156I- PET
b
Figure 13.1. Two versions of the beer-quiche game with incomplete information.
coward. Now in this game, we have player 1 choosing her breakfast know-
ing the first letter of the initial node but not the second. That is, {bo, bp} is
one information set for player 1, and {co, cp} is another. And then player
2 chooses whether to pick a fight based on two pieces of information 
whether player 1 had beer or quiche for breakfast, and whether the second
letter of the initial node is 0 or p. That is, player 2 has four information
sets: {bo-beer, co-beer}; {bp-beer, cp-beer}; {bo-quiche, co-quiche}; and
{bp-quiche, cp-quiche}.
This second extensive form game is a model of the following situ-
ation. Player 2 has precisely the sorts of doubts that he has in the first
model whether player 1 is brave or a coward. But now player 1 has
doubts too. She knows that player 2 is uncertain about her character.
466 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
But we have modeled things so that player 1 is unsure about player 2's
assessment. Player 1 thinks that player 2 may initially be pessimistic,
assessing probability .8 that player 1 is brave (which is, in fact, the situa-
tion), or that player 2 may initially be optimistic, assessing probability .4
that player 1 is brave. Player 1 assesses probability .7 that player 2 has the
first, pessimistic assessment, and .3 that player 2 has the second, optimistic
assessment. The letters o and p in the initial nodes are mnemonics for op-
timistic and pessimistic. So the initial node bo is: nature begins the game
with a brave player 1 and an optimistic player 2. This node, note, has
probability .12, obtained as the product of the probability that player 2 is
optimistic as assessed by player 1 and the probability that player 1 is brave
as assessed by player 2, if player 2 is, in fact, optimistic. Note that in the
model player 1 always knows (whenever it is her turn to move) whether
the game started at a b-class initial node or a c-class initial node; player 1
always knows her disposition. And player 2, whenever he is called upon
to move, knows whether the game started at an o-class initial node or
a p-class node; he knows his own initial assessment. Finally, the model
closes here; player 1 knows what sorts of assessment player 2 might be
making, and player 2 knows that player 1 knows this. Player 2 knows the
odds that player 1 assigns to the chances that player 2 makes various as-
sessments, and player 1 knows that player 2 knows these odds, and so on.
These are examples of what are called games of (or with) incomplete in-
formation. These garnes are used to model situations in which some players
have more or less information at the outset than do others. One player will
know her own utility function. A second will know what options he has
available. A third will have assessments about those two things, and the
first two players may have assessments about those assessments. And, if
we wanted something really complex, we could imagine that player 3 has
an assessment concerning player 2's assessment of player 3's assessment
of player 1's utility function. (If you think this is painful to read, imagine
having to draw the corresponding extensive form.)
The form of the model is: Nature acts first to determine all these
things, and then players initial states of information are set by giving
them varying amounts of information about natures initial choices. These
models are not completely general. In particular, they presume:
(a) There is a single, consistent base model in the minds of all the play-
ers. Everyone agrees on the possible initial states among which nature
chose. No player is completely ignorant about something another player
knows, although one player may assess very low (conditional) probability
13.1. Games of incomplete information 467
to certain states that other players know pertain for sure. (We will see
later how you can model your way around this restriction.)
(b) Players agree on the prior distribution on initial states. This is implicit
in the model; it is planted when we put at the initial nodes a single proba-
bility distribution representing the (unanimous) assessment of how nature
starts things off. There is no reason to make this assumption in theory.
We could, for example, assume that different players have different pri-
ors over nature's initial move, although we would still assume that each
player is aware of the priors assessed by all others. (Note well: This isn't
to say that each is aware of the posteriors assessed by others. We saw
how one player can be unsure what assessment a second player makes,
after nature selectively reveals some of what was done in getting the game
underway.) But it is conventionally assumed that players have a common
prior more of the religious doctrine about which we spoke in chapter 2
and again in chapter 11. )
(c) The model closes at a certain point. By this we mean the follow-
ing. Suppose that player 2 is unaware of some characteristic of player 1.
Player 2 will then have a probability assessment over this characteristic.
We see in figure 13.1(b) how to model the notion that player 1 is un-
certain about player 2's assessment. And we could further complicate the
model and have player 2 uncertain about player 1's assessment concerning
player 2's assessment. And we could have player 1 uncertain about 2's as-
sessment about 1's assessment about 2's assessment. (Such a model would
be quite intractable, so you needn't worry that we will ever look at such
a thing.) But, in the end, this chain ends say with player 1 knowing
2's assessment of 1s assessment of 2's assessment of 1's assessment of
2's assessment of 1s unknown characteristic. In figure 13.1(a) the model
closes rather sooner than that; player 2 had an assessment over player 1's
character, and player 1 knew 2's assessment. In figure 13.1(b) the model
closes a step further along.
This sort of closure is theoretically unnecessary. With some very high-
powered mathematics, one can show that an infinite regress of assessments
is modelable. But, speaking practically, a model that doesnt close (and
quite quickly) would be useless in applications, so the models that people
write down and analyze almost always close quickly.
Despite these limitations, this way of modeling situations of incom-
plete information has proven very powerful in generating insights into
behavior in competitive situations. The proof of that pudding will only
468 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
come in the eating, however, so without too much further ado we proceed
to an application of this sort of model.
But before doing so, we make one short remark. The model given in
figure 13.1(a) may remind you of a game you have seen earlier; it is the
truth game described in problem 3 in chapter 11 and discussed and de-
picted in subsection 12.7.4. The story has changed, but the two games, as
extensive form games, are entirely isomorphic. This provides a good op-
portunity to introduce some conventional language. In the story about the
truth game, the randomization by nature (the flipping of the bent coin) was
entirely within the game. Because player 1 was told the outcome of the flip
and player 2 wasn't, the two players were put on different informational
footings. This sort of situation is called, in the literature, a game with imper-
fect information. In contrast, in the beer-quiche story nature is invoked as an
external artifice to get the players from some never-relevant point of com-
mon information to a starting point where one player knows something
about which another is uncertain. This sort of situation is conventionally
called a game with incomplete information. As mathematical models, the two
are the same; the different names refer (somewhat vaguely, to my mind)
to the sort of story that is being told.
One further point on this: It is commonplace to regard the truth game as
a two-player game, with player 1's expected payoffs computed by averaging
over the two possible outcomes of the coin flip. No one ever quibbles with
this. But in beer-quiche, things are not so straightforward. Is this a two-
player game, or should the two different manifestations of player 1 be treated
as different players, so that this is in some sense a three-player game? Making
interpersonal comparisons of utility between a cowardly player 1 and a brave
player 1, which is what we would do if we took expectations over player 1's
disposition, is suspicious at least. For certain game-theoretic considerations
this would make a difference; cf. problem 1. There is no set conventional
wisdom on this matter; for what little it is worth, my prejudices are to regard
this as a three-player game.
13.2. An application: Entry deterrence
To illustrate the uses to which this sort of model has been put in
the literature, we briefly consider the problem of entry deterrence by a
monopolist that was discussed in section 9.2.7 This is not meant to be
anything like a complete treatment of entry deterrence; consult the relevant
papers or, say, Tirole (1988) for that. But, at the same time, to introduce
! Since there will be both a monopoly firm and an entrant, it is convenient to use personal
pronouns of different genders. Hence we will refer to the monopolist as she and to the po-
tential entrant as he.
13.2. An application: Entry deterrence 469
the reason for this application we will have to wander a bit far afield of
the main subject of this chapter. Your forebearance is, therefore, requested.
To begin, recall the simple story of section 9.2. A monopolist faces
demand given by D(p) = 9P and has a constant marginal cost production
technology with marginal cost of production equal to $1. The monopolist
must also pay a fixed cost of $2.25. The standard theory of monopoly
holds that this monopolist will equate marginal revenue, or 9 2X at
output level X, with marginal cost; this gives X = 4, P = $5, and profits
of $13.75. .
Despite this, the story goes, we find that this monopolist sets X =5,
which leads to P = $4 and profits of $12.75. When pressed to explain this,
the monopolist says:
A single potential competitor is sitting out there who is consid-
ering entry into this market. This competitor has exactly the
same production technology as I do. If this entrant believes that
I will produce four units, the entrant faces residual demand of
5 ~ X; = P, which leads the entrant to produce X; = 2 if he
enters, depressing price to $3, and leaving him with net profits
of $4 $2.25 = $1.75. Hence this competitor will enter. And if
he enters, I will make net profits of $8 $2.25 = $5.75.
But if I produce five units and the entrant believes that I will
continue to do this, then the entrant faces residual demand of
4 X,, which leads him to produce X, = 1.5 if he enters. This
pushes price down to $2.50, giving him a gross profit of $2.25
(gross of fixed costs), and a net profit of $0. Hence this entrant
will not enter, and I will continue to make profits of $12.75. So
I'm really much better off with my production level of 5.
This, as we noted in chapter 9, is a curious story on several grounds,
chief among which is, Why does the potential entrant suppose that, if
he enters, the monopolist (now a duopolist) will persist in the quantity
that she produces preentry? It is not impossible to tell stories to justify
this. One can imagine, for example, a world in which the incumbent
monopolist must commit to a certain level of production that is observed
by the potential entrant, and the entrant can then decide whether to enter
and how much to produce. That is, we imagine a structure of competition
like the von Stackelberg extensive form game. But it isnt clear that this is
a very realistic model of the details of competition, and so one may wish to
look further, particularly at models where the incumbent monopolist and
the entrant interact competitively only after the incumbent decides to enter.
470 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
This sort of model presents a problem for the story of entry deterrence.
If the entrant decides whether to enter or not, the incumbent monopolist
sees this, and the two compete, it follows that the postentry competition
can be thought of as a proper subgame. And there is no reason (yet) to
imagine that the monopolists preentry pricing or quantity decisions have
any effect at all on the entrant's calculations. To take the simplest example
once again, imagine the following details of competition: The monopolist,
in a first period, exercises however she wishes her monopoly power. The
entrant observes this and decides whether to enter. The monopolist ob-
serves what the entrant does, and then a second period of production/sales
takes place, either in a monopoly (if the entrant chooses not to enter) or in
a duopoly (if the entrant does enter). If the entrant does enter, the form of
competition in the second period, for the sake of concreteness, is assumed
to be Cournot style. The two firms simultaneously and independently
choose quantities to supply to the market. (If you have any doubt about
it at all, give the extensive form for the game just described.)
The point is that in this game, what happens subsequently if the en-
trant does enter is a proper subgame. It is a Cournot-style duopoly game,
and we know the Cournot equilibrium for this subgame; each firm pro-
duces 8/3 units of the good, price is $11/3, and each firm's net profits are
approximately $4.86. (You should be working all this out as we go along.)
Now the entire game has many Nash equilibria. For example, it is
an equilibrium for the incumbent monopolist to threaten that she will
produce 5.01 units in the second period if the entrant enters; this causes
the entrant to choose not to enter. Since the entrant doesnt enter, the
threat is off the path of play and is okay as part of a Nash equilibrium.
But this relies on behavior that is subgame imperfect; the game has a
unique subgame perfect equilibrium. If the entrant enters, the incumbent
monopolist accommodates herself to this fait accompli and produces 8/3;
the entrant nets $4.86; and so the entrant enters. And, going back to the
first stage, the incumbent monopolist realizes that nothing she does in the
first period will influence this, so she (optimally) chooses to produce four
units, knowing that her days as a monopolist are numbered but knowing
as well she can do nothing about that.
So how do we resurrect the story of the entry-deterring monopolist?
At least three ways are suggested in the literature. First, one can move to
a formulation in which the second period is followed by a third, a fourth,
2 If you like irrelevant logical puzzles, try to build a (subgame imperfect) Nash equilib-
rium for the game in which the incumbent monopolist produces five units in the first period.
In this equilibrium, how much will the monopolist necessarily produce in the second period
(assuming it is the last)? -
13.2. An application: Entry deterrence 471
ad infinitum, and where profits in different periods are evaluated using
discounted present value. This sort of technique, which is the subject of
chapter 14, does give us enough leverage to resurrect the story. We leave
it to the next chapter to see how.
Second, one can invent ways in which decisions made by the mo-
nopolist in the first period affect (physically) what happens in the second.
There are a large number of variations on this theme, but the general idea
is the same: The incumbent monopolist by something she does in the first
period that is observed by the entrant is able to shift around her own sec-
ond period incentives in a way that makes her more aggressive in the
second period in the event of entry aggressive enough so that entry
is forestalled. I will not work out an example of this here, but refer you
instead to problem 2.
Third (and the point of all this here) is that we can link the two
periods by supposing that the potential entrant learns something about
the incumbent monopolist from the monopolists actions in the first period.
To illustrate this, we change the numbers around a bit. Suppose that the
entrant is uncertain about the marginal cost of the monopolist. The entrant
faces a constant marginal cost of 3; the monopolist either has a constant
marginal cost of 3 or a marginal cost of only 1. And suppose that the
entrant's (and the incumbent's) fixed costs are $3, which is known to both
parties.
These numbers are selected so that the entrant will enter if he is sure
that she has marginal costs of $3; but he won't enter if he is sure her
marginal costs equal $1. Specifically, if the entrant knows that the mo-
nopolist has costs of $3, Cournot competition leads each to produce two
units, gross profits for each are $4, and so (net of the $3 fixed cost) the
entrant makes a $1 profit and will enter. Whereas if the entrant knows
that the monopolist has costs of $1, the Cournot equilibrium if the entrant
enters will be for the entrant to produce 4/3 and the monopolist to pro-
duce 10/3. Price will be 13/3, and the entrant's gross profits will be 16/9
for net profits of $ 11/9. The entrant doesnt enter.
Suppose the monopolist, in the first period, chooses her single-period
optimal level of quantity, as suggested by the standard theory of monopoly.
If her costs are 1 per unit, she prices the good at $5. If her costs are 3 per
unit, she prices the good at $6. Hence if the entrant anticipates that the
monopolist will act in this fashion in the first period, the entrant can learn
from the monopolist's first period decisions whether to enter or not. But
then the monopolist, if her costs are in fact 3, might wish to price the
good at $5 to mislead the entrant into thinking that entry is a bad idea.
(This would then be our phenomenon of entry-deterring pricing in the
472 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
first period.) But then perhaps the entrant would not pay attention to the
monopolists first period decision.
How do we model and analyze this? Needless to say, the appropri-
ate model depends on what (and how much) the incumbent monopolist
knows about the uncertainties of the entrant and how much the entrant
knows about what the monopolist knows. We can use games of incom-
plete information to model a number of situations along these lines, of
which we will give the simplest example here.
Suppose the entrant assesses probability p that the incumbent has
marginal costs of $3; suppose the incumbent monopolist knows this; the
entrant knows that the monopolist knows this, and so on. Consider the
game of incomplete information where Nature first chooses the produc-
tion function (marginal costs) of the incumbent monopolist, with p giving
the probability that nature chooses $3, and reveals this to the monopolist.
Depending on this, the monopolist chooses her first period levels of out-
put and price. The entrant observes this (but not the monopolists cost
structure) and decides whether to enter. If the entrant enters, the entrant
and monopolist play a simultaneous move Cournot subgame. Since the
entrant may be uncertain about what the monopolists costs are, he may
face uncertainty about his profits; we will assume he seeks to maximize
the expected level of profits he attains. And since the monopolist will be
receiving profits in each of two periods, we have to know how she trades
off a dollar today against a dollar tomorrow; we will assume for simplicity .
that she maximizes the undiscounted sum of her profits. (Accommodating
a discount factor would not be difficult.)
We depict this extensive form game symbolically in figure 13.2. Note
that we show six information sets for the incumbent three each for each
of her types. She must decide how much to produce in the first period,
how much to produce in the second if the entrant doesnt enter, and how
much to produce in the second period if the entrant does enter. (Actually,
she has many information sets of the latter two types, as she can condition
her second period decisions on her level of output in the first period.) We
show two information sets for the entrant: whether to enter or not, and if
he enters, how much to produce. This is very deceptive. The entrant has
a pair of these information sets for each first-period output decision of the
incumbent, and the whole point of the exercise is, How will the first-period
output decision of the incumbent affect the decisions taken by the entrant?
We will now undertake to analyze this extensive form game, using
as solution concept sequential equilibrium. This analysis will be tough
 To be very precise, the notion of sequential equilibrium doesnt really apply here, since
13.2. An application: Entry deterrence 473
Don't
enter Oyen Incumbent's
Incumbent price/ quantity
with $3 choices in the
unit cost : =~ Enter second period
ip} > ! 5? i if no entry
: 5 So | !
; 84 Qo:
FE ok =T__
gi Zi Ra
Lo BY gi =
ncumbents g i 2 "Incumbent's
price/ quantity 21 ol quantity
choices in g E ; - choices in the
first period---. Bi 1 Don't y second period
Yom (5 | enter if entry
Incumbent : : }
with $1 oz Enter: /
unit cost T=2 J
{1-p}
Figure 13.2. An entry deterrence game.
going for many readers; it is the first serious problem using noncoop-
erative game theory we've undertaken to examine. We will take things
slowly and in steps, but still this will not be easy to follow. You should
persevere; many recent developments in microeconomics ar based on ar-
guments of this sort. I, after struggling with this analysis, you are still
at sea, it may be worthwhile to move immediately to chapter 17 and then
return to this analysis.
To begin, we note why we use the sequential equilibrium concept.
We have already seen in our discussion of the entry game without incom-
plete information that we could get entry deterrence on the cheap, using
Nash equilibria that are held together by the monopolists threats to pro-
duce very large quantities in the event of entry. To avoid these threat
equilibria, we needed to invoke subgame perfection. We are unable to
sequential equilibrium is defined for finite game trees only. Our analysis is really only in the
spirit of sequential equilibrium,
474 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
invoke subgame perfection here; because of the incomplete information,
this game has no proper subgames. By using the sequential equilibrium
concept, we mvoke sequential rationality for the monopolist, which means
that she cant threaten to meet entry with an incredibly large amount of
output; she must respond optimally to what she supposes the entrant will
do if he enters.
Step 1. The Cournot subgame given the entrant's beliefs
Of course, the sequential equilibrium notion does more than avoid
threats by the monopolist. It also ties the actions of the entrant to his
beliefs, after seeing the price/quantity choice of the monopolist in the
first round, concerning the monopolists costs. More precisely, suppose
that we write u(p) for the beliefs held by the entrant that the incumbent
monopolist has marginal cost $3, as a function of the price p that the
monopolist charges in the first round. Given those beliefs, what ensues if
the entrant decides to enter is completely fixed by u(p) in the fashion of
problem 17 in the last chapter.
More precisely, in that problem we asked what would be the out-
come of Cournot-style competition between two firms, where the first had
marginal costs of c, but the first was uncertain about the marginal costs
of the second. In terms of the numbers here, we imagine that the entrant
chooses output level z.(p), while the monopolist chooses zm (p,1) if her
costs are $1 and z,,(p,3) if her costs are $3. Note that all three of these
are taken as functions of p, the price the monopolist charged in the first
period, since that may influence the incumbent's beliefs about the monop-
olists costs.
In an equilibrium, the monopolists quantities must be best responses
to the entrant's quantity, or
-1- Te(p)
9 9-3z,
zm, 1) = > 9-3 zp)
and z,(p, 3) = 5
(If you aren't sure where these came from, compute the monopolists prof-
its as a function of her output quantity and optimize.) The entrant's quan-
tity must at the same time be a best response to the (from his perspective)
random level of output selected by the monopolist. His expected profits,
given his beliefs and given his output level z, are
[u@IO-3 zp, 3) Bz] + [1 p@IO 3 zm(p, 1) zz]
= (6 [u@zm(p,3) + 1 pE)Zm(p, D1 2)z,
13.2. An application: Entry deterrence 475
which is maximized at
rep) = 6 [u@zm(p,3) +a p()zm(o, Py
Note well where this expression for his profits comes from; he assesses
probability u(p) that the monopolist has costs $3 and so will produce
at level z,(p,3) and probability 1 u(p) that she will produce at level
zm(p,1) because her costs are $1. :
This gives us three equations in three unknowns, and if you solve
them, you will find that
2(6 3ulp) 4(1 pn) _ 22+ pu)
ze(p) = 3 3
(pT) = 6 + 3u(p) +a ul) _ 10 He, and
20,3) = 3 + 3ulp) +a up) _7- 20)
And if you work at the algebra a bit more, you'll find that the profits of
the entrant, not including his fixed cost, are 4(2 + w()?/9.
This is an algebraic swamp, but what emerges is sensible: The higher
(p) is, the more optimistic the entrant is. Higher u(p) means he assesses
a higher probability that the monopolist has higher costs. This emboldens
him; his level of output rises with u(p). And this rise in his level of output
causes the equilibrium levels of output of the monopolist to fall. All of
which raises his expected gross profits.
When seeing this sort of construction for the first time, readers will
sometimes latch onto what was just said and conclude that the entrant
should choose to have optimistic beliefs. It should be stressed that play-
ers dont choose their beliefs; they have them based on their experiences
with life, similar situations, and so on. Players choose their actions op-
timally given their beliefs, but we don't think of players choosing to be
optimistic when being optimistic is to their benefit. Choosing advanta-
geous beliefs would be like choosing to like broccoli this year because the
price of broccoli is low.
Let us take stock of where we are. We are looking for sequential
equilibria to the extensive form game we have described, a game with
which we hope to capture some aspects of entry deterrence. We have
shown what will ensue after the monopolist charges price p at the first
date, if the entrant, therefore, assesses probability u(p) that the entrant
476 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
has cost $3 and enters. Namely, the entrant and monopolist will act (in
equilibrium) in a fashion that leads the entrant to gross profits of 4(2 +
p@)/9.
One skeleton is buried in what was just asserted, which should be ex-
humed if not fully explained. In any sequential equilibrium of this game, the
beliefs of the entrant at an information set where he is deciding whether to
enter will be identical with his beliefs at the subsequent information set if he
enters, whether he is supposed to enter or not in equilibrium. This is a con-
sequence of the consistency criterion of beliefs and strategies in a sequential
equilibrium. Besides, it is fairly sensible. Why should something the entrant
does or doesnt do change his beliefs about the costs of the monopolist?
Step 2. The entry decision given the entrant's beliefs
So should the entrant enter, if he believes that the incumbent has costs
of $3 with probability u(p)? He will enter if his expected gross profits are
enough to cover his fixed costs of $3. If you compare 4(2 + p)*/9 with
$3, you will find that the critical value of u(p) is approximately .598.% If
the entrant believes that the incumbent monopolist has marginal costs of
$3 with probability exceeding .598, he enters. If he assesses probability
less than .598, he stays out. (If he assesses precisely .598, he is indifferent
between entering and staying out.)
So, with all this as prelude, we can ask, What are the sequential equi-
libria of this game? There are, it turns out, many of them. We will not
attempt to characterize them all. Instead, we will discuss one set of strate-
gies that do not form an equilibrium, and we will give one sequential
equilibrium for the case p < .598 and another sequential equilibrium for
the case p > .598. For now, be content to understand why the nonequilib-
rium is not an equilibrium, why the two types of equilibria are equilibria,
and what these two equilibria entail for the story of entry deterrence. Later,
after completing chapter 17, you will be told to return and conduct a more
complete analysis of this problem.
Step 3. A nonequilibrium
No matter what the value of p is, it won't be an equilibrium for the
monopolist to charge $5 in the first period if her costs are $1 and $6 if her
costs are $3. For if she does this, then the entrant will infer that her costs
are $3 if she charges $6 and $1 if she charges $5. That is, u(6) = 1 and
(5) = 0. These beliefs are forced by Bayes rule; if the monopolist charges
 Precisely, 3v/3/2 2.
13.2. An application: Entry deterrence 477
$5 or $6 in the first period, then these observations are along the path of
play, and Bayes rule must be applied. 
But given these beliefs, we know that the entrant won't enter if he sees
$5 charged in the first period, and he will enter if $6 is charged. Consider
the plight of the monopolist if this is the entrant's strategy and she has
marginal costs of $3. If she follows the strategy outlined and charges $6,
she will net $6 in the first period (net of fixed costs), but then the entrant
will enter, and she will make only $1 net in the second period. If, on the
other hand, she charges $5 in the first period, mimicking the strategy of
the $1 monopolist, her net profits in the first period will fall to $5 in the
first period (from $6). But then the entrant will not enter, and she can
charge $6 in the second period and make net profits of $6. This is far
better than following the strategy outlined, which is, therefore, not part of
an equilibrium strategy profile.
Step 4. A pooling equilibrium
Now suppose p < .598. We claim the following is a sequential equi-
librium: The monopolist charges $5 in the first period, no matter what her
costs are. The entrant enters if the monopolist charges anything more than
$5 in the first period, based on beliefs u(p) = 1 for p > $5. The entrant
does not enter if the monopolist charges anything at or below $5, based on
beliefs that u(p) = p for p < $5. (If there is entry, the two play according to
the scheme outlined in step 1. If there is no entry, the monopolist charges
her monopoly price in the second period.)
Why is this a sequential equilibrium? First note that the entrant is
playing optimally given his presumed beliefs. He is entering when he
should and staying out when he should, according to the analysis in step 2.
Note second that his beliefs are consistent with the supposed equilibrium
strategies, at least along the path of play. The only price that is used in
the first period is $5 (in these strategies), and since both types of monop-
olist charge this price, the posterior assessment of the monopolist's type
given this price should be the prior. All other prices are off the path, so
beliefs can be arbitrary. But they even make some sense: The higher
the price the monopolist charges, the greater should be our suspicion that
she has high costs. The beliefs we have mandated have this monotonicity
character, at least.?
 This is always true in a sequential equilibrium.
d They should be consistent in the sense of sequential equilibria, and these are (allowing
for the fact that we arent working with a finite game and so must fudge definitions a bit).
3 Aha, the reader is saying, what was all this stuff about not choosing beliefs? Seems
like beliefs are being chosen here! At the risk of confusing the reader who is not confused,
478 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
And finally, the monopolist is optimizing given the entrant's strategy.
If the monopolists costs are $1, she is getting to charge her favorite price
in the first period and forestall entry. Nothing could be better than that.
While if her costs are $3, she would prefer to charge a higher price in the
first period, but that will bring on entry. On balance, it is better to accept
the smaller profits in the first period and keep the larger profits in the
second.
The intuition of this equilibrium resides in the last assertion. Be-
cause p is low, the entrant, if he doesnt learn anything from the first
period price charged by the monopoly, will choose to forego entry. Hence
the monopolist, if her costs are $3, wishes to hide that fact. And in this
equilibrium she hides that fact by charging a $5 price in the first period,
just like in the story of section 9.2!
This is called a pooling equilibrium because the two types of monopolist
do the same thing in equilibrium.
Step 5. A screening equilibrium
This pooling equilibrium doesnt work if p> .598. In this case a pool
would be ineffective; entry would not be forestalled at all. And what's the
point of the $3 monopolist charging a short-run suboptimal price in the
first period if she is going to see entry anyway?
When p > .598, we assert the following is an equilibrium: If the
monopolist has costs $3, she charges $6 in the first period. If she has
costs $1, she charges $3.76 (1) in the first period. The entrant enters if
the monopolist charges anything above $3.76, based on beliefs u(p) = 1
for p> $3.76. The entrant stays out if the monopolist charges anything
let us be very clear about this. A sequential equilibrium describes what people do and what
they believe, both in and out of equilibrium. We aren't saying why they act as they do,
although we assume as part of the justification that they all are pretty sure how each will
act, and they all choose their actions optimally given their beliefs. Similarly, we aren't saying
why they believe what they do (out of equilibrium). We are only seeing whether beliefs
and intended actions are in equilibrium, which means that the intended actions are optimal.
If we are to have faith in a particular equilibrium, then we need to have some reason to
believe that individuals will see the prescribed actions as obvious ways to play the game,
and when we employ sequential equilibria, we essentially are supposing there is reason to
think the specified out-of-equilibrium beliefs describe what the players will find the obvious
beliefs to have. When we remark, as we did at the end of the previous paragraph, that
the beliefs conform to a sensible monotonicity property, we are imposing a partial test on the
reasonableness of supposed beliefs. But this is a pretty weak test, and if we are going to have
faith in this equilibritim, we will need either empirical evidence or some convincing story as
to why people will think and act as we are postulating. In this sense, what is demonstrated
here is the possibility or coherence of various sorts of entry deterrence; we would need some
other argument to assert that this is what will happen.
ee ree re ee A 1 SA ent A er 
13.2. An application: Entry deterrence 479
at or below $3.76, based on beliefs u(p) = 0 for p < $3.76. (If there is
entry, the two play according to the scheme outlined in step 1. If there
is no entry, the monopolist charges her monopoly price in the second
period.)
Why is this an equilibrium? First, the entrant is behaving optimally
given his beliefs, according to step 2. And those beliefs make sense given
the strategy of the monopolist; a first period price of $6 is a sure indication
that the monopolist has costs $3, while a first period price of $3.76 is a
sure indication that the monopolist has costs $1. The other prices are off
the path of play and so any beliefs will do; the ones we've selected even
have the appropriate monotonicity property.
So is the monopolist behaving optimally? Consider first the monop-
olist if her costs are $1. She would prefer to charge a higher price than
$3.76 in the first period, but that would attract entry. We leave to you the
task of showing that given the beliefs of the entrant for prices above $3.76
she prefers to keep the entrant out and sacrifice a bit of her first period
profits.
The more interesting case is the monopolist if her costs are $3. If she
follows the prescriptions above, she makes $6 (net of fixed costs) in the
first period and, after entry, $1 (net of fixed costs) in the second. She can
only forestall entry by charging a price of $3.76 or less, which forestalls
entry completely, and then she would make $6 in the second period. But
what does she make if she charges $3.76 in the first period? She makes $.76
per unit on sales of 5.24 units, or $3.98 gross and $.98 net of fixed costs.
This is just short of the $1 threshold needed to make forestalling entry
worthwhile, and we have an equilibrium. N.B., the level $3.76 is chosen
so that, if the monopolists marginal costs are $3, she just fails to prefer
to mimic the low-cost monopoly strategy of charging $3.76 and forestall
entry. ,
Intuitively, in this equilibrium the $1 monopolist to demonstrate con-
vincingly that she has $1 costs must charge a very low price in the first
period a price so low that the $3 monopolist would rather give up the
benefits of forestalling entry than take such low profits in the first period.
This is called a screening equilibrium because the two types of monopolist
are screened or separated by their first period actions. Note that in this
equilibrium entry occurs whenever it would have had there been complete
information about the monopolist's costs. The only thing that incomplete
information brings is a better deal for consumers in the first period, if
the monopolist has low costs the low-cost monopolist charges a low
price in order to prove she has low costs and (thereby) forestall entry
480 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
that would be forestalled if only she could reveal her cost structure to the
potential entrant. *
The objective of this example is not to analyze entry deterrence. The
model given is frightfully simple, and there is an enormous amount more
to the story. The point instead is the form of the model, where we use a
game of incomplete information, and then the style of analysis. In partic-
ular, note what is presumed by this simple model: The incumbent monop-
olist is aware of the uncertainty in the mind of the entrant, and (at least
in the case p < .598 and the monopolists costs are $3) the monopolist
uses this uncertainty to her own advantage. If we thought that the mo-
nopolist was uncertain what the entrant assessed, we would need a more
complex model. We might enrich the model as well by supposing that the
monopolist is uncertain about the entrant's fixed or marginal costs: Then
the monopolist would be unsure whether the price she charges will deter
entry, and she would update her assessment of the entrant's cost structure
if the entrant does enter. (And a higher-cost entrant would have a bit of
an incentive to enter insofar as this would mislead the monopolist into
believing that he is a lower-cost entrant.)
There are other ways we could think of enriching the model. An
obvious on is to suppose that the monopolist may be a bit of a dope 
unaware of the entrant's uncertainty about her cost structure, or unaware
that he will be watching her first period price to uncover that cost structure.
Such an unaware monopolist is not fully rational, at least in the sense that
she doesnt quite understand the full implications of her actions. So we
turn next to the question How would we model irrationality of this sort
and of others?
13.3. Modeling irrationality
Games of incomplete information can be used to model situations in
which one player assesses significant probability that another player is
irrational.
The key comes from identifying what we mean by irrational. To take
the simplest case first, we would call irrational any behavior in the game
that flies in the face of the player's own best interests as determined by
the player's payoffs. For example, consider the extensive form game given
in figure 13.3(a). Solved by backwards induction, we see that player 1
* We will discuss this in chapter 17, but you might think through how things would
change if the incumbent monopolist had the ability to reveal at no cost to herself the details
of her cost structure.
13.3. Modeling irrationality 481
1 A o 1 a
o> (1,-5)
D | s d
(4,4) 2,2) 3,3)
(a)
1 {7} .1
D 31% d
\, 2
44) 2,2) 5 (3,3)
{.3] 5 1
1 A 8 a -e a (0,5)
D | J d
1,4 ,2) -1,3)
(b)
Figure 13.3. Modeling irrationality.
should play d at her final node, hence 2 should play at his node, and
hence player 1 should play D. Suppose, however, that player 2 is concerned
that player 1 may for some reason be intending to play Aa. This could
be because of inattention on the part of player 1, or because player 1 is
malicious, or simply because player 1 has an irrational phobia about the
letter d. In particular, suppose that player 2 assesses probability .3 that this
player 1's behavior will be to begin with A and, if she gets the opportunity,
to continue with a despite 1's (apparent) payoffs.
How do we model this? Consider figure 13.3(b). We have created a
game of incomplete information containing two versions of the original
game, between which nature picks at the outset. In both versions, player
2's payoffs are exactly as in the original game. In the top version, player
1's payoffs are exactly as in the original game. But in the bottom version,
player 1 is given payoffs that make the play of Aa a strictly dominant
strategy. Notice how we do this: Fixing the strategy Aa for player 1,
for each terminal node in the tree, we count the number of information
sets of player 1 at which player 1 would have to deviate from the strat-
egy Aa to get us to that terminal node; 1's payoff is set at minus that
482 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
number. In this way, at any information set possessed by player 1 and
given any strategies player 1 supposes her opponents might choose, she
will always choose the appropriate part of the fixed strategy (Aa in this
case) as a strictly dominant choice.
Of course, there is more to the game in figure 13.3(b) than this. First,
nature picks between the two versions with probability .7 and .3. This
is intended to model player 2's initial assessment whether player 1 is ir-
rational or not. Player 1, at each of his information sets, knows which
version was selected; that is, player 1 knows whether she is irrational
or not. But player 2 at his information set isn't given this information.
The trick, then, is to model irrational behavior of a particular form
by creating uncertainty about the payoffs of the player who might be
irrational, where in states in which the player is modeled as irrational we
simply make up payoffs that force (by reason of dominance) the player
to act in the irrational manner. The player is told his own payoffs, so the
player knows when to act irrationally. And other players are kept in the
dark.
This is how we model irrationality of the form: The player takes a
particular course of action regardless of what other players do. Of course,
we could have multiple forms of irrationality of this sort for a single player
in a single game if player 2 assessed probability .2 that player 1 irra-
tionally plays Aa, .15 that player 1 irrationally plays Ad, 25 that player 1
irrationally plays D, and .5 that player 1 is rational, then we would look
at a game of incomplete information with four versions of the initial game.
In three, player 1 would be given payoffs that force her to play accord-
ing to the particular behavior being modeled, and in the fourth, player 1
would be given her original payoffs.
At the risk of beating the point to death, let me make a further ob-
servation about the nature of irrationality that we are modeling here. In
this particular game, a rational player 1 will always pick D. Yet in the pre-
ceding paragraph, I spoke of a model where player 2 assesses probability
25 that player 1 irrationally plays D. The distinction here is rationality
57g check your understanding of this rule, consider how it would work if we fixed 1's
strategy as Dd. You can check your answer by looking at the bottommost version of the
basic game in figure 134(c).
8 A more complicated situation is where there is uncertainty on the part of player 2 about
the rationality of player 1, although player 3 does happen to know that player 1 acts ra-
tionally. That would be modeled as follows: There is initial uncertainty about player 1's
payoffs, as in the example. Player 2 doesn't learn the resolution of that uncertainty and
player 1 does, as in the example. And, if we suppose that player 3 knows player 1's state of
mind, player 3 has the uncertainty resolved whenever player 3 has an opportunity to take
an action.
ot nie so
13.3. Modeling irrationality 483
is meant to connote behavior that is in accord with the originally given
payoffs, taking into account the predicted behavior of ones opponent(s).
Trrationality connotes, for the time being, behavior that is taken with-
out much thought or introspection. Now in this game it is fairly easy
to see that introspection by player 1, given that player 1's payoffs are as
originally described, leads to rational play of D. But we can and do want
to be able to model situations where player 1 might take action D either
because she engages in this sort of thought or because, say, she is averse
to the letter A. }
Hence, with caveats to be given momentarily, we see how to model
the notion that one player assesses positive probability that another player
might act in a particular fashion, regardless of what the rationally com-
puted best interests of the second player might be. What about other
forms of irrationality? Some are easily handled. For example, a player
might play to maximize the expected difference between his payoff and
that of his rival. It isnt clear that one should call this irrational; perhaps it
is better described as play according to a different set of preferences (hence
a different set of payoffs). But whatever you choose to call it, this is easily
modeled with a game of incomplete information. To take a slightly more
complex example, one player might assess positive probability that his op-
ponent plays to maximize the minimum payoff the second player might
receive. One could model this in a two-step procedure: First determine
what sort of strategy this criterion would lead to; and then enter that into
the model behaviorally, as we have done above. In general, we try to
reduce irrationality of any sort to behavior, so that we can use the sort of
model that has been described. In most cases, this will work. (See below
for particularly crafty ways to do this.)
The model in figure 13.3(b) implicitly makes other assumptions that
should be mentioned. Most importantly, it assumes that player 1 is aware
of player 2s uncertainty about player 1's rationality. Player 1, knowing
the structure of the game, is aware of the fact that player 2 assesses prob-
ability .3 that player 1 will play Aa as a strictly dominant strategy. Player
2 is aware of the fact that player 1 is aware of this, and so on. The model
closes with player 2s uncertainty. We can say two things about this:
(a) This knowledge held by player 1 is only conceivably of use to her
in the top half of the game in figure 13.3(b). That is, if nature picks
the bottom initial node, player 1 will pick Aa no matter what she be-
lieves player 2 is doing. So when we say that player 1 is aware of
player 2's uncertainties, we could rephrase this as: Player 1, if rational, is
aware of 2's uncertainties. The model formally has the irrational type of
484 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
player 1 knowing this as well, but the knowledge is irrelevant given 1's
payoffs.
(b) We could, of course, close the model further down the chain. That
is, we could have player 2 uncertain about 1's rationality, with a rational
player 1 uncertain about 2's assessment. Precisely the sort of model given
in figure 13.1(b) would be employed if we closed the model with: Player
1s assessment concerning player 2's assessment concerning player 1's ra-
tionality is known to player 2, etc. The same comment applies here as
applied (more generally) in the previous section: On theoretical grounds,
we dont need to close the model after any finite number of stages. But
on practical grounds, we will always look at models that do so.
Let us now change the payoffs and probabilities in figure 13.3 just
a bit to make a couple of final points. Consider first the game in figure
13.4(a). The difference is in player 1's payoff if player 1 chooses A followed
by & by player 2. The payoff 5 in this case means that player 1, playing
rationally according to the given payoffs, would happily choose A if she
thought that player 2 was going to respond with with high probability.
Of course, if player 2 is sure that player 1 is rational and will play d at
the final node, then player 2 chooses c:. In which case 1 should rationally
choose D. So the choice of A by player 1 seems irrational. So perhaps it
scares player 2 into 6. In which case the choice of A by 1 isn't irrational,
and player 2 shouldn't play 6. But then A is irrational, and so on.
How do we model this mess? By saying that player 2 isn't completely
sure at the outset that player 1 is rational, 2 entertains doubts at the start
whether player 1 will choose d at the final node. We could, for example,
hypothesize that player 2 assesses probability .1 at the outset that player 1
will irrationally play Aa, building the model shown in figure 13.4(b),
and proceed to analyze this.
The analysis of the game in figure 13.4(b) is a bit complex, and I
dont think one can conclude that the answer obtained from equilibrium
analysis is a clearly obvious way to play this game. But let us pursue this
analysis and see if it makes sense in the end.
To begin, note that in any equilibrium, player 1 in the bottom part
of the game will choose Aa by strict dominance. So we need only be
concerned with the play of player 1 in the top half of the game. Next,
note that the game has a pure strategy Nash equilibrium that isnt very
plausible: In this equilibrium, player 1 plays Aa in the top half of the
game (as well as in the bottom), and player 2 responds with 6. It is clear
why player 2 responds with ; he is going to get -5 if he gives the move
to player 1, regardless of which half of the game we are in. And then
13.3. Modeling irrationality 485
1 A 2 o 1 a
oO @ p (1 -5)
D 5 d
4 5,2) 3.3)
(a)
1 191 A a a
oe @ lp @ p= (1-5)
of Wad
(44) GAY G3)
1A Na La 0-5
) 5 d
(1,4) 02) 1,3)
(b)
1 151 A a a
0 @ 0p (1-5)
D 5 "2 d
44) G2 33)
1 \
1 oA Ly oe boa (0,-5)
0] IY d
14) 02% 13
14 A Na 1 a
or Qo (-J,-5)
D 5 d
04 (1,2) (1,3)
(c)
Figure 13.4. Modeling irrationality, continued.
player 1's strategy (in the top half) is optimal; given player 2 will choose
6, A is better than D, and the choice of a over d is irrelevant. But this
depends on player 1 choosing a in the top half of the game if given the
486 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
move, and it is implausible that given the move player 1 would actually
do that. Why take 1 when she can have 3? Or, in the language of Nash
refinements, the choice of a in the top half of the game isnt sequentially
rational. So we hereafter restrict attention to cases where player 1 plays d
in the top half of the game (and, of course, a in the bottom half).
Now suppose that player 2, given the move, assesses probability x
that he is in the top part of the game. If he chooses &, she gets 2 for
sure. Whereas if he chooses a, he gets 3 with probability px and -5 with
probability 1-4, foran expected utility of 3p5(1p) = 8u5. Comparing
this with the 2 he gets for sure from &, player 2 will choose for sure if
p < 7/8, he will choose a for sure if p > 7/8, and he is just indifferent
(and can play any mixed strategy at all) if p=7/8.
Suppose that the solution of the game is that he plays for sure. Then
player 1, realizing this, plays A in the top half of the game. This means
that player 2 should assess probability .9 that he is in the top half of the
game, given the move, which leads him to choose a for sure. This isn't
an equilibrium.
Suppose that the solution is that he plays a for sure. Then player 1
will optimally choose D in the top half of the game. But then if player 2
is given the move, he knows he is in the bottom half of the game, and he
chooses 6. This isnt an equilibrium either. :
So the only possible equilibrium (where 1 plays d in the top half of
the game) is where player 9 randomizes between and . For this to
be optimal, he must assess probability 7/8 that he is in the top half of
the tree, given the move. How can this happen? Suppose player 1in
the top half of the game randomizes between A and D, playing A with
probability 7. Then Bayes rule tells us that player 2, given the move,
assesses probability .9m/(.97 + 1) that he is in the top half of the tree. This
equals 7/8 if w= 7/9.
And what would allow a randomized strategy for 1 in the top half
of the tree to be optimal? Suppose that 2's strategy at his information set
is to play a with probability and with probability 1 . Then, in
the top half of the tree, player 1 nets 4 for sure if she plays D and 5 with
probability 1 or 3 with probability if she plays A. If $ =1/2, player 1
in the top half is indifferent between A and D.
What we have here is: Assuming 1 plays d in the top half of the tree,
there is no possibility of a pure strategy equilibrium. The only possible
equilibrium is where player 1 mixes in the top half between A and D
just enough so that player 2 is indifferent between a and , and player 2
mixes between and so that player 1 is just indifferent between A
and D. The appropriate mixing probabilities are computed above. You
13.3. Modeling irrationality 487
can decide for yourself whether this qualifies as a solution. But (always
with the reasonable presumption that 1 will play d in the top half of the
tree), it is the only possible candidate.
To help build your intuition, note that we get a very intuitive solu-
tion if we increase 2's initial assessment that 1 is irrational to .2, or if we
decrease the 5s at the rightmost terminal nodes to 10s. With either of
these changes, even if player 2 thinks that player 1 will choose A in the
top half of the game for sure, player 2 thinks the odds of a bad outcome
combined with the severity of that outcome if he picks a are too great;
he will pick 6 no matter what he thinks the rational sort of player 1 is
doing. And then player 1 in the top half of the game clearly wants to give
player 2 the opportunity to pick .
Let us next pursue a further elaboration on the game of figure 13.3. We
have supposed in figure 13.4(b) that player 2 is unsure about the character
of player 1 and that player 1 is aware of this (and in the previous analysis
tries to take advantage of this). Imagine that player 2 entertains the fol-
lowing more complex initial beliefs: There is probability .1, as before, that
player 1 will irrationally choose Aa. Otherwise, player 1 plays according
to the payoffs originally given. But there is an additional marginal prob-
ability 4 that player 1 is unaware of the fact that player 2 is uncertain of
player 1's character. With this 4 probability, player 1 thinks that player 2
thinks the game is precisely as in figure 13.3(a). And with probability .5,
player 1 is aware of player 2's uncertainty, including (now) the fact that
player 2 entertains three possibilities for player 1: the .1 chance that 1 is
irrational, the .4 chance that 1 is rational but naive, and the .5 chance
that 1 is rational and sophisticated about all this. How would we model
this?
One way to model this is to ask, How will the rationally naive player 1
act? This type of player 1 presumably views the situation as given by figure
13.4(a). If we conclude (and for purposes of argument, please so conclude)
that player 1, thinking that 13.4(a) describes the game, finds D the obvious
action to take, then we can build the sort of model shown in figure 13.4(c),
where the topmost version of the initial game represents the possibility
that player 1 is rational and sophisticated, the middle version represents
the possibility of player 1 irrationally playing Aa, and the bottom version
represents the possibility of a rationally naive player 1 a player who is
led by our assignment of payoffs to pick D as a dominant strategy.
This is how one might consider modeling players who are truly igno-
rant of the situation who attach zero probability to certain things that
other players think are in fact possible. We first look at the world through
the eyes of this type of player to try to discern what this players perspec-
488 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
7d A a J oa 9
ree Be
4) CEI CY
(1 bf og oo 1 0,-5)
D| 1 8 dl "1
(a 0 13)
Ly A o ; a
ot @ rp @~ (0,-1)
) of d |
1,0 00 C1
Figure 13.5. An extensive form game of incomplete information.
tive will lead to. And if we can find how that player will act, given his
view, we then build that into the larger game in just the way that we build
in simpler forms of irrationality.
This two-step (or, rather, multistep) procedure works in a large variety
of situations that one wishes to model. But there is another, more complex
way to get similar effects, which sometimes permits somewhat more general
models. This is to go back to the basic model of games with incomplete in-
formation and consider games in which (a) players may have different prior
distributions on the set of initial nodes, and (b) those priors may have differ-
ent supports. That is, one player thinks that certain initial nodes have zero
probability, while others think the game might well begin from one of those
nodes. Can you see how one would use this sort of model to capture the
story just told of the rational but naive player 1?
We have looked exclusively at examples where one Player is uncertain
about the rationality of a second, but the second has no questions about
13.4. More on refinements: Complete theories 489
the rationality of the first. This is done to keep matters simple. But it is
completely unnecessary. One can easily model situations where player 1
is unsure whether player 2 is rational and, at the same time, player 2 is
uncertain about the rationality of player 1. To test your ability to disen-
tangle this sort of model, consider the game depicted in figure 13.5 and
try to describe just what is being modeled here. (See problem 5 for some
more-pointed questions about this game.)
Note that what is called rational naivety is another form of irra-
tionality or, at least, limited rationality. It is a type of player who isn't
fully clued in to what might be going on a type of player who isn't
aware of all the possibilities entertained by another player.
13.4. More on refinements: Complete theories
This entire section is optional. Nothing that follows in the book builds on if,
and it may prove to be difficult reading for a first time through the subject.
Consider for a final time the game 12.1(0), which is reproduced here
as figure 13.6. What we know about this game is easily summarized: It
is dominance solvable. U strictly dominates R, and once R is removed, 1
weakly dominates r, leading to L-l as the solution. This is, of course, a Nash
equilibrium. But U-r is also a Nash equilibrium; U-r is even sequential. To
support the U-r equilibrium, 2's beliefs at her out-of-equilibrium information
set must put weight 1/4 or more on player 1 having picked R instead of I.
Are such beliefs at all plausible? We gave in chapter 12 two arguments,
one for and one against.
(1) Against these beliefs was the argument that R is dominated by U while L
is not. Put differently, given that 1 has the option U, she has no business at
all playing R; she cant possibly do better with R than with U. But there is a
reason she might play L, since there is the chance (if 2 responds with 1) that
she will do better with L than with U. Hence 2 ought to conclude, given
the move, that L was probably 1's choice, which mandates a response of L
(2) In favor of these beliefs was Myerson's properness criterion. One begins
by taking the perspective that out-of-equilibrium actions are mistakes 
Figure 13.6. An extensive form game.
490 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
trembles of the hand. And to this one adds the notion that the relative chance
of making a mistake should be related to how severe the mistake will be;
players are meant to be more attentive to avoiding mistakes the consequences
of which are more substantial. If player 2 is playing 1, then L by mistake is
a bigger mistake than R by mistake. Hence player 2 should conclude, given
the move, that 1 is more likely to have chosen R by mistake. And this leads
to 1 as the rational action.
Now these two arguments are not of equal substance. For one thing, the first
argument pins down the answer definitively. If you accept this argument, Li
is the only possible answer. The second argument is more circular, holding
that U-r cant be disqualified as a solution if it is a solution. That is to say,
in the second argument, L is a mistake in the first place only if one accepts
the premise that 2 will play r.
I am more interested, though, in a particular strength of the second
argument. That strength is that there is a story about why one might see
a deviation from the supposed solution, a story that is used to guide what
is considered a reasonable conjecture out-of-equilibrium. This story is quite
explicit: Deviations from a solution are the result of mistakes (the story of the
trembling hand), and, moreover, bigger mistakes are less likely than smaller
mistakes.
There isn't a similar story for the first argument, but it isnt hard to cre-
ate one. For example, note that there is a single Nash equilibrium in which
player 1 gives the move to player 2: L-1. Suppose that we tell the following
story. The players in this game are randomly matched. Most of the players
come from a society in which it is minderstood that the solution is what the
solution is. But a sprinkling of the players come from other societies, where
other solutions might prevail. Whenever an out-of-equilibrium action is
observed, the most likely explanation, if it fits at all, is that this action was
taken by someone from another society in which the game has another con-
ventional solution. If no explanation of this sort can be found, then the next
most likely explanation is that the out-of-equilibrium action is the result of a
mistaken action.
With this story, since L-1 is the only possible other conventional solu-
tion for this game, when player 2 is put on the move, he assesses as (condition-
ally) most likely the possibility that this is an action taken by someone from
a society where L-1 is the convention. But this then destroys the possibility of
U-r being a solution, by the argument given.
A different story that one can tell for the first argument is that out-of-
equilibrium actions are tests of out-of-equilibrium responses. Players are
assumed to be extremely certain what will happen if they follow convention
in situations where there is conventional wisdom; they are pretty sure as well
what happens if they deviate. But, just to check, players sometime experiment
with deviations from conventional wisdom. These experiments are not picked
haphazardly, however. Players are more likely to experiment with deviations
meme er
 Myerson's notion of properness goes a good deal further than this. It requires that a
13.4. More on refinements: Complete theories 491
that have some chance of beating what (they are virtually sure) will happen if
they follow conventional wisdom than with deviations that have no chance of
doing so. If the solution of this game is U-x, if player 2 believes that player 1
deviates from U on occasion to test the conventional wisdom that 2 will play 1,
and if player 2 believes that player 1 is more likely to experiment with L than
with R, since L holds some possibility of being better than U, then player 2
will not choose r given the move. And then Ur can't be the solution.
What is the point of these stories? In refining the notion of a Nash equi-
librium, we are necessarily thinking through what is relatively more likely to
have happened (and to happen subsequently) if the solution that is pro-
posed is falsified. In any real application, a given solution describes what
is pretty certain to happen. But it would be foolish (or, at least, heroic) to be
completely certain that a given sqlution applies. There are presumably rea-
sons why deviations occur. And if, in a particular context, we understand
something about the cause of deviations, we are better able to argue what
inferences players will make when confronted with a deviation. This, then,
informs the sort of refinement we might be willing to accept.
The term complete theory is meant to capture this sort of logic. By this
term is meant a theory that rules nothing out a priori; although it may lead
to certain things being assessed as very, very unlikely, it nonetheless offers
some explanation for why the very unlikely might happen. Trembling-hand
perfection is based on the complete theory of mistakes made in the course of
play. Alternative complete theories can be built out of stories of randomly
matched players from various societies or experimentation by players to check
conventional wisdom.
With this as prologue, let us reexamine the logic of subgame perfection
and sequential equilibrium. Consider the game in figure 13.7(a), a game
of complete and perfect information. By backwards induction, player 1 will
choose a at his second node, hence 2 will choose a, and hence 1 will choose A.
This is the unique subgame perfect equilibrium. But Da- is another Nash
equilibrium. This is an equilibrium, moreover, that is fairly safe for player 2.
What is the argument one would make against it being the solution of this
game?
If player 2 subscribes to the theory that deviations from a given solu-
tion are most likely to be simple mistakes, and if he further subscribes to
the theory (fairly explicit in trembling-hand perfection) that a mistake at one
information set has no bearing on the likelihood of subsequent mistakes at
subsequent information sets, then, if A is played by 1, he should shrug his
shoulders and assume that player 1 will (probably) choose action a given an-
other opportunity to choose, which then rules out as a reasonable choice
for him.
But let me suggest a different thought process for player 2 that leads
to a very different analysis. Suppose that he thinks there is a small chance
that his opponent is out to get him say one chance in one million but
enough chance so this possibility, whenever it is consistent with what he
J This is the subject of current research, by Suehiro (1989) in the first case and by Fuden-
smaller mistake be asymptotically infinitely more Tikely than a larger mistake. We dont need
quite that much power here. berg and Kreps (1989) in the second.
492
Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
A o
1 2 1 a
oO @ @-1p (3,3)
od
(1,1.5) 02) (2-5)
(a)
A o
1.999999} o
a
e (3,3)
1 .
| J ! |
\ 2
(1,1.5) 02 % (2,-5)
A o
{.000001} o
* a
 o = (33)
1
(-1.5,1.5) 2,2) (5,5)
(b)
Figure 13.7. Two extensive form games.
~
observes, is deemed more likely than the chance that his opponent has made .
an inexplicable error. We can think through the consequences of this sort
of thought process by looking at a game of incomplete information, such
as the game in figure 13.7(b). Note what we have done here. We've taken
the game in figure 13.7(a) and imagined that nature initially selects one of
two versions. In the first, player 1's motivations are captured by the orig-
inally given payoffs. But in the second, which has prior probability .000001,
player 1's payoff is simply minus the payoff of player 2; player 1 is out to
get player 2. }
Now suppose that player 2 believes the solution to the game is proba-
bly that player 1 plays D, player 2 if given the move plays , and player 1
if given the move by 2 will intend to play a. This is probably the solution
in the sense that it is meant to describe 1's actions in the very likely case that
player 1 isn't out to get player 2. But if player 1 is out to get player 2 (which
is very unlikely), then player 1 will play A and, given the chance, d. oo
If this is how player 2 views the game, his view passes the equilibrium
test of internal consistency. In the first place, if he is given the move by
player 1, and if he thinks that the one-in-a-million chance that 1 is out to get
him is more likely than the chance that 1 has simply erred, then he will assess
substantial a posteriori probability that he faces a malicious player 1. (More
precisely, he will assess probability exceeding one-half that the bottom part of
the game pertains.) Thus his ex post expectations are that player 1, given the
13.4. More on refinements: Complete theories 493
chance to move again, is now more likely to choose d than a. And so he pru-
dently (and optimally) selects . Moreover, assuming player 1 understands
all this, D in the top half and A in the bottom are optimal moves for her.
Of course, the game in figure 13.7(b) possesses another equilibrium. In
this equilibrium, player 1 plays A in both halves of the game, player 2 plays
a, and player 1 plays a in the top half and d in the bottom half. Note why
it is that player 2 is content to play in this case. Since player 1 is meant to
play A in both halves of the tree, player 2's assessment upon being given the
move is that he is in the top half of the tree with probability .999999. There is
a one-in-a-million chance that, if he plays , 1 will respond with d. But this
isn't nearly a large enough chance to'make a better choice.
I do not mean to say that the equilibrium in which 2 plays is the
obvious solution. But in this game of incomplete information, one would be
hard pressed to dismiss the 2-plays- equilibrium as something unreasonable.
And so, if this sort of model of incomplete information fleshes out the thought
process of player 2 in the game in 13.7(a) concerning where deviations come
from, then I dont think one can so easily dismiss the 2-plays- equilibrium
in 13.7(a) on grounds that it is subgame imperfect. It comes down to What
sort of theory does player 2 have about the source of deviations when/if
they occur? The story formalized by 13.7(b) is to my mind neither more
nor less outrageous than the story of hands that tremble independently at
different information sets. And while independently trembling hands lead
to refinements such as subgame perfection and sequential equilibrium, other
stories can lead to something less.
The sophisticated reader may object to the argument just given on the
following grounds: The strategy specified at any information set is meant to
be ones prediction about what will happen if that information set is reached.
If an information set is off the path of play, then the strategy specified there
should be conditional on the deviation having occurred. And as long as the
right (conditional) strategy is there, then we can have no grounds for doubting
that players should anticipate the play of this strategy. One cannot maintain
in the analysis of the game of 13.7(a) that the play of action a at 1's second
information set is expected and that player 2 is nonetheless reasonable in the
choice of when it is his move.
To this objection I plead guilty, but only on grounds of expositional ease.
What I want to claim is that in the game in figure 13.7(a) it is not so easy to
reject the subgame imperfect equilibrium where player 1 chooses D, 2 chooses
6, and 1, given the choice again, plays, say, a with probability .1 and d with
probability .9. Rejecting this equilibrium is not so easy because the source
of deviations might be an a priori small chance of a malicious player 1;
where the chance that player 1 plays A because she is malicious is nine times
more likely than the chance that player 1 plays A by mistake. (The nine times
then explains the .1 probability, if we consider a still more complex game
of incomplete information in which nature not only gave us a chance of a
malicious player 1 but also a nine times smaller chance of a player 1 who
mistakenly plays A.)
In this sort of theory, subgame perfection and sequential equilibrium
come to grief in the requirement of sequential rationality (or backwards
494 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality ! 13.4. More on refinements: Complete theories 495
induction) applied at information sets that follow a deviation from the equi- !
librium. At least, this is so for the actions of a given player taken subsequent 1 0 A 2 a
. tae . fp 1 } pe @ (3,3,0)
to his own deviation, when one explains the first deviation by the possibility D | d
that the player has radically different payoffs from those specified as being ; 3 |
that the player has dial ifr py Bo me LY oy
What precisely do we get as a reasonable refinement concept, if we use | 4 R L R
this sort of story to explain unlikely deviations from equilibrium play when
they occur? 1 will not attempt to give a precise answer here. For one thing, \ 0871 804 (193 912)
we are now well past what is reasonable for a first course on this subject and |
to explore this question fully would take us right to the frontiers of current t
research and beyond. And more importantly, this question doesnt have an
answer that I, at least, find fully satisfactory. But let me give a partial answer
Figure 13.8. An extensive form game.
for which the intuition is not hard to develop. In any game, any equilibrium would tt : oo \ .
outcome that is trembling-hand perfect in the normal form will certainly pass ! uilib expect 0 se this player con g to follo w the dictates of this other
outcc \ fe | eq rium, at least until this player gets some indication that his theory of
if this sort of story is used to explain deviations. Once a player begins to how to play is wrong. : ty
deviate, with this sort of story one can have any ex post beliefs about further ow fo pay is Wrong But why should the deviator necessarily be the
party with an incorrect theory? In a more-than-two player game, if you see
deviations by the player. In other words, players tremble at the level of entire
strategies, which is just normal form perfection. Of course, perfection in the
normal form doesnt imply subgame perfection or sequentiality that is the
whole point. ?
One needn't stop here, however. One can spin stories about the causes
or sources of out-of-equilibrium play that rationalize equilibrium outcomes
that are not even perfect in the normal form. For example, imagine stories
one player deviating from what you suppose is the equilibrium, then perhaps
you should entertain the possibility that your theory of how people play this
game is wrong, and (in consequence) others will play in ways you didnt
predict.
Tt is important in all this that one maintains the hypothesis that players
have consensus conjectures concerning the play of others, both in and out of
equilibrium. Or, rather, this hypothesis is important if the solution concept
JPR
as above, where out-of-equilibrium play is manifestation of very different : to be employed is Ni qe . !
payoffs for the players (so that sequential rationality out-of-equilibrium is ! game in Foe ns ash equilibrium. To take a simple example, consider the
not a tenable requirement), arid where one adds the possibility that different Yi Lo . .
> , s ) ou can quickly verify: No matter what action player 3 takes at hi
players payoffs are correlated. (Why might this be true? Insofar as players : information set, one of players 1 or 2 will choose to ive her he ove ao fost
come from similar backgrounds, if one player acts in irrational fashion, that i A-a is not a Nash equilibrium outcome. But if player 1 thinks pla or 2 will
could indicate that his or her peers are more likely to do so.) Then if we see choose a and that player 3 will probably choose L, then 1 SN D. And
one player deviating from the solution, we might increase the odds that i if player 2 thinks player 1 will choose A and player 3 will probably oom X
others will not conform to the dictates of sequential rationality. Indeed, if we then he prefers a. If we allow players to have divergent opinions about wh :
tell stories (admittedly farfetched) about how players don't necessarily have } might happen out of equilibrium, we can get ton that " 2
the best possible information about their own payoffs, so that they look to Nach. We saw a related phenomenon EE er 12 in he aren even
others behavior for some indication as to what they should do, then virtually game with a single Nash equilibrium that ( assert) is rarely layed partial
any Nash equilibrium can be rationalized. ; colutions fo a given game may be present, and thous ceeiiit ; &
Or. without telling stories about small chances that players have rad- : bp se needn't pass the test
. / out telling 5 : ! player of Nash. The point here is that if there is consensus only on what happens
jcally different payoffs, one can tell different stories that lead to correlated along the path of play, then we h nl : .
RK oe . } Pp play, ave only a partial solution, and the Nash
conjectures about out-of-equilibrium play. Recall the stories sketched above criterion is no longer a necessary condition
that ran: A deviation from expected play is taken as an indication that the } So what is the bottom line for x efinements of Nash equilibrium? The
player deviating 15 playing some other equilibrium. Needless to say, we philosophy espoused here can be paraphrased as: The bottom line is that
 ee } there is no simple bottom line. In refinin, PR : :
91 am careful here to say that any equilibrium outcome that is trembling hand perfect in ) about what is supposed to happen after me that the on 5
the normal form can be rationalized. In the game in figure 13.7(a), if we are being precise, we ! is incorrect. Depending on why you (and the players involved) gong 4
would say that what can be rationalized by this story is & combined with D and a mixture : deviations from a prior likely play and wh Rod think one sees
of d and a that puts substantial weight on d. But if we move to the normal form, we don't } Pp . y play wha 5 por tends about future play,
really distinguish between 1's strategies Da and Dd. So, from the perspective of normal form one supp orts or diminishes the relevance of particular formal refinements.
perfection, it is D-6 that is perfect. : } Since the appropriate story is apt to be specific to the context (and, especially,
bh To see these two stories fleshed out, see Fudenberg, Kreps, and Levine (1988) on the _
subjects of personal types and general elaborations, respectively. + i See Hillas (1987) and Suehiro (1989).
er mr
to depend on why one thinks that there is a solution in the first place), it
seems fruitless to try to choose among refinements in the abstract.
The usual rejoinder to this philosophy is that the implicit criticism is
misplaced. The problem is not with the solution concept, but instead with the
model of the game that is used. If there are reasons why unexpected actions
might be taken, then the thing to do is to include those reasons within the
model, using incomplete information. Once these things are modeled directly,
we don't need refinements tuned to particular stories of why unexpected
actions take place. And then there is no reason not to think that a universal
solution concept might be available. :
I take the main point of the rejoinder to be that the way to understand the
effects of various hypothesized causes of unexpected actions is to build more
complete models using incomplete information. I fully agree; that is precisely
what we've done here. However completing the model in an application
may well be impractical, and so it may be of practical value to have handy
refinements that are well tuned to various sorts of completions. As a practical
matter, one may need to select the refinement used with a view towards what
has been omitted from the model for reasons of tractability.
13.5. Bibliographic notes
The classic paper that introduces the notion of a game of incomplete
information'is Harsanyi (1967-1968). Harsanyi deals primarily with mod-
els where players begin with commonly held priors. This is certainly as
befits the author of the so-called Harsanyi doctrine that priors should al-
ways be held in common; in fact this is the application for which that
doctrine was first formulated. The notion of a game with incomplete in-
formation where players have different priors, or even priors that have
different supports, is attributed by Harsanyi to Selten, although I do not
have a reference I can give. For the question of how to close models
with incomplete information but with infinite regresses of assessments, the
original reference is Mertens and Zamir (1985). A recent paper by Bran-
denburger and Dekel (1985) may be relatively more accessible. (The word
relative is important to stress; this is a very mathematical subject, and no
treatment will be accessible unless your math skills are very high.)
I think the best way to get a feel for how models of games of incom-
plete information are constructed and used is to look at applications. In
section 13.2, we discussed the example of entry deterrence, which is an
excellent place to begin. See the seminal work of Milgrom and Roberts
(1982) on this. Many other applications fall under the general rubric of
market signaling; see chapter 17 for references. Problems in mechanism
design also use games of incomplete information; see the references given
in chapter 18.
nr i en cri ie
mir ee lps
ees
13.5. Bibliographic notes 497
The topic of entry deterrence in general is summarized in Tirole (1988).
As for the philosophy of refinements of Nash equilibrium, please un-
derstand that this is a highly contentious issue, and the philosophy I've
espoused is far from the consensus point of view. The point of view taken
here is further developed in Fudenberg and Kreps (1989), Kreps (1989),
and Kreps and Ramey (1987). Fudenberg, Kreps, and Levine (1988) devel-
ops the appropriate mathematics for stories of radically different payoffs
with small probability (and the connection to trembling-hand perfection in
the normal form), although the results there are couched in somewhat dif-
ferent language. Reny (1988) independently arrives at this conclusion, in
language more directly applicable to the problem as posed here. McLen-
nan (1985), Hillas (1987) and, especially from the point of view of complete
theories, Suehiro (1989) develop stories about refinements based on the no-
tion that players may have mistaken theories about how to play. Of course,
Selten (1975) and Myerson (1978) began this subject with the development
of the deviations-as-trembles story. Finally, Kohlberg and Mertens (1986)
and Mertens (1987) present a very different view of the entire subject.
References
Brandenburger, A., and E. Dekel. 1985. Hierarchies of Beliefs and Com-
mon Knowledge. University of California at Berkeley. Mimeo.
Fudenberg, D. and D. Kreps. 1989. A Theory of Learning, Experimentation,
and Equilibrium in Games. Stanford University. Mimeo.
Fudenberg, D., D. Kreps, and D. Levine. 1988. On the Robustness of
Equilibrium Refinements. Journal of Economic Theory 44:354-80.
Harsanyli, J. 1967-1968. Games with Incomplete Information Played by
Bayesian Players, I, II, and IIL. Management Science 14:159-82, 320-34,
486-503.
Hillas, J. 1987. Sequential Equilibria and Stable Sets of Beliefs. Stanford
University. Mimeo.
Kohlberg, E., and J.-F. Mertens. 1986. On the Strategic Stability of Equi-
libria. Econometrica 54:1003-38.
Kreps, D. 1989. Out-of-equilibrium Beliefs and Out-of-equilibrium Be-
haviour. In The Economics of Missing Markets, Information, and Games,
E H. Hahn, ed., 7-45. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kreps, D., and G. Ramey. 1987. Structural Consistency, Consistency, and
Sequential Rationality. Econometrica 55:1331-48.
McLennan, A. 1985. Justifiable Beliefs in Sequential Equilibrium. Ecoro-
metrica 53:889-904.
498 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality -
Mertens, J.-F. 1987. Ordinality in Noncooperative Games. CORE, Uni-
versit Catholique de Louvain. Mimeo.
Mertens, J.-E, and S. Zamir. 1985. Formulation of Bayesian Analysis
for Games with Incomplete Information. International Journal of Game
Theory 10:619-32.
Milgrom, F., and J. Roberts. 1982. #1 imit Pricing and Entry Under Incom-
plete Information: An Equilibrium Analysis. Econometrica 50:443-59.
Myerson, R. 1978. Refinements of the Nash Equilibrium Concept. Inter-
national Journal of Game Theory 7:73--80.
Reny, P. 1988. Backward Induction, Normal Form Perfection, and Expli-
cable Equilibria. University of Western Ontario. Mimeo.
Selten, R. 1975. Re-examination of the Perfectness Concept for Equilib-
rium Points in Extensive Games. International Journal of Game Theory
4:25-55.
Suehiro, H. 1989. On Mistaken Theories Refinements. Ph.D. diss., Stanford
University.
Tirole, J. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
13.6. Problems
2 1. (a) Consider the version of the beer-quiche game given in figure
13.1(a). What is its normal form, if we think of it as a two-player game?
Parts (b), (c), and (d) to be done precisely require you to know the formal defini-
tion of Myerson's proper equilibrium, something we have refrained from giving
here. You may wish to find that definition in one of the references given here;
alternatively, you can get the gist of this problem using only. the informal char-
acterization we gave, which states that a player should be relatively much less
likely to make a bad mistake than one that is not so bad.
(b) Following remarks we made in subsection 12.7.4, a natur sequential
equilibrium for this game is for player 1 to have beer for breakfast whether
she is a coward or brave, for player 2 to avoid a fight if he observes 1
having beer for breakfast, and for him to pick a fight if he observes 1
having quiche for breakfast. Using the two-player game normal form you
created in part (a) is this equilibrium proper in the sense of Myerson?
If we viewed this as a three-player game (the three players being 1 the
coward, 1 brave, and 2), would this equilibrium be proper? (To answer
eee cle ne
cm
rte
ee perereces mats 3 nn +
rth sme
a
rong ee om
i
13.6. Problems 499
this, you will have to consider what the payoffs are to 1 the coward if
nature selects the bottom half of the game to start. Does your choice of
payoffs for 1 the coward in the bottom half matter to the answer?)
() Suppose we rescaled the payoffs of player 1 in the top half of the tree
only by multiplying each payoff by a factor of 50. That is, the payoffs if 1
is a coward, 1 has quiche, and 2 fights become (50,1). Note that we dont
rescale 2's payoffs, and we dont change 1's payoffs in the bottom half of
the tree. Does this sort of rescaling change in any way the strategic nature
of the game? (There is no right or wrong answer to this question. The
quality of your answer turns on how well you defend the position you
take and not necessarily on which position you decide to defend.) After
completing this rescaling is the equilibrium described in part (b) proper in
the sense of Myerson? (To answer this, you have to decide whether you
think of this as a two- or as a three-player game.)
(d) Can you find an equilibrium of this game that gives the same outcome
as the equilibrium in part 1, such that no matter how we rescale the payoffs
of player 1 in either half of the tree, the equilibrium is and remains proper
in the sense of Myerson, viewing this as a two-person game? (When you
have the answer to this question, you have an important example to carry
around in your head if ever you study stability in the sense of Kohlberg
and Mertens.)
Problem 2 gives a standard sort of story on entry deterrence based on an action
taken by the incumbent monopolist that makes her more aggressive postentry.
There are many stories of this sort; for others, see Tirole (1988).
= 2. Consider an industry with an incumbent monopolist, who is currently
producing, and a potential entrant, who might or might not choose to
enter. '
There is a range of possible production technologies for producing this
good, which differ in the level of marginal and fixed costs. Each technol
ogy is a constant marginal cost technology with marginal cost somewhere
between 1 and 3 per unit. In the technology with marginal cost (from
the range from 1 to 3), fixed costs are 154c. That is, lower marginal costs
bring with them higher fixed costs. Any firm in this industry may choose
whatever technology it wishes to employ, but it can make this choice once
only. The choice of technology of any firm is known to all potential and
actual competitors.
We imagine that there are two periods of production. In each, demand
is given by D(P)=9P. In the first period, the incumbent monopolist
500 Chapter thirteen: Incomplete information and irrationality
is definitely a monopolist. The monopolist begins this period by select-
ing her production technology and then producing. In the second period,
the entrant decides whether to enter at all. If he does enter, he picks
his production technology. And then the two compete Cournot-style, si-
multaneously picking quantities. If he does not enter, then the monopolist
retains her monopoly and picks the quantity she wishes to sell. We assume
that the entrant will enter only if he believes he will make positive profits,
and the incumbent monopolist acts in a way that maximizes her sum of
profits in the two periods. (Adding a discount factor only complicates the
arithmetic.)
(a) Suppose there was no threat of entry. What technology would the
monopolist select?
(b) Suppose the monopolist selects the technology you got as the answer
to part (a). Will the entrant enter? If so, with which technology?
(c) If the monopolist, in the first period, picks a technology that discourages
the entrant from entering in the second period, we say that the monopolist
has blockaded entry. Is there a technology the monopolist could pick in the
first period that would blockade entry? If so, what range of technologies
accomplishes this?
(d) Given the threat of entry, what is the optimal course of action for
the monopolist? How does the entrant respond to this? (What solution
concept are you using?)
= 3. Analyze the game depicted in figure 13.3(b). Assuming this model
describes the situation, do you think you can clearly predict what will
happen?
m4. (a) Contrast the analysis of the entry deterrence game in section 13.2
with the analysis of the game in figure 13.4(b). In what senses are the two
games similar? How are they different?
(b) Analyze the game depicted in figure 13.4(c). Assuming this model
describes the situation, do you think you can make any clear prediction
concerning what will happen?
m 5. Consider the extensive form game depicted in figure 13.5.
(a) Would it make any difference to the analysis of this game if we removed
the information set of player 2 that links the topmost and bottommost
pieces of the tree? If so, what difference? If not, are there information sets
of player 1 that are similar candidates for removal?
se an emia Amo
13.6. Problems 501
(b) Analyze the prior distribution over the four possible initial nodes. Sup-
pose we say that player 1 is rational if one of the top two of these initial
nodes prevails, and player 2 is rational if one of the middle two initial
nodes prevails. Is there correlation in the rationality of the two players?
Is the correlation positive or negative?
 Analyze this game. Assuming this model describes a particular situa-
tion, do you think you can clearly predict what will happen?
em rors tme o 
chapter fourteen
Repeated play:
Cooperation and reputation
1 begin this chapter with an apology. More than in any other chapter, in
this one the text will constantly be shifting between larger and smaller
type. The reader who consumes only the larger type should be able to
get the flavor of the basic ideas here, but this is a subject that from start
to end is best appreciated by seeing at least a bit of how things are done
formally and properly. Rather than reserve all the technical material for
the back, which would mean repeating a lot of what was said in the front, 1
have elected to frustrate the nontechnical reader who will often be paging
through to find the next group of large type. I hope this frustration will
induce some readers to try to consume the entire chapter, which should be
possible if you understand appendix 2. But to those for whom it doesnt,
apologies.
14.1. The prisoners dilemma
The one game from figure 12.1 that has yet to be discussed is the
game in figure 12.1(m), reproduced here as figure 14.1. This game is called
the prisoners dilemma. The story that goes with it runs as follows. Two
individuals, player 1 and player 2, are being held by the police in separate
cells. The police know that the two (together) committed a crime but
lack sufficient evidence to convict. So the police offer to each of them
separately the following deal: Bach is asked to implicate her partner. If
neither does so, then each gets no time in jail. If each implicates the other,
then each goes to jail for a while. If one implicates the other but is not
implicated, the first gets off (and gets a greater share of the loot), while
the one implicated goes to jail for a longer period of time. Each player
ranks the four possible outcomes: It is best to implicate your associate and
not be implicated (so you get the greater share of the loot). Next best
Player 2
tl 2
sl| 55 | -38
g
~ s2| 8-3 | 00
Figure 14.1. The prisoners dilemma.
is not to implicate and not to be implicated (to avoid jail). Then comes
implicating and being implicated (a short jail term). And worst of all is
to be implicated while not implicating your associate (a long jail term). If
we let s1 and t1 be the do not implicate strategies and s2 and t2 be the
implicate strategies, then the normal form game depicted in figure 14.1
is consistent with this story. (Of course, by giving payoffs we have been
much more specific about the relative utilities of the various outcomes).
In the sequel, we will refer to the strategies s1 and t1 as cooperation (with
each other and not with the police), while for s2 and t2, terms synonymous
with noncooperation will be used.
While the story is fanciful, the basic structure of options and payoffs
that characterize this game occur over and over in economics. In this ba-
sic structure players can cooperate to greater or to lesser extent. If one
player unilaterally decreases the level of her cooperation, she benefits and .
her rival is made worse off. But if both decrease their level of cooper-
ation equally, both are made worse off. Consider, for example, the case
of Cournot duopolists, each (independently) choosing a quantity level to
bring to market. Typically, if one firm increases its production (which is
a less cooperative strategy), its profits increase, at least for a while, and
the profits of its rival decrease. But (past the monopoly level of output) if
both firms increase their levels of output, both do worse. We'll get back
to this particular economic application in section 14.4.
The analysis of the prisoners dilemma game using noncooperative
game theory seems quite simple: s2 strictly dominates s1, and {2 strictly
dominates t1. So the solution by application of one round of strict dom-
inance is s2-t2. Of course, this is also the unique Nash equilibrium. It
does seem rather a shame that this happens, because this outcome is quite
inefficient. (That is, there is an outcome, namely s1-t1, that is better for
both sides.) It may not be surprising that competition of this sort can lead
to inefficient outcomes, but you might still wonder how this particular
inefficiency can be avoided.
14.2. The folk theorem 505
14.2. Repeating games can yield cooperation:
The folk theorem
Imagine that the jail sentence involved is quite short (it was only a
petty theft), and the two prisoners will be engaged in this circumstance
over and over again. That is, imagine that the players play the game
not once but repeatedly, and payoffs are added together. This situation
has been the subject of experiments. College sophomores (typically) are
matched against one another; instead of playing the game once, they are
told that they will play the game many times, with no fixed horizon in
view. As long as they don't see a horizon looming, the empirical evidence
is that such subjects often cooperate (play s1-t1). The explanation that
is typically given for this lack of short-run optimality is that in repeated
play there is the long run to worry about as well. If, say, player 1 tries
to take advantage of player 2 in the short run by playing s2 instead of
sl, player 2 might react to this by subsequently playing t2 instead of t1.
Player 1 may feel there is less to gain by optimizing in the short run than
to lose in the long run and so chooses to cooperate. If player 2 feels the
same way, cooperation ensues. Note well that this is not cooperation borne
of altruism or fondness for ones fellow player. This is cooperation arising
from a self-interested calculation of the benefits and losses that may accrue
from polite behavior.
Formal analysis of this point involves what are called repeated games.
Imagine two players playing the prisoners dilemma game over and over
again. We could imagine that they play forever and their payoffs for the
entire string of games are just the average of the payoffs they get in each
stage. That is, if player 1's payoffs in a sequence of rounds are given
by {ui(1),4(2),4(3),...}, where the subscript refers to the player's iden-
tity and the argument to the round number, then we could assign over-
all payoff lim; ,oo(1/8) 35 u(3) to this sequence. Or we could imag-
ine that they play forever, and they value a stream of payoffs according
to the discounted sum of the payoffs. That is, there is some number
a (0,1) and the overall value to Player 1 of the sequence of payoffs
{ui (D), % (2), 4; (3), .. is 3070 fu). Or, to take a third possibility, we
could imagine that the game is played a finite but indefinite number of
times. For example, we could imagine that after each round of play a
 The very careful reader ma i imi
on y wonder what happens if the limit doesnt exist. To avoid
this difficulty, formal analysis of this problem is based on the criterion that the stream of
rewards {m@, (2), w1(3),...} is better than the stream of rewards {uf(D), wl(2),u{(3),...}
if lim inf, Doin [ur () wi] > 0.
506 Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
roulette wheel is spun. If it comes up 0 or 00 (2 chances in 38) we quit;
otherwise we play another round and spin the wheel another time, and
so on. Being a bit more general, we let 1 be the probability that we
stop after each round and g be the probability that we continue for at
least one more round. Then, the expected value of the sequence of pay-
offs {ur (1),u1(2), uw); -- .} for player 1 is yo guy (9). For o,1),
assuming players maximize their expected sums of payoffs, this is math-
ematically equivalent to the formulation with discounting where takes
the place of a. These are all variations of the general notion of a superganme,
wherein a particular game called the stage game is played over and over by
two (or more) players. There is a rich literature concerning supergames for
both the first and the second two (equivalent) formulations of the problem.
We will deal in this chapter primarily with the second two formulations,
referring to the sums that give a player's payoff for an entire game as the
 expected|discounted value of the stream of payoffs.
What happens if we go from a one-round prisoners dilemma to this
sort of repeated formulation? Just what we wanted: Cooperation becomes
an equilibrium outcome. Suppose that player 1 announces she will play
s1 as long as player 2 plays t1. But if ever player 2 plays t2, player 1 will
forever aftef play s2. Player 2, if he believes this, finds it easy to formulate
a best tesponse. As long as tl is played, a payoff of 5 each period will
result. This gives a stream of payoffs of 5 extending into the future, which
has expected /discounted value 5/(1-q). But if player 2 begins with t2 .
this round, he will get 8 immediately and (at most) 0 forever after. For
reasonable values of (in this case for anything over 3/8), player 2 has
no incentive to play t2 in this round. And, a bit of arguing will show, for
these values of g player 2 never has any incentive to play t2. To have an
equilibrium we must also give player 1 the incentive to play the strategy
above, but this is easily accomplished. Have player 2 announce that he
will play tl as long as s1 is played, but he will play t2 ever after, if ever
player 1 is foolish enough to try s2.
The point is that these two strategies by player 1 and player 2 consti-
tute a Nash equilibrium in the repeated game. Each is a best response to
the other. And together they give the cooperative outcome.
There are (at least) four problems with this simple story.
b The easiest formal proof shows that each strategy is unimprovable in the sense of ap-
pendix A2 when played against the other. See the end of the next subsection for a slightly
more complex example worked out formally.
 These two strategies do not, however, constitute a subgame perfect equilibrium. Starting
from the point where one player, say player 1, has just played noncooperatively, player 2 will
respond with noncooperation. But according to the strategies given, player 1 will not revert
to permanent noncooperation for one round more even though she knows that he is about
14.2. The folk theorem 507
(1) Too many equilibrium outcomes
We have produced one Nash equilibrium for this repeated game. But
there are many, many others. Suppose, for example, that player 1 an-
nounces the following strategy. She will alternate between sl and s2 as
long as player 2 plays 1 all the time. But if ever player 2 deviates and plays
2, player 1 will play s2 forever after. The effect of this is to offer player 2
the choice of getting payoffs of 5 alternating with 3 forever, or (at best)
taking one 8 and 0s afterwards. For high enough g, the cooperative
response is better. This allows us to construct an equilibrium as long as
player 2 issues a threat that keeps player 1 honest; e.g, player 2 says that
he will play t1 as long as player 1 alternates sl and s2, but player 2 will
play t2 forever after a deviation from this alternating strategy by player 1.
Or consider the following pair of strategies: Player 1 says that she will
alternate s1 and s2 as long as player 2 does the same, but if ever player 2
deviates, then she will play s2 forever, and the same for player 2. Again,
for close enough to one, we have an equilibrium, where the players
get alternating 5s and 0s (or, if they are out of sync, 8s and 3s). Both
sides are worse off in this equilibrium than with the first equilibrium we
named, but this is nonetheless an equilibrium, as is the situation where
both players play s2-t2 all the time.
- The problem in the repeated game formulation is a profusion of equi-
libria. Just what is possible as an equilibrium? We know we couldn't have
an equilibrium where player 1 or player 2 came away with less than zero
expected value. Why? Because by playing s2 or t2, each can guarantee
that she or he will get at least that much. But their opponent can hold
them to no more and can threaten to use this as a punishment. So, roughly,
any pair of payoffs that is feasible and gives each player more than zero
apiece can be sustained in an equilibrium. This statement is completely
correct in the infinite horizon, undiscounted formulation. For discounting
or a finite but indefinite horizon, we need to amend it slightly. A result
where one player is left too close to the value zero cannot be sustained in
an equilibrium. Each must have enough stake in maintaining the equilib-
rium so a one-stage defection (followed forever after by zeros) isn't better
than carrying through on the agreement.
to play noncooperatively. To make the strategies subgame perfect, amend them as follows:
Each player will play cooperatively as long as both have played cooperatively in the past.
But if either ever plays noncooperatively, each plays noncooperatively for the rest of the game.
d (1) We continue to name strategies that aren't quite subgame perfect, and the technically
proficient reader may wish to fix this. (2) We say for close enough to one repeatedly.
How close? See problem 1, and see as well the material at the end of this subsection.
This result, which is fairly obvious when you think about it, has been
given for general repeated games. Roughly put, the general result says
that any feasible expected payoffs can be sustained in an equilibrium as
long as each player has expected payoff at least as large as what that
player can guarantee for herself even if all the other players gang up on
her. The proof of this proposition is really quite simple. Each player is
told by the others to stick to the agreement or everyone will gang up on
her. Then no single player, acting alone, has any incentive to deviate; the
condition necessary for a Nash equilibrium. This result is known as the
folk theorem, so-called because its statement belongs to the folk literature
of game theory; no one has been brash enough to claim it, since it seems
to have been well-known long before it appeared in print.
To be precise, suppose we are given an I player normal form game as
the stage game, where player has a finite set 5; of strategies and where the
payoff to player i at the strategy profile (si, ..., ss) is given by ui(si,..., sz).
Let X; be the space of mixed strategies of player and define u:(o1,...,0;)
to be the expected payoff to player 1 if players play the mixed strategy profile
{o1,...,01). For each player i, define
"y= min max ui{o1,...,0i_1, 5, Gist, eer, OL).
wl
CTRL FPL SINS IT]
.
Note carefully how this is defined. We fix the mixed strategies of all the
players except 1, and we find player i's best response to those. Then we
minimize i's payoff over the selection of the strategies of the other players.
This is called player i's minmax value.
Imagine that the players play this normal form game over and over again,
where after each round of play the actions chosen by each are known. Roughly
put, the folk theorem states that players can achieve in a Nash equilibrium
any feasible payoff that leaves each player at or above her minmax value.
This is only rough; making it precise requires the following steps.
(a) It is easy to show that in any Nash equilibrium a player can never do
worse than her minmax value. If she plays in each round her best response
to whatever her opponents are doing, she does at least this well.
(b) Suppose in an undiscounted, average reward formulation we try to
implement payoffs that arise from some pure strategy selection by players
and that give each player as much or more than her minmax value. This
is easy. Everyone is to play this strategy selection as long as everyone else
does. If some one player deviates, everyone plays her part in that players
minmaxing strategy forever after. (For a Nash equilibrium, it is irrelevant
what we prescribe if more than one deviates, so make any prescription at all.)
Note that there is no reason to believe this is a subgame perfect equilibrium
 a matter to which we turn in a bit.
(c) If we attempt to implement payoffs that arise from mixed strategy
selections, then we cant tell from observed actions whether there have been
rn ps ave. oh rs ee ree pe
14.2. The folk theorem 509
deviations. In case we are using an undiscounted, average reward formu-
lation, we can avoid this difficulty by using a pure strategy that convexi-
fies with time. If, say, we want a payoff that arises from two-thirds of one
pure strategy combination and one-third of another, then we play the first on
rounds 3n+1 and 3n+2 and the second on rounds 3n, for n = 1,2,.... This
is a tiny bit harder to do if the mixing probabilities are irrational, although it
is still possible. Note that by this scheme we can get values that result from
mixed strategies and also values that arise from correlated mixtures of pure
strategies.
(d) If we are using a discounted formulation, we have to worry that a
deviation may prove so profitable to a player, relative to what she obtains in
equilibrium, that she might deviate even if threatened with minmax punish-
ment. So the statement of the folk theorem becomes: For every feasible payoff
above the players minmax values, there is a value of q (the discount factor
or probability of continuing) sufficiently close to one such that for all larger
discount factors/ probabilities of continuing, this payoff can be implemented
in a Nash equilibrium. And we have to worry about convexifying using time,
which is harder in this case. :
For detailed arguments and precise statements, see the papers cited in
section 14.7.
You might worry that ganging up on a deviator can be quite costly for
the other players. One player may be able to inflict a terrible punishment
on another, but only at tremendous cost to herself. In this case, the first
player might not want to carry out the punishment that is threatened.
That is, these punishment strategies may not give a subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium. Let us give an example. Consider the normal form game in
figure 14.2. In this game, player 2 can threaten player 1 that by playing
t2 he can hold player 1 to a payoff of (no more than) zero. Hence the
following is a Nash equilibrium; player 1 plays s1 all the time. Player 2
plays t1 as long as player 1 plays s1, but moves to t2 if ever player 1 tries
s2. The problem is that while player 1 wouldn't want to move to s2 (if 
is sufficiently large) if she believes that player 2 will carry out this threat,
she may find it hard to believe that he would in fact carry out the threat.
After all, player 2 will get no more than 2 by playing t2, while he will
Player 2
tl t2
Tw sl] 55 | -1,2
w
5
Bl s2| 6-1 | 0-3
Figure 14.2. A bimatrix game.
510 Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
get at least 1 with 1. So player 1 may play s2 with impunity, on the
presumption that player 2 will never carry out the threat to punish her.
It has been shown, however, that the conclusion of the folk theorem
holds up if one restricts attention to subgame perfect Nash equilibria. 
The details are fairly complex and won't be repeated here. But it may be
instructive to say how we could get the s1-t1 outcome in the game of figure
14.2 in a perfect equilibrium. Suppose that player 1 and player 2 adopt
the following pair of strategies. They begin with s1 and t1 and continue
with this unless and until there is a deviation. If either (or both) deviate
from this, they play s2 and t2 for one round. If both do this, they go back
to s1 and t1. But if either deviates during the punishmen * round, then
they have to play s2 and t2 again, and each has to keep this up until they
both comply (at which point they can return to sl.and t1). Given that
player 2 is playing this strategy, will player 1 ever deviate? The answer
is no, at least for high enough g. If play is in the phase where player 1 is
supposed to play sl, by changing to s2 she nets 6 instead of 5, but then
she'll have to take a 0 instead of a 5 next time. For high this isnt worth
it. And in the punishment phase, player 1 prefers both in the short run
- and the long to get this phase over with and get back to the cooperative
phase. As for player 2, when the two are cooperating, he has no incentive
whatsoever to move to 2 and trigger a round (or more) of punishment.
The question is, Will he carryout the punishment, which is so costly for
him? Given player 1's supposed strategy, the answer is yes; player 2 has
a choice of either taking a 3 and then getting back to 5s or getting a
1 and delaying by (at least) one round return to cooperation. For large
enough g, it is worth his while to get the punishment phase over with.
* Just to show how it is done, let us derive what is large enough and
show formally that this is an equilibrium. In fact, we will show that this
equilibrium is subgame perfect, using techniques from appendix 2.
The proper subgames of this game correspond to the start at each time
t =1,2,... of that period's stage game, given a history of play up to time
stage t, which we write h: and which is a sequence of 1 pairs of the
form (sx,ty), where x and y are each 1 or 2. Think of play of this game as
being at the start of each period in one of two states: and +, where 
represents the state where players are to cooperate and represents the
state where players are punished. Transitions from period to period of this
state depend on the state at the start of the period and play in the period. If
at the start of a period the state is and play that period is s1-t1, then the
state is at the start of the next period. If play in a period begins in state
[ .
 This is subject to some technical restrictions in the case of discounting; see Fudenberg
and Maskin (1986).
:
arr +
mpgs pens pe. =e i ATT
14.2. The folk theorem 511
3 and play that period is s2-t2, then the state next period is . In all other
cases, next period begins in state 9.
Note that with this convention, play in period t according to the sup-
posed equilibrium strategies depends only on the current state. Player 11s
supposed to play sl in state and s2 in state 9, and similarly for player 2.
As noted already, the state in any period depends only on the state in the
previous period and play in that period. So we conclude that play from pe-
riod # on, according to the presumed strategies, depends on previous history
only through the current state. Thus in checking subgante perfection it suffices to
show that each player is using a best resporse beginning in state and beginning
in state 3. 
We have four things to check. Is player 1 playing a best response by
choosing s1 beginning in state ? Under the equilibrium hypothesis that
player 2 conforms to his supposed strategy, if player 1 plays sl starting in
state and conforms thereafter, the state will stay forever and player 1 will
receive 5 forever, for an expected/ present value of 5+5+5*+...=5/(1q).
If, on the other hand, player 1 plays s2 this period and then goes back to following
the strategy assigned to her, she will net 6 immediately, the state will change
to +, and she will get (conforming thereafter) 0 next round and (after is
thereby restored) 5s for the rest of the game. The expected / present value is
6+0g+54+5+...=6 +52/(1 g). For player 1's strategy in state to be
unimprovable in a single step, it must be that
5* 1
 > 1
Tozer oraz D)
Next, is player 1 playing a best response by choosing s2 in state $7? By
conforming, she nets 0 this round and then 5s for the rest of the game. By
failing to conform this round but then returning to conformance, she nets ~1
this round, 0 next, and then 5s. This is worse than conformance for all . It
seems silly, but for the form of things we'll write down this constraint:
3
q>0 (1
Is player 2 playing a best response by choosing t1 in state ? You should
have no problems with this one conforming always beats deviating for one
step and then conforming:
>0. (42)
Is player 2 playing a best response by choosing t2 in state $? Conforming
forever nets him 3 and then 5s, for an expected / present value of 3+5/(1
), while deviating to t1 for one stage and then conforming nets him 1, then
3, and then 5s, for an expected / present value of (=) + {(~g+5/(1q).
If you work through the algebra, you'll find that the constraint on that
ensures that the first is as large as the second is
q>1/4. (42)
As long as all four of these constraints are met, which is to say that
as long as > 1/4, neither player ever has an incentive to deviate from
her prescribed strategy and then return to conformance. By proposition 4 in
appendix 2, any unimprovable strategy is optimal in an infinite horizon, bounded
reward, discounted dynamic programming problem. Thus we know then that for
these q, neither player ever has an incentive to deviate from the prescribed strategy.
That is, we have a subgame perfect equilibrium.
The key here and in much of the formal literature that looks at the folk
theorem with discounting is (1) to construct players strategies in this fashion,
using a small number of states that evolve from period to period in rela-
tively simple fashion and that determine what happens from any point on
and then (2) to use the theory of dynamic programming and especially the
result that inimprovable strategies are optimal to verify that a given strategy
profile comprises an equilibrium. We will provide you with further examples
of this style of analysis later in this chapter.
(2) Lack of a focal point
Any time there are multiple Nash equilibria, we have to wonder which
of them, if any, is the solution. In the story told above, we had one side
or the other announcing its strategy and inviting the other to formulate a
best response. That is fine if we imagine preplay negotiation between the
players, although we might then wonder why one player is able to nego-
tate from such strength. A good way to interpret the folk theorem, when
the players can engage in explicit preplay negotiation, is that it shows
how repetition can greatly expand the set of self-enforcing agreements to
which the players might come. If the players play the prisoners dilemma
game once (and never meet again, so the game is not embedded into some
larger game), then no amount of preplay negotiation will enable them to
cooperate. To cooperate, they will need to find some way to form a bind-
ing agreement with an enforcement mechanism that is quite outside the
game as described. But if this situation is repeated, then there are many
self-enforcing agreements they might come to. We dont know which one
they will agree to (if any), and we can imagine a rather spirited session of
bargaining between them, but we do know that a lot more can (reasonably)
be agreed upon.
What if no explicit communication is possible? We said in chap-
ter 12 that the notion of a Nash equilibrium gives a necessary condition
for an obvious way to play the game, if one exists, without prejudging
Le
A
eee reese om
14.2. The folk theorem 513
the existence of an obvious way to play the game. Without preplay
communication, we rely on convention, or learned behavior, or a focal
point, or something equally vague. Can you see any reason to suppose
that any one equilibrium is the obvious/intuitive/focal way to play this
game?
In the case of the prisoners dilemma, which is quite simple and sym-
metric, principles of symmetry and efficiency point us toward s1-t1 as a
likely candidate outcome. In other games, not so symmetric, one might
also look for focal points. Or one might try to explain the particular equi-
librium one sees as conforming to some social norm or convention. The
current state of formal theory is that we know, in general, how repetition
allows for the possibility of a wide variety of focal point or conventional
equilibria. But we certainly dont have many good formal criteria for
picking out any particular one.
(3) Too many out-of-equilibrium threats
The third problem is actually part of the first. Not only is there a
profusion of equilibria, but there are many out of equilibrium responses
that hold them together. In the equilibrium we gave above for the prison-
ers dilemma, player 1 told player 2 that if player 2 ever played t2, then
player 1 would resort to s2 forever. But, as long as gq is fairly large, it is
enough for player 1 to threaten player 2 with If you play t2 in any round,
then I will respond with s2 in the next round. (How large does have
to be so that player 2, thinking that player 1 will act in this fashion, will
wish to play t1 in every round?) Indeed, player 1 can build this threat
into an overall strategy that is very easy to enunciate: I (player 1) will
begin with s1, and in each subsequent round I will do whatever player 2
did in the previous round. This particular strategy for player 1 is known
as tit-for-tat. The point is that a threat never to cooperate will stop
player 2 from trying t2, but a tit-for-tat threat, and many others besides,
will do so as well as long as is close enough to 1. Which of these many
possible threats will actually occur? It is hard to say, especially when
you consider that if the threat works we will never actually see it carried
out!
(4) Games with a definite finite horizon
The fourth problem with the repeated game formulation is that it
doesnt work when there is a finite and definite horizon. Consider the
repeated prisoners dilemma and imagine playing that game no more than,
say, 100 times. That is, if we do reach round 100, there will be no more
514 Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
randomizations to determine if there will be a 101st round. Round 100, if
we get there, will definitely be the last.
If we get to round 100, the two players know it will be the last, and so
player 1 will play s2 and player 2 t2; there is no longer-term loss to weigh
against the short-term gain. Now if we get to round 99, there may be
one more round. But we know that both sides will play noncooperatively
in round 100, so neither side has the incentive to cooperate in round 99;
the short-term gain from noncooperation won't be overcome subsequently,
since we will have noncooperation subsequently. Thus we have noncoop-
eration in rounds 99 and 100. So what if we reach round 98? Since we
will have noncooperation in rounds 99 and 100 no matter what happens
in rounds 1 through 98, it follows that we will have noncooperation in 98,
and so on. The entire cooperative scheme unravels from the back. To get
cooperation; there must always be a future substantial enough to outweigh
immediate considerations.
If you are very careful about these things, you will note that what we
just proved is that there is a unique subgame perfect equilibrium that involves
no cooperation. We claim as well a different result: There is no cooperation
along the path of play in any N. ash equilibrium.
An argument that proves this other result runs as follows. Suppose that
in some Nash equilibrium there is cooperation at some stages with positive
probability. Let T be the last stage at which this is so; that is, there is zero
probability of cooperation along the equilibrium path in stages T+1,...,100.
Now examine the incentives of the player who is meant to cooperate along
the path of play in stage T. This player will do no better than zero in the
remaining stages by following the equilibrium, since her opponent will not co-
operate subsequently along the equilibrium path. By acting noncooperatively
in stage T and in every subsequent stage, the player does better immediately
than if she follows the equilibrium prescription, and she can do no worse
than zero subsequently. Hence this player will not cooperate in stage T, a
contradiction.
If this sounds vaguely familiar, recall the centipede game from chap-
ter 12. In that game we saw a similar unravelling from the back. And,
indeed, the centipede game is very much like the repeated prisoners
dilemma, except that players take turns moving and the first noncoop-
erative action ends the game. Because of these two features (but mostly
the first), the centipede game is solvable by backwards induction (i.e., by
iterated weak dominance), whereas a slightly more involved argument is
needed here. But the same basic idea is at work, and we have the same
basic story.
And as with our analysis of the centipede game, the theoretical con-
clusion that we reach here is not supported either intuitively or empirically.
14.3. Noisy observables 515
Play the prisoners dilemma, say, 100 times, and in most cases (with col-
lege sophomores, or with MBA students) you will get cooperation for
much of the game. Our theoretical analysis of finitely repeated play of the
prisoners dilemma is missing something. We will get back to this (and to
what is missing) in section 14.6.
14.3. Noisy observables
Note that in our equilibria a defection from cooperation is noticed by
the other side immediately and is dealt with summarily. In applications
of these ideas, we might be concerned with cases in which one side isn't
quite sure what the other is doing. Observable data might indicate that
perhaps the other side isn't living up to some cooperative arrangement, but
the observable data might be less than perfectly conclusive.
One could model this in a number of ways. Imagine, for example, that
we played the prisoners dilemma game above, but with the following
noise added. The numbers in figure 14.1 give only the means of the
payoffs for the players. The actual payoffs are Normally distributed with
those means and with standard deviation, say, 5 units. Each side sees
both payoffs but not the move chosen by the other side. For example, if
player 1 picks s2 and player 2 picks tl in some round, then in that round
player 1 gets a payoff with Normal distribution at mean 8 and standard
deviation 5, and player 2's payoff has Normal distribution with mean -3
and standard deviation 5. (The error terms are assumed to independent
of one another, both cross-sectionally and serially.) ?
Suppose you are player 2 playing this game and in the first round you
pick t1, get back a payoff of 6.2, and your opponent receives 5.2; in the
ee
J 1t is vitally important for what follows that both payoffs are seen, even if this isn't en-
tirely natural. We will say why this is vital below.
9 A different model of this effect would be to suppose that players work through an in-
termediary who sometimes fails to follow instructions. That is, imagine that players 1 and
2 on each round send instructions to an intermediary. This intermediary implements the
instructions but sometimes does the wrong thing; on any given round, the intermediary
implements the instructions of a player with probability, say, 8, and with probability .2 takes
the other action. At the same time, the intermediary may or may not correctly implement
the instructions of the other player. Assume that whether the intermediary implements the
instructions of a given player is independent of whether he implements the instructions of
the second player and independent of what the intermediary does on any other round. And,
the key to all this, imagine that players do not see what instructions their rival passes to the
intermediary, but only what actions the intermediary takes. This formulation of the prob-
lem is of about the same level of technical difficulty of the one we will tackle here, and the
reader would do well to see which of the conclusions we derive will work in this somewhat
different formulation.
second round you pick t1, get back 4.8, and your opponent receives 3.9;
and in the third you pick t1, get back 1.3, and your opponent receives
6.8. (I'll only report your payoff to the level of tenths.) You cant be sure
what player 1 has been playing, so you might try maximum likelihood
estimation; you would then guess that player 1 has played sl, s1, s2. But
these data are not inconsistent with player 1 choosing s1, s1, s1. So should
you punish player 1? How stiff should your punishment be? If 1.3 is
low enough to trigger punishment, what about .3? What about 1.3?
And should your punishment fit the crime more punishment if you
get 1.3 than if you get .3?
You might consider simply forgiving player 1 and not engaging in
any punishment. But if you do this, then player 1 has no incentive to play
s1 she can play s2 every time and blame your string of payoffs on bad
luck. At the same time, you dont want your punishment to be triggered
too often or to be too harsh. Even if player 1 is playing sl every time,
you will see, by the luck of the draw, some bad payoffs occasionally. If
you trigger punishment whenever your payoff is, say, 1 or less and/or if
that punishment lasts a long time, then you will be spending a lot of time
punishing your opponent (and, presumably, she will spend a lot of time
punishing you) and the gains from cooperation/collusion will be lost.
We will give an exact analysis of this problem momentarily (in smaller
type), but you should have no difficulty seeing the basic trade-off; too little
punishment, triggered only rarely, will give your opponent the incentive to
try to get away with the noncooperative strategy. You have to punish often
enough and harshly enough so that your opponent is motivated to play sl
instead of s2. But the more often/more harsh is the punishment, the less
are the gains from cooperation. And even if you punish in a fashion that
leads you to know that your opponent is (in her own interests) choosing
sl every time (except when she is punishing), you will have to punish
in some instances to keep your opponent honest.
Let me make two assertions here (which will be supported in a mo-
ment). Recall the third problem listed in the previous section: In the folk
theorem there were many threats that could hold together an equilibrium,
and we had no reason to choose among them in any fashion. If there are
noisy observations, we do have some reason to select one threat over a
second; we want our threat (which now will be executed sometimes) to
be severe enough to deter the other party from cheating, but only that
severe and no more, because a more severe threat will increase the losses
from collusion caused by the inevitable punishments that will be meted.
Second, if we look for equilibria in this setting, and then we vary
the level of noise (in terms of the standard deviation of the Normal
re
14.3. Noisy observables 517
distributions, say), then we expect to and do find that the higher the noise
the less we can get in an equilibrium for both sides. As the noise (standard
deviation) rises, it becomes impossible to disentangle what an opponent
is doing, and both sides move to play noncooperative strategies (s2 and
t2). As the noise falls to zero, we can get closer and closer to the ideal of
5 apiece forever.
We now plunge into a technical analysis of this problem. We will be
unable to do full justice to this problem it sits right at the frontiers of what
is known about this form of game but we can give the technically oriented
reader enough of a lead to understand what conclusions the literature comes
to. Our analysis comes in two parts: First we look at trigger equilibria and
then at a more complex form of equilibrium.
Trigger equilibria
To begin, we restrict attention to a very simple form of strategy for each
player. We assume that each player begins by playing cooperatively, that is,
sl and tl. And they continue to do so until either of the two payoffs falls
to a level at or below some critical trigger level T. If in a given round either
payoff is less than or equal to T, then for the next N rounds the two play
noncooperatively, that is, s2 and 2. After N rounds, whatever happens in
those rounds, the two revert to cooperative play, until the next time that a
payoff is less or equal to T.
There are two parameters in these strategies, the trigger level T' and the
length of the punishment phase N. We are interested first in the question For
which values of N and T are the given strategies an equilibrium?
To answer this question, we begin by computing the expected values
to the players of playing these strategies. (Then we will employ the usual
dynamic programming technique of seeing whether the strategies are unim-
provable.) To be very precise in our technique, we would imagine a state
space with NV +1 states: {,%:,%s,...,%n}, where is the state where the
two cooperate and 1, is the state where the two are not cooperating and are
meant to do so for N ~ n +1 more periods before returning to cooperation,
Then we begin in state and remain there until the first payoff is seen less or
equal to T, at which point we transfer to state 1; and then deterministically
through the +, in order, until we get to from which we move back to 4.
We won't try to carry that level of formality around, but the reader should
check that what we say can be made this formal.
When cooperating, the two are meant to play s1 and t1. Their immediate
rewards are random but have expected values of 5 apiece. What is uncertain
is whether they will be cooperating next period or not; if we let ,1=1,2
be two independent Normal random variables with means zero and standard
deviations 5, then the chance that cooperation will continue to reign is
me = Prob(5+e >T,5+ > 1),
and the chance that noncooperation will take over is 1 7... (We will work
in terms of the discounted formulation, so q is a discount factor and not a
518
Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
N= 1 2 3 4
T=0: v= 3959 33.34 29.20 26.26
=-1: v= 41.83 3647 3270 29.92
Table 14.1. Values for following the given strategies.
chance that the game ends altogether.) We claim, then, that the value to either
player of following the strategy given above, assuming her opponent does so
as well, is the solution v of the equation
v=5+gmv+{1- me) vl
Let us explain: The 5 out in front is the immediate expected reward; the is
the discount factor, applied to expected future payoffs. And expected future
payoffs dare m. times v, which is the chance that cooperation continues {0
ensue times the expected value of being in a cooperative phase, plus (I~ Te)
times "v, which is the probability that noncooperation begins times the
value starting at a noncooperative phase. This last value requires explanation.
For N periods each player receives an expected payoff of zero, and then play
reverts to cooperation. Hence the value of cooperation is simply delayed for
N periods, hence discounted by ".
We gan invert this recursion 0 find
. 5
SL
VET gle + V1 = mel
Note that as m. implicitly depends on T, v is a function of T' (implicitly)
and N (explicitly). Because Te decreases with T, v is decreasing in T and
N (these take some showing); the quicker the trigger or the longer the pun-
ishment phase, the lower the value to the players.
In general, we need to compute expected values to the players starting in
every possible state, in this case, in the states $1. yn as well as in . But
this is easy in this case: The value of starting in 1 is Vv; in 9, is to,
and so on. .
What sort of values do we get? Consider the parametrization = 9.
For T=0and T =-1, and for N =1,2,3,4, the corresponding values of v
are given in table 14.1 (rounded to the nearest .01). Note that, as expected,
values fall with rising T' (quicker to punish) and with rising N (heavier
punishment).
Is each strategy unimprovable given the other? The reader may wonder
whether this is a useful question to answer. Since the payoffs are now un-
bounded, we cannot simply plug into our result that unimprovable equals
optimal. But the result is valid here. One can replace the actual payoff in any
round with its expectation conditional on the actions chosen, and those con-
ditional expectations are bounded. So the question is useful and is equivalent
to asking whether each strategy is optimal given the other, that is, whether
we have an equilibrium.
eee nt on mere cir tr
14.3. Noisy observables 519
We assert that it is clearly optimal to play noncooperatively when in a
punishment phase; cooperation returns no more swiftly and ones immediate
expected payoff is less, if one plays cooperatively at these times. But there
is a real trade-off when cooperation is supposed to be played. By playing
noncooperatively, you increase your immediate expected reward (from 5 to
8), and you also increase the chance that you trigger a bout of punishment.
Specifically, if you play noncooperatively for one period and then revert to the
strategies prescribed, your expected payoff is computed as follows. Let
y= Prob8+e& >T,-3+a> .
Then 4 is the chance that you will see a payoff that doesnt trigger a pun-
ishment phase if you dont cooperate. Your expected payoff is
v' =8+glmv +1 ra)g" vl.
Note well: This computation assumes you immediately go back to playing
according to the strategies prescribed; the only effects your deviant play
has is to increase your immediate payoff and to change the probabilities that
you dont and do trigger punishment. Hence we use and "o for the
continuation payoffs.
We have an equilibrium, then, if v' as computed above is less or equal
to v, since this implies that the strategies are each unimprovable against each
other, hence optimal. In table 14.2 we give v and o for g=.9, T=0,and
N =1,2,3,4, and we see that we have equilibria for N =3 and 4 but not for
N =1or?2: Ata trigger level of T' = 0, it takes three rounds of punishment
to deter players from playing noncooperatively in a presumably cooperative
phase.
We can ask now, What is the best combination of NV and T'? Best here
has a clear meaning; we are looking at symmetric equilibria, and so we are
concerned with finding that pair NV and T that gives the highest expected
payoff to both players. The scheme for finding the best IV and 7, at least
numerically, is clear: Fix T. For N =1, compute the corresponding values of
 and . Find whether v' <v whether we have an equilibrium. If not,
try N =2, and so on, until you find for the given T the smallest N (hence
the best IV) that supports an equilibrium. Call this N(T). (You may find that
for the given T no N gives an equilibrium.) Do this as you search for the
optimal level of T' by some numerical procedure.
Table 14.3 provides partial results for such a search, for the case =.9.
Each row corresponds to a different level of T. The first column reports T,
N = 1 2 3 4
v= 39.59 33.34 29.20 26.26
v= 40.99 33.79 29.00 25.61
Table 14.2. Checking for an equilibrium: T=0.
520
Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
T NT) v
2 11 12.76
1 4 23.01
0 3 29.29
-1 3 32.70
-~2 3 36.28
-3 3 39.68
4 3 42.66
5 3 45.05
-6 4 46.06
-~7 5 47.16
-8 6 48.11
-9 10 48.55
10 20 48.96
-10.1 23 48.99
-10.2 26 49.02
-10.3 34 49.05
-10.33 38 49.06
~10.35 43 49.069
-1037 52 49.0716
 ~10.38 67 49.0746
Tnble 14.3. Finding the efficient trigger equilibrium.
the second NV 0, and the third column the expected value v at T and N(T). -
The search for an N that supported an equilibrium was stopped at N = 100,
and for values of T' outside the range shown (i.e., for T =3 and T = -10.39),
at N =100 an equilibrium had not been found. Note well: For some values
of T no N, no maiter how large, will support an equilibrium. This is easiest
to see for very small T. As T becomes very small, the chance of triggering
punishment is virtually zero, thus there is no penalty for a player to take 8
instead of 5 immediately by playing noncooperatively. }
Two things are striking. First, N(T") falls and then rises with falling T'
The rise as T gets very small is fairly intuitive. For small 7, the chance
of triggering punishment is very small, and so it takes a larger and larger
punishment to keep players from playing noncooperatively in the cooperative
phase. But the fall in N(T") as T falls for large T is a bit surprising. The
intuition here is that for large T' punishment is likely to be triggered with high
probability in either case, so it takes a fair amount of punishment to keep the
players cooperating. Put differently, the ratio of the likelihoods of triggering
punishment if you cooperate and if you don't is quite high for large T. 50
the marginal impact on the probability of triggering punishment by playing
noncooperatively is quite low. Hence, to keep players honest, punishment
must be severe.
 For readers who think well in terms of relative likelihoods, it may help to note that
14.3. Noisy observables 521
The second striking thing is that the value v rises with falling 7. (Ac-
tually, if we decreased T continuously, it would jump down at values of
T where N(T) jumps up by one. But the overall effect is a rise in v with
falls in T.) The optimal T is the lowest possible value consistent with equi-
Librium, which means (although our numbers are too discrete to show this)
N =o0.
This is not a fluke result. Given our restriction in this subsection to these
sorts of trigger strategy equilibria, one can prove that the efficient equilibrium
from this restricted class is the smallest T consistent with equilibrium, which
has N(T) = co. To show this takes very advanced methods; the required
methodology (and, once you make a-few clever changes in the formulation,
the result itself) is found in Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchett (1989). The techni-
cally very adept will find it an interesting exercise to (1) prove what has just
been asserted, using their results and (2) show that one can get somewhat
better (higher v) results using trigger equilibria a bit more sophisticated
than the one we've employed here, equilibria where the region of payoffs
that triggers punishment is not simply whenever either payoff falls below
some single value.
More sophisticated and efficient equilibria
For the parameterization with which we have been working, we've pushed
the value of a collusive equilibrium to 49.0746. That is pretty good, especially
considering that we know 50 is unattainable. (Why do we know this?) But
we can do better still with more sophisticated equilibria.
Consider the following sort of strategy profile parameterized by two
numbers, a and 4. There are three phases or regimes of play, labeled , 4,
and +. Phase is cooperative; players choose s1 and t1, respectively, in
this phase. Phase +; is the punish player 1 and reward player 2 phase,
in which player 1 is supposed to play s1 while player 2 plays t2. Note that
given these choices player 1 will have an expected immediate payoff of -3 and
player 2 a payoff of 8. Phase 4 is symmetric with ;; we reward player 1
and punish 2.
Transitions in the phases from one stage to the next depend on the phase
at the start of the stage and the payoffs received by the two players.
Starting a stage in phase $, if player 1 receives more than and player 2
receives less than a, we transfer to phase 4;. (The idea is that player 1 did
too well relative to player 2 and must be punished.) If player 1 receives less
than a and player 2 receives more, we transfer to 92. Otherwise we remain
in phase .
Starting a stage in phase +x, all that matters is how player 1 does. If she gets
more than b, we remain in phase 9;. (She did too well and has to be punished
again.) If she gets less than b, we go back to stage .
Starting in phase +,, everything is symmetric with starting in
the ratio of the likelihoods of triggering punishment if a player cooperates to if she doesnt
approaches zero as T' + oo because of properties of the tails of Normal distributions.
522
Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
Play begins in phase . With this start and the rules given above, players
are always, for every point in the game tree, able to figure out what they
are meant to do. This recursive structure specifies, in fairly opaque form,
strategies for the two players.
Do these strategies constitute an equilibrium, for a fixed a and b? By
now the technology for finding out should be clear to you. First we compute
the expected payoffs to the players, starting in phase , in 1, and in 1, if
they follow the strategies described. Let us call these values for player 1 v(9),
v(t), and (3h). These three numbers satisfy three simultaneous equations:
o() = 5 + gm) + wavy) + (1 mm w)o(@)],
(gp) = =3 + glpv() + (1 pulp], and
(gh) = 8 + qlpo(@) + (1 = wv),
where mis the probability that if players follow these strategies we trans-
fer from to i, and 50 OD. (Note that in the second two equations only
two states are involved; given the strategies and transition rules, there is no
chance that we transfer from ay directly to 7 or vice versa.) The transition
probabilities are, in the case of m and m, products of Normal cumulants,
while p and p are simple Normal cumulants. For example,
7 = Prob(5 + & > a) X Prob(5 +e < a).
So, for example, if a = 9.4 and b= 8.2, you can work out (for =.9)
that o() = 49.6245, v(3) = 15.6337, and veh) = 62.5915.
We check for an equilibrium by checking if each strategy is unimprovable
given the other. For player 1, we have to check Does she prefer s1 to s2 in phase
$? In the now usual fashion, this involves checking whether
v(g) > 8+ glmio(y) + mul) + (1 7 pu),
where al and =, are the transition probabilities if player 1 plays s2 instead
of 51 while player 2 sticks to tl. For example,
a) = Prob(8 + & > a) X Prob(3 +6 < a).
Does she prefer s2 to s1 in phase +? This one is trivial of course she does.
(Why of course?) Does she prefer s1 to s2 in phase 4? This involves checking
whether
oli) > 0+qlp'v(@) +1 PRLIC VIR
where p' = Prob(0 +e <b).
emesis on
ae + et cream ln on inn tm =
een i
14.3. Noisy observables 523
For example, if a = ~9.4 and b = 8.2, both tests are passed. (In case you
are interested, deviating for one stage in phase gives 49.597 and deviating
for one stage in phase 1; gives 15.61 ) Since everything here is symmetric in
players 1 and 2, we do have an equilibrium for a = =9.4 and b= 8.2, one that
is better than the best trigger strategy equilibrium.
What is going on here? In the trigger strategy equilibria, punishment is
very inefficient; one punishes the seeming transgressor (although we know
that, in equilibrium, no one has transgressed), but at the same time the seem-
ing transgressed-against is also punished. It is more efficient to punish the
seeming transgressor and reward the transgressed-against. You can do this,
if you are careful to be sure that the seeming transgressor will go along with
her punishment.
The equilibrium offered above is certainly not the best one can do. So let
me offer a challenge to readers: How much higher can you push the expected
value of playing this game for each player in a symmetric equilibrium?
We close with two comments. First, one can, in this exercise, parametri-
cally vary the amount of noise by varying the standard deviation in the noise
terms. As that standard deviation rises, any possible gains from-this sort of
cooperation vanish, since sooner and sooner comes the descent into punish-
ment. And as that standard deviation falls, gains from this sort of cooperation
approach those where there is no noise (a theoretical high of 5/.1 = 50 in this
case of g = .9), which should be clear since the descent into punishment is
pushed further and further into the future. (These things have formal proofs
as well.)
Second, we stated at the outset that it was important that both sides
saw both payoffs. If each side saw only its own payoff, one imagines that
equilibria that support collusion can be constructed, but these equilibria will
be quite complex too complex for us to compute, at least. This is so because
one player, receiving a low payoff, may initiate punishment of the other, and
the other will not know that punishment has begun; she will have to infer
that it probably has done so. Put another way, transitions from one phase to
another by both players in the clean and crisp fashion of the equilibria above
will not be available. It isnt quite clear what will be.
Forgiveness
In all these equilibria, we speak of punishment as if there is some
bad behavior to punish. But there is none in equilibrium. There is pun-
ishment, to be sure, when there is noise that makes it impossible to tell
whether a bad outcome is due to bad behavior by ones opponent or to bad
luck. But in equilibrium both players know it wasnt bad behavior. So
why punish? Why not forgive your opponent and get on with collusive
behavior, especially when you know there is nothing really to forgive?
The reason is simple: If you do this, and if your opponent anticipates
that you do this, then she will engage in bad behavior.
i Another answer, for those who followed the small type discussion, is that in some
14.4. Implicit collusion in oligopoly
The notion that oligopolists collude has been around since the virtual
inception of economics. In 1776, Adam Smith (1976, 1:144) wrote that
people of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and
diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or
in some contrivance to raise prices.
The theoretical case for how such a conspiracy might be enforced
is obvious from developments in the preceding sections. Consider the
Cournot game for a duopoly, in which each of two firms simultaneously
names a quantity that it will supply to the market. As we saw, the equi-
librium in such a situation does not give the firms as much as they could
get through collusive action. With collusion, identical firms could each
supply half the monopoly quantity, and together they would obtain the
monopoly profits. But this isnt an equilibrium; if one side provides half
the monopoly quantity, the other side has the incentive to supply more:
This lowers overall profits, but raises ones own profits (while lowering
the profits of the other side more quickly than ones own are going up).
This isnt identical to the prisoners dilemma game, since there we had a
single strictly dominant strategy for each side. But here, as there, we have
(in equilibrium) each side taking actions that leave both worse off than if
they could collude.
Now imagine that the Cournot game is repeated with profits dis-
counted and summed. A simple application of the folk theorem guar- .
antees (for large-enough discount rate) that we can sustain the collusive
outcome. Each side communicates to the other, somehow, its intention to
play the strategy: Supply half the monopoly quantity as long as the other
side does likewise; revert to the Cournot quantities in the face of any de-
viation. As long as the discounted present value (or expected value) of
half the monopoly profits exceeds the best one can get from a deviation in
a single round plus the Cournot profits thereafter, we have an equilibrium
in which both sides collude.
In a sense, this is a simple variation on the story of the kinked demand
curve. In the story of kinked demand, the response of one firm to the other
raising its quantity supplied (or lowering its price) was instantaneous.
equilibria, such as the last one discussed, punishment for one player means good times for
the other. Rather than call it punishment, we might think of it as compensation for the
unwitting victim of circumstance. It isnt the fault of ones rival, but isn't it reasonable that
your rival should give something up to help compensate you for your bad luck? Of course,
this story doesnt go too well with what is takes to get back to collusion in our example (bad
luck by your rival, to balance your own). And it won't help in those cases where punishment
of one side necessarily entails a loss for the others, as in the story we tell next.
ee ee ete eon ee ees ees oem.
144. Implicit collusion in oligopoly 525
Here the response is delayed for one round. But as long as the delay isn
too long, which we model mathematically with a discount factor close to
one, we get the same outcome, collusion, as a potential equilibrium.
Of course, in the story of the kinked demand curve we had a problem
with a multiplicity of equilibria; we had no theory about where the sta-
tus quo point would be. And, although we didnt speak of it at the time
(except in problem 10.2), we could have told kinked demand curve stories
where the outcomes are not symmetric. Likewise here, the folk theorem
tells us that there are many equilibria: Asymmetric equilibria in which
one side insists on a share of the market in excess of 50 percent; equilibria
in which firms settle on profits less than they get from the most collu-
sive outcome. For two symmetric firms, the half-the-monopoly-quantity
equilibrium seems a rather strong focal point, but in cases of asymmetric
firms, we have no particular theory about which equilibrium will arise, if
any.
In a sense, all the classic models of oligopoly can be rooted in the
folk theorem. The folk theorem holds that any outcome from the collusive
outcome down to the competitive outcome, including all manner of asym-
metric outcomes, are outcomes of a Nash equilibrium, if the discount factor
is close enough to one. And note well that the fact we (formally) imagine
players choosing quantities in a given round is nearly irrelevant. If we
Imagined them choosing prices, we would have much the same range of
possible equilibrium outcomes. Collusion can be sustained if the firms are
picking prices. Each firm picks the collusive price, with the implicit threat
that it will drop its price precipitously if the other side deviates, And if
the firms are picking prices, the same threat to drop prices precipitously
will Sustain an equilibrium where firms name the Cournot equilibrium
prices (and sell the Cournot quantities). Similarly, prices arbitrarily close
to Bertrand equilibrium prices can be sustained as an equilibrium (for
high-enough discount factor) even if the rivals are simultaneously choos-
ing quantities, although the argument here is a bit complex.?
Which of these many equilibria (if any one) is the solution? That
depends, of course, on how each side imagines the other will react to
how each side acts today; it is a matter of equilibrium expectations. This
isn't quite the same as the classic story of Cournot, or Bertrand, or von
Stackelberg conjectures. But it isn't far removed.
Of course, a model of repeated play is vastly more descriptive of
the world of real oligopolists than are the stories we gave at the end of
chapter 12, where firms simultaneously pick quantities to output or prices
1
For a general treatment of this problem, see Abreu (1986).
526 Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
they will charge, once and for all. Most oligopolistic competition is played
out over time, and the competitors do retain some ability to react to how
their opponents act, even if they are not quite as free to react as we might
suppose in a repeated game formulation. From this perspective, becoming
specific about the institutional details of competition does not seem to
have paid such large dividends in getting us to definite predictions after all.
Implicit collusion and noise
We can recover some value from the general approach of adding in-
gtitutional details by adding a second element of realism to our model of
oligopolistic competition noisy observables. Imagine playing the re-
peated Cournot game with the following variation: Instead of seeing how
much the other side puts on the market, all you see is the market clearing
price. (Of course, you know how much you put on the market.) No prob-
lem so far if you know your Own quantity and the market clearing price,
then you know how much your opponent(s) put on the market. You have
enough information to detect any defection from the implicit agreement,
and, once detected, you can punish that defection. Hence we get collusion
as an equilibrium outcome. But now suppose that the demand curve for
this product is subject to unobservable noise. Suppose, for example, that
demand in period t is P = A(t) X, where X is the total quantity sup-
plied, and A) is a constant whose value you don't know; imagine that
it has some probability distribution, and the A(t) are independently and .
identically distributed through time. Then if you put on the market the
agreed-upon (equilibrium) quantity and you find a lower than expected
market clearing price, it could be because your opponent put more on the
market than she was supposed to or because A(t) is lower than its aver-
age. Should you punish your opponent? It may not be her fault. But if
you never engage in punishment, then your opponent has the incentive
to chisel on the deal and put a higher quantity on the market. To keep
both sides honest, punishment is called for at least sometimes. Note well:
Even punishment of finite duration will cause a dimunition in what can
be accomplished collusively because it is sometimes set off by mistake.
But, on the other hand, you cannot go too far in lessening the severity
of the punishment, making it of shorter duration, say, or only triggering
punishment when prices fall very far. This would encourage each side to
chisel somewhat, thereby lessening the gains from collusion.
The following notions are suggested:
(a) It is necessary in any collusive arrangement that each side is able to
monitor the actions of others.
oe
14.4. Implicit collusion in oligopoly 527
(b) Sometimes such monitoring is difficult (or, at least, is costly).
(0) The parties to the agreement have an incentive to chisel on the agree-
ment and blame the results on whatever noise is in the system.
(d) Punishment for implied cheating must, therefore, be imposed, even
when the cheating is certain to have accidental causes, to prevent chis-
elling from getting entirely out of hand.
(e) The loss of collusion from the necessary punishment phases must be
balanced with the loss of collusion from the chiselling.
( The requisite costs of monitoring and punishment increase with the
number of participants, hence collusion is more difficult to achieve the
more firms there are in the industry.
(g) Collusive schemes work best when they are based on less noisy ob-
servables.
These ideas about oligopolistic collusion in noisy environments all predate
the sort of formal models we discussed in section 14.3; see, for example,
Stigler (1964). But they have recently been addressed with models of the
style of section 14.3 in papers by Green and Porter (1984) and Abreu,
Pearce, and Stacchetti (1986), among others.
The reader is left to discover the details of the formal treatments of
these ideas from the original papers. But it may be useful for the more
technically minded reader to see a sketch of how business of this sort is
conducted.
We begin with a sketch of Green and Porter. They deal with an infi-
nite repetition, discounted formulation of the problem with I identical firms
producing a homogenous product. In the model they use, price in period
t is given by 6:(A X), where 6; is a random disturbance term and X is
total output. They look for equilibria of the following sort: A trigger price
P' is set. As long as the equilibrium price stays above P', everyone pro-
duces at some level =. If the equilibrium price falls below P', then a "re-
versionary punishment period of set duration ensues: Each firm produces
the Cournot quantities for N periods. After these N periods, firms go back
to producing until the next time they find an equilibrium price below
P'. Fix exogenously N and P' and consider the production decision of a
given firm. Suppose every other firm produces at level z'. Then for every
level = produced by the given firm, we can work out from the distribution
of 8, the distribution of P(t) = 8:(A (I Dz 2). And, therefore, we
can find the probability that P(t) will be less than P'. This allows us to
compute the expected length of time between reversionary periods. And it
allows us to compute as a function of z (and parameters , P' and N)
the discounted profits our single firm will receive if it produces z in the
collusive periods instead of &'. Optimizing over z, we find this firm's best
response to everyone else producing =z. We have an equilibrium when the
optimal z is equal to z'. The parameters P' and N are fixed throughout
the analysis so far; we proceed to vary these parameters to find the most
efficient equilibrium of this sort the one that gives all the firms, since they
are treated symmetrically in the equilibrium, the highest possible average
rofits.
F The results obtained by Green and Porter are just what we would expect:
Lowering P' and/or N, in essence lowering the amount of punishment,
raises the equilibrium value of z; less punishment means more chiselling.
The best equilibrium from the point of view of the firms balances the cost of
high P' and/or N, coming from the cost of reversionary periods caused by
low values of 6;, with the benefit in preventing chiselling. As we add more
firms (increase I), things get worse; each firm has a smaller impact on P(t),
hence is more willing to chisel, and the level of collusion decreases. (With
perfect monitoring, there is no theoretical reason why adding firms should
lower the amount of collusion.)
Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti (1986) pick up this analysis and using tech-
niques from dynamic programming and optimization theory are able to give
the structure of symmetric equilibria that give the oligopolists the highest
possible expected profits.
We asserted that by adding noisy observables we recovered some
value fromthe general approach of being specific about the institutional
details of competition. Why is this? Point (g) above is the key. One expects
that oligopolistic firms will tend to collude as much as circumstances per-
mit. At least, they will tend to act more collusively, everything else held
equal, when there is less noise than when there is more. And some in-
stitutional arrangements for competition are inherently more noisy than
others. So we would expect greater levels of collusion in industries where
institutions allow for more precise monitoring of rivals.
A classic case of this sort drawn from Sultan (1975) and Porter (1983),
concerns the competition between General Electric and Westinghouse in
the manufacture and sale of large turbine generators. In 1963, the majority
of orders that were placed for these very large pieces of capital equipment
were placed (with one of the two firms) after protracted secret negotia-
tions. An electric utility would negotiate first with GE (say), then with
Westinghouse, then with GE again, and so on, without either of the two
manufacturers ever being certain what the other was bidding. When an or-
der was placed, there still was no clear indication (to the losing firm) what
the winning firm had bid. In this environment, prices were quite low and
competition quite severe. GE, however, found a way to restructure com-
petition with Westinghouse in a manner that made GE's bids predictable
and its winning bids public knowledge. You should consult the original
sources to see the extremely clever way in which this was done. But the
14.4. Implicit collusion in oligopoly 529
essential idea was that GE provided themselves with contractual obliga-
tions to reveal this information, with auditing and verification provided
by a public accounting firm. Westinghouse went along with this restruc-
turing and the result was quite successful implicit collusion between the
two firms collusion so successful that the Antitrust Division of the U.S.
Justice Department stepped in and puta stop to the institutions that sup-
ported GE's scheme.
What's wrong with the game theoretic approach?
The discussion above centers on the (in)ability to monitor. But there
is another problem, intuitively similar, to contend with in applications,
What do you monitor? When we have symmetric firms, it seems ob-
vious that we should look for symunetric equilibria wherein every firm
acts in the same way.? But in an oligopoly of asymmetric firms, it won't
be crystal clear just what is the rule each is supposed to follow. (This
is s0 if we rule out secret negotiations in hotel rooms something at
which many governments look askance.) When firm A finds that its prof-
its are lower than expected, it must decide whether this is due to (a)
something completely outside the control of As rivals, (b) an honest
mistake by its rivals concerning the nature of the agreement, or (0
chiselling by its rivals. Stigler and Green and Porter discuss (a) versus
). But (b) versus (c) is at least as important in real life especially
if ones rivals might chisel and then claim that this was just an honest
mistake.
We have returned to two closely related weaknesses of this approach:
The twin problems of too many equilibria and the selection of one of
them. Compare the model of this section with the Cournot, or Bertrand,
or von Stackelberg model. In the three classic models, a definite prediction
is made about what will happen. One can (and we do) argue that this
definiteness arises speciously. Insofar as the repeated play model is the
right model, the classic models make an ad hoc assumption about rivals
conjectures, which is virtually equivalent to assuming which equilibrium
2 .
But even this is too pat an answer. Imagi i are i
_'B . gine; that Coca Cola and Pepsi are in all respects
identical. (Of course, they aren't) Should they then collude by each having a presence in
ory, we will leave such enticing issues in industrial organizati iti
Y, we wi ganization and competitive strategy at
this point in the hope that the tools you are learning here will help you study such questions
530 Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
pertains. Unless there is some reason given for the ad hoc assumption,
nothing has been gained except perhaps to explain what sort of conjectures
lead to certain equilibrium outcomes. (But at least the classic models make
predictions definite enough to be refutable.)
A better comparison is with general equilibrium and, in the context
of partial equilibrium, with the usual picture of upward sloping supply
and downward sloping demand. In the latter class of models, a definite
equilibrium prediction is made. In general equilibrium, one mightn't get
a single specific prediction. But as noted in chapter 5, with some high-
powered math, results are available establishing the local uniqueness of
equilibria for most economies. In these contexts, then, one is able to do
local comparative statics jiggle this parameter or that a bit, and see how
the predicted equilibrium can be expected to react. This adds utility to the
model and it gives a handle for testing the model empirically.
Imagine, in contrast, trying to do local comparative statics in a sit-
uation where the folk theorem applies. Only if you have an idea how
equilibrium expectations move with changes in parameters can you hope
to get anywhere. Since the theory is silent on where equilibrium expecta-
tions come from, the theory is of limited help (to put it charitably). What
is needed ig some theory about how and when equilibrium expectations
arise, and how they then adapt to changes in the environment.
A second lacuna in the theory is apparent when we examine closely
the claim that specifying institutions helps us to understand outcomes, at
least in noisy environments. This may be true as far as it goes. (It takes
empirical verification before may be can be replaced by is.) But it
leaves open the question, Where did the institutions come from? With
the benefit of hindsight, we might predict that GE and Westinghouse
would achieve greater collusion after GE changed the rules than before;
we might even make this into a legitimate empirical test by looking cross-
sectionally at a number of industries. But how do we explain why, sud-
denly, GE saw how to change the rules to ifs own benefit? Why weren't
those rules changed before? Is it the changed rules that led to greater
collusion? Or did collusion increase because of the rule changes? More
generally as we look across industries, do variations in the rules reflect
uncontrollable environmental differences, or are institutions the result of
some conscious Or Unconscious choices by participants? The answer is
almost always going to be that both types of factor intrude. But this leads
us to wonder whether there isnt some connection between the chosen
parts of the institutional framework and the equilibrium expectations held
by individuals. And even if we dont find such a connection, having a
theory about how institutions arise and evolve could be more informative
DV ,
ee arn ot eee ener A rl
14.5. Reputation 531
than theories of equilibrium within the context of a given set of institu-
tions.
We will not resolve these puzzles at this point. In fact, we won't re-
solve them in this book at all; their full resolutions are over the horizon of
economic theory at this point. We will return to them, however, especially
in part V and the postscript. For now, we proceed with noncooperative
game theory, having noted some fairly substantial limitations and weak-
nesses.
14.5. Reputation
We have dealt so far with the power of repeated play when two (or
more) parties interact repeatedly. Imagine the following alternative story:
A monopolist sells a particular product, which it is able to make either
high quality or low. Demand for this good depends on its quality: If the
good is high quality, demand is P = 10 X. If it is low quality, demand
is P =4 X. The cost of making high-quality goods is $2 per unit, while
low-quality goods cost $1 per unit to make. Consumers are unable to
observe the level of quality when they purchase the good, although they
learn shortly afterwards just what they bought. |
If we think of this situation as a one-time market, we get the extensive
form representation shown in figure 14.3. And we get a very inefficient
equilibrium. No matter what strategy consumers will use, the firm is bet-
ter off making and selling low-quality goods; making high-quality goods
won't change consumer buying decisions since consumers dont know the
Make
high Frm et Quantity
 to buy
Firm Op
o ~~
Make 5
NN om
quality - : 7
Quantity
to buy
S
wn
Mm
o
Consumer
|
Figure 14.3. A quality choice game.
The firm chooses quality level and sets a price. Consumers purchase
knowing the price, but not knowing for sure what quality the firm chose.
quality of the goods. Consumers realize this and anticipate that the firm
will produce shoddy goods. So the firm sets price at $2.50 apiece, sells 1.5
units of the good (which it makes low quality) and reaps profits of $2.25.
Now imagine that the firm sells the good not once but repeatedly
through time. To be formal, imagine there is a market in this good at the
sequence of dates = 1,2,.... We can imagine that the same consumers
continue to buy this good or that there is a fresh batch of consumers each
period, as long as we maintain one important assumption: Consumers
who might buy at date are aware of the quality of goods sold previously
at dates t1,t2,..., 1. Finally, the firm seeks to maximize its discounted
profits, using discount factor a.
In this new situation, it is still an equilibrium for the firm always to
set price at $2.50, make shoddy goods, and sell 1.5 units per period. But
there are other, more interesting equilibria as well.
Imagine that the consumers adopt the rule: Assume the firm is pro-
ducing high-quality goods as long as the goods produced in the previous
three periods were all of high quality. Otherwise, assume that the goods
produced this period will be shoddy. (For the first three periods, give the
firm the benefit of the doubt. Assume the firm is producing high-quality
goods unless it has produced shoddy goods previously.) Then the firm by
always producing high-quality goods can set a price of $6 each period, sell
four units, and realize profits of $16 per period. Of course, the firm could
take advantage of consumers in any given period by producing shoddy |
goods. That would increase the firm's profits from $16 to $20 during that
period. But the firm would pay for this subsequently; the most it could
make in the next three periods would be $2.25, and if it ever wanted to
get back to those $16 profits, it would have to do worse than that. At rea-
sonable values of a the firm will continue to produce high-quality goods.
And the consumers assumption that the firm is producing high-quality
goods works out.
There is certainly nothing profound or complex in this. We are simply
reinventing in the formal language of game theory the notion of reputation.
Our firm can have either a reputation for selling high-quality goods or
for selling shoddy merchandise. Consumers form their expectations by
looking at recent production by the firm. And, in this case, carrying a
reputation for selling high-quality goods is viable as an equilibrium, The
value of the reputation in the future is always more than what can be
had by taking advantage of it in the short run. Indeed, for a sufficiently
close to one, a firm in this situation would want to invest in reputation.
It would produce high-quality goods for a few periods even if this cost it
money to convince consumers that it produces high-quality goods.
14.5. Reputation 533
It is crucial here that the firm believes its current actions affect its
reputation and, thus, its future demand. If the quality of goods sold at
date never became known to future consumers, or only became known
with a substantial lag, then having a reputation for high quality might not
be viable as an equilibrium in the sense that a firm with a reputation for
high quality would prefer to exploit that reputation in the short run.
This is very much like the construction of the folk theorem, and it
suffers from similar problems. First, there are typically many possible
reputational equilibria. It is not hard to imagine complicating the simple
story above so that there are many possible levels of quality among which
the firm must choose, and it isnt hard to parameterize the problem so that
the firm could carry an (equilibrium) reputation for many of those levels.
(See problem 3.) It will simply depend on what the consumers anticipate
and how they react to the quality levels the firm has previously produced.
Second, given a multiplicity of equilibria, we worry as before about
the lack of a focal point. :
Third, if there is a fixed and finite horizon, these reputation construc-
tions can collapse. In our simple example, consumers in the last period
rationally assume that the firm will end with a run of shoddy goods, no
matter what the firm has produced prior to this. Hence in the next-to-
last period, the firm has no incentive to produce high-quality goods, and
consumers in that period assume as much, and so on, just as before.
Fourth, noisy observables complicate matters. If our firm cannot per-
fectly control the quality of its output, we run into difficulties. Imagine
for example, that when the firm is trying to produce shoddy goods, each
item produced is low quality with probability .9 and high quality with
probability .1, independently of the others. Whereas if the firm is trying
to produce high-quality goods, each item is high quality with probabil-
ity .8 and low quality with probability .2. Then if the firm produces and
sells four items and two are shoddy and two are high quality, what do
consumers do? If they dont sometimes punish the firm, the firm will
certainly always produce shoddy goods, blaming it all on an incredible
string of bad luck. But even if the firm is trying to produce high-quality
goods, every so often it will have an unlucky day. Considerations very
much like those in the previous sections apply.
You shouldn't imagine from our example that reputation can always
do just as much as can be done with the standard model of repeated play.
If we imagined that one player played against a sequence of opponents in
3 .
Although when the party carrying the reputation interacts with a sequence of myopic
opponents, there can be quite natural focal points; see Fudenberg and Levine (1988).
534 Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
the prisoners dilemma game, and if those opponents had only short-run
interests (either because they played only once or because they otherwise
weren't concerned with their own reputations), then the fact that the one
player carries a reputation will get us nothing. All her opponents will
play noncooperatively whatever her reputation is, since noncooperative
play in the static prisoners dilemma is strictly dominant. And so there
is no reason for this one player to carry a reputation for acting coopera
tively.
This raises the question, Is there a neat characterization of what can
be obtained in a reputational equilibrium analogous to the folk theorem?
One needs to be a bit more precise about the setting and about what is
meant by a reputational equilibrium, but results of this sort have been
obtained; see, for example, Fudenberg, Kreps, and Maskin (1989).
This sort of reputation construction is used in many ways in co-
nomics. While the reputation sketched above is beneficial to both sides,
there are other contexts in which one side cultivates a reputation which is
harmful to others. A neat example (because it illustrates the limitations of
reputation vis a vis the folk theorem) is the following somewhat artificial
story concerning market leadership. Imagine a long-lived firm that at a
sequence of dates = 1,2,... is engaged in duopolistic competition with
a sequence of rivals. That is, at date this firm and a rival compete in
a duopoly market; then at date t+ 1 this firm competes against a new
rival. Imagine that at each date the two firms engage Cournot style .
competition. You should think of our standard model of a market for
an undifferentiated good with linear demand P = A X and constant
inal cost c.
i, two firms competed at date t and t+1 and forever into the
future (discounting their profits), then the folk theorem shows how with
sufficiently high discount factors the two could sustain monopoly profits
between themselves. But if one of the two firms competes only at date t,
then it isnt concerned with the future when setting its quantity; its only
concern is with the quantity that the long-lived firm might set. If in the
equilibrium the long-lived firm chooses quantity r, then the short-lived
(date t) firm will choose its quantity optimally in response, using the
response function oir) = Ac )/2.4 So we can never get an
equilibrium where the long-lived firm and its rivals share the monopoly
profits unless the long-lived firm produces nothing. You can easily confirm
that zr, + zi(zr) > (A 0/2 for zg, > 0.
4 In this problem, even if the long-lived firm sets quantity randomly, the same response
function works with zp, now the expected value of the long-lived firm's quantity as long as
the total quantity supp! ied is always less or equal to A-c.
14.5. Reputation 535
But now consider the following equilibrium: The long-lived firm pro-
duces (A )/2 in each period, as long as it has produced (A )/2 in
the past. If ever the long-lived firm deviates from this production plan,
it will produce (A )/3 thereafter. The short-lived firms each produce
(Ac)/4, as long as the long-lived firm in the past has produced (Ac)/2.
But if ever the long-lived firm produces something other than (A )/2,
the short-lived firms all subsequently produce (4 )/3.
You can check that for a discount factor a that is sufficiently close to
one (> 9/17, if you work it out) this describes an equilibrium. A colorful
story goes with this equilibrium. Our long-lived firm has the reputation
of being a Stackelberg leader; it sets its quantity at (Ac)/2, expecting its
rivals to reply with (Ac)/4. Of course, in any single period given that it
expects its rival to produce (A )/4, it would prefer (in this round) to set
its quantity at 3(Ac)/8. But if it does this, it loses its reputation for being
a Stackelberg leader, after which all its (subsequent) rivals assume it will
produce the standard Cournot output (A )/3, to which they optimally
reply with the same level of output. Note two things here. First, in this
equilibrium we have the short-lived firms always producing on their short-
run optimal reaction function to what the long-lived firm does. This is a
quite general property of this sort of equilibrium. Second, the short-lived
firms are worse off in this equilibrium than they would be if the long-lived
firm couldn't carry a reputation.
A number of simple variations on this story can be played. We can
turn it into a story about entry deterrence if we imagine that all the firms
involved have fixed costs. For example, consider the parameterization we
have used in tales of entry deterrence: Demand is given by P=9-X,
marginal costs are = 1, and fixed costs are $2.25. And consider the
following equilibrium: The long-lived firm produces 5 units, as long as it
has produced 5 units in the past. If ever it produces something other than
5 units, it produces 8/3 thereafter. The short-lived firms produce nothing
(which we will assume avoids the fixed cost) as long as the long-lived firm
has in the past produced 5 units each period, but if ever the long-lived
firm deviates from this, short-lived firms subsequently enter and produce
8/3 apiece. You should have no trouble telling the story that goes with
this equilibrium.
Or consider the original story, but now with noise in the market price
as in Green and Porter. This one is left to you as a problem, but try to
guess before thinking about it. Should the long-lived firm be punished
if observed prices are higher than expected or lower? Also left to you is
the following very easy exercise. What happens to our basic story if the
long-lived and short-lived firms engage in Bertrand style competition?
We will see other, very important applications of this reputation con-
struction in chapter 20.
14.6. Reputation redux: Incomplete information
The details of this section are difficult, and nothing that follows in the book
builds on this section. This can be regarded as optional material for a first reading.
One of the deficiencies of the constructions explored so far in this chapter
is that they depend heavily on there always being a future that can be used to
influence current behavior. It isnt necessary to have infinitely many periods;
in the variation where there is always a probability of at least one more
round, there are only finitely many periods before the game ends but it
cant be that players can predict that the game will end by some definite time
in the future. For once there is a definite terminus to the game; the sorts
of cooperative and reputational equilibria that we've been constructing tend
to unravel Behavior is fixed in the final period, which then fixes it in the
penultimate, and so on.
The theory, then, seems to imply that these constructions rely crucially on
a horizon that never does loom up. But, as we've noted several times now,
this doesnt seem right intuitively. And it certainly isnt right empirically.
When students play, say, the prisoners dilemma twenty times, where it is
understood from the start that there will be only twenty rounds, there is
usually some cooperation early on.
Or consider the game between players 1 and 2 depicted in figure 144.
This game goes with the following story. Player 2 is an incumbent monopolist
in some market. Player 1 is a potential entrant. First player 1 must decide }
whether or not to enter player 2's market. If player 1 enters, then player 2
must decide whether to acquiesce to this entry or to fight the entry (with
slashed prices, etc). This game has two Nash equilibria in pure strategies.
In the first, player 1 enters and player 2 acquiesces. In the second, player 1
doesnt enter and player 2 fights entry if it comes (which it doesnt). By now
you will recognize that only the first of these is subgame perfect, and it is the
usual prediction that would be made if player 1 and 2 play this game once.
1 2 i
o Enter -o Acquiesce - (11)
Don't enter Jr
0,2) 1,1)
Figure 14.4. The chain-store stage game.
 Actually, this happens only if there is a single equilibrium in the static stage game. If
there are multiple equilibria in the stage game, even with a finite horizon one can construct
cooperative or reputational equilibria. See Benoit and Krishna (1985) for details.
es lh mam
lie ee eee ees
14.6. Reputation redux: Incomplete information 537
But now add the following complication. Player 2 will play this game
not once but, say, twenty times in sequence, each time against a different
opponent. Each of 2s opponents plays the game once and once only. The
order of play is set, and players 1 who play later observe what happened in
earlier rounds of play. The story that goes with this is: Player 2 is a chain-
store monopolist with twenty stores in as many towns. In each town, there
is the threat of entry from a firm that will if it enters be active in that town
only. Moreover, there is a set sequence of actions: The entrant in some given
town must decide whether to enter or not and the chain store must react to
that entry; then in a second given town the entry-reaction decisions must be
taken, and so on.
The theory dictates that this complication doesnt really change matters.
In the last round, if the entrant enters, the only subgame perfect reaction for
the chain store is to acquiesce. But then in round nineteen, the same is true,
and 50 on; the unique subgame perfect equilibrium has every entrant entering
in turn and the chain store always acquiescing,.
If we string out infinitely many of these stage games, we can get a dif-
ferent equilibrium using a reputation construction as in the previous section.
One equilibrium is: No entrant enters as long as the chain store has never ac-
quiesced. Every entrant enters subsequent to the chain store ever acquiescing.
The chain store fights any entry, as long as it never previously acquiesced.
And the chain store acquiesces if ever, by chance, it had acquiesced previ-
ously. You can verify that this equilibrium is subgame perfect. Roughly put,
the chain store is willing to fight any entry because, although this is costly in
the short run, it is more costly to acquiesce and invite entry from all subse-
quent entrants.
As with the finitely and infinitely repeated prisoners dilemma, the theo-
retical dichotomy between the finite and the infinite repetition versions of the
chain store game does not have much intuitive appeal. Indeed, in the original
paper on this subject, Selten (1978) finds this dichotomy so counterintuitive
that he refers to it as the chain-store paradox.
We saw yet another example of the same sort of thing in the centipede
game of chapter 12. This game, reproduced here in figure 14.5(a), has a
unique subgame perfect equilibrium in which the two players pick D at every
node. It has some subgame imperfect equilibria as well, but every Nash
equilibrium necessarily begins with player 1 choosing D. Nonetheless, this
doesnt seem a very intuitive solution to this game, and this game, played by
students and other experimental subjects, certainly doesnt always end with
player 1 choosing D at the first opportunity. We say this is another example
of the same sort of thing because the argument that the game has a unique
subgame perfect equilibrium involves the same sort of unravelling from the
back: Player 2 will surely choose D at his last node, so player 1 will surely
choose D at the next-to-last node, and so on.
I next present an argument for why this equilibrium seems unintuitive,
which I will later tie back to the notion of reputation. The argument in-
volves the incomplete information variation on the basic game depicted in
figure 14.5(b). In this game of incomplete information, we suppose that player
1's payoffs are determined by nature. With probability .999 they are as in the
538
Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
2 1A 2A1A 2A 100
oA, A ou Ae lro Lees 100
9 98 97 99 98
99 9g 100 99 101
(a)
 ; To IP P 
1 A Ala Ala A 100
1.999) 0-Le ps es p>-0>9>8>0> 4,
D /|D /lp |p flop |p /|D
2/ 2/ 2/ 2/
70 S96 98 S97 9 9B
1 FE: J 99 8 100 997 101
1 x aA Fala Sala SA 0
1.001} 0B 6 Ls ces 80-0->0>0-> 4
IP | | I P I 
1 0 0 -1 0 -1 0
1 3 99 98 100 99 101
(0
Figure 14.5. The centipede game and a variation.
ricinal centipede game, while with probability .001, these payoffs make play-
me A until ihe end of the game a dominant strategy. Think of the following
story. Player 2 assesses, at the outset, a one-in-one-thousand chance that his
opponent overflows with the milk of human kindness and will play Aat ev-
ery opportunity. Player 1 is aware that player 2 entertains this hypothesis,
and player 1 is aware that player 2 doesnt put much store by it. Player 2
only gives it a one-in-one-thousand chance.
It certainly isn't part of an equilibrium in this variation for player 1 to
play D at the outset (and thereafter) in the top half of the game. Why? Because
if player 1 plays this way in the top half of the game, then player 2, given
the move, will believe (by applying Bayes rule) that he is in the bottom half
of the game. Believing this, he plays A until the last node (when he plays
D) in anticipation that player 1 will play A at each of her nodes. But then
it is in player 1s interests in the top half of the game to play A until the
next-to-last node, beating 2 to the punch by one. Which then causes our logic
to go haywire, as player 2 won't conclude on the basis of A at the first node
that he is in the bottom half of the game.
What does the equilibrium of this game look like? What follows is,
unhappily, not entirely transparent. But 1 know of no way around this.
i1t is Hime to remind you that you were specifically warned about this example in
ete
Gores el
 rere + + sre rm ae pr an
14.6. Reputation redux: Incomplete information 539
The game has a unique sequential equilibrium, which can be obtained
by reasoning back from the last round. First, let me label the nodes 1x, 2x,
3x, ..., 198x, where x is t for top and b for bottom, and where 1x is the last
node in the sequence, 2x is the second to last, and so on. Note that at nodes
with an odd number for an index player 2 moves, while at even numbered
nodes player 1 chooses. (Sorry about that.) Since player 2's information sets
contain pairs of nodes (2n+1)tand (2n+1)b, his actions at these nodes must
be the same; we will speak of his move at information set 2n +1.
Because player 1 chooses A for sure in the bottom half of the tree and
there is prior probability .001 that the bottom half prevails, player 2 is never
completely surprised to be given the move back if he chooses A. This implies
that 2s beliefs at each of his information sets can be computed by Bayes
rule from 1's strategy, whatever that strategy is. We will use pn. to denote
the probability 2 assesses that he is in the top half of the tree, given that
information set 2n + 1 has been reached. Note that psa < .999 for all n
(since player 1 chooses A for sure in the bottom part of the tree).
At information set 1, player 2 chooses D for sure by dominance. Hence
at node 2t, player 1 chooses D. 
Now move back to information set 3. Player 2 computes: If he plays D, he will
get 100. If he plays A, he will get 101 if he is in the bottom half of the tree
and 99 if he is in the top half. Letting us; denote his probability assessment
that he is in the top half of the tree, he nets expected value 99u; + 101(1 us)
by playing A, and so he chooses A if pu; < 1/2, Dif ps > 1/2, and he is
indifferent if pu; =1/2.
Now go back to node 4t. Player 1 nets 98 at node 4t by choosing D. If she
chooses A, she nets 97 if player 2 follows up with D and 99 if player 2
follows with A. So what she will do depends, in equilibrium, on 2's beliefs at
information set 3: If he will believe pu; < 1/2, then he will play A, in which
case she plays A. If he will believe yu; > 1/2, then he will play D, in which
case she will play D. If he will believe ps = 1/2 and he chooses to randomize
exactly 50-50 between A and D, she is indifferent at node 4t.
(a) Since ps < 1, it cant be part of an equilibrium for him to believe ps > 1/2.
Because if we suppose these are going to be his beliefs, she will choose D at
* 4, and Bayes rule will give him beliefs of yu; = 0, contradicting ps > 1/2.
(b) Could it be that us < 1/2? This is possible if and only if us < 1/2 because,
if ps is going to be less than 1/2, he will play A at information set 3. Thus
she will play A at node 4t. Thus, by Bayes rule, us = ys. So if ys; is to be
less than 1/2, then ps < 1/2 in an equilibrium. Conversely, if ps < 1/2, then
Bayes rule implies that ps < ps < 1/2 and he will play A at information set
3, so she will play A at 4t (and pus = ps).
(c) This leaves the case where us > 1/2. We cant have pus < 1/2, and we
cant have ps > 1/2, so we will have to have py; = 1/2. Denote by my the
chapter 1.
In fact, the game has a unique Nash equilibrium; this is left as an exercise.
540
Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
equilibrium probability that 1 chooses A at 4t. Then given =, and ps, Bayes
rule is used to compute yu; as
HsTs
Ha = psmy + (1 ps)
Since we need pu; = 1/2, this gives us m = (1 ps)/ps. This tells us a few
things. First, at information set 5, player 2 assesses probability 1 us+ mus =
2(1 ps) that player 1 will play A next time. So if us < 3/4, he definitely
wishes to play A at information set 5. If, on the other hand, us > 3/4, he
definitely wishes to play D at information set 5. And he is indifferent if
us = 3/4. (Recall that if yz = 1/2, he has expected payoff of 100 starting from
information set 3.) Next, unless us = 1/2, the only way we will get pu; = 1/2
is if 0 < my < 1. This requires that player 1 is indifferent between A and D at
node 4t, which in turn requires that player 2 at information set 3 randomizes
precisely 50-50 between A and D.
This nails everything down (in terms of ps) at nodes 4t and at informa-
tion set 3 except for the knife-edge case where pus = 1/2. In this case, us = 1/2
only if player 1 plays A for sure at 4t. And player 1 will play A for sure as
long as player 2 chooses A with probability 1/2 or more at information set 3.
So in this knife-edge case, we do have a bit of freedom in what happens.
Now back to information set 5. We already know rather a lot. If ps > 3/4,
player 2 will choose D for sure. If us < 3/4, he will choose A for sure. If
us = 3/4, he is indifferent, and his expected payoff is 99. All of which we use
when we ...
... nove back to node 6t. The analysis here is a lot like the analysis of 6t, except
the role of us = 1/2 is replaced by us = 3/4. Essentially, if pu; < 3/4, then
player 2 is sure to play A at information set 5, so 1 plays A at 6t and us = y7.
If pu, > 3/4, then the only way to have an equilibrium is to get us = 3/4 
this determines what player 1 must do at 6t. If py, = 3/4, there is a bit of
latitude in what player 2 must do at information set 5; while if pu; > 3/4,
player 1 must randomize at 6t, which fixes the needed randomization of 2
at information set 5. And when we compute what 1 must do at 6t to get us
from py > 3/4 to ps = 3/4, we have begun to ...
... move back to information set 7. If pu; < 7/8, player 2 will play A for sure; if
#7 > 7/8, he will play D for sure; and if yr = 7/8, he is indifferent.
The pattern emerges. The crucial thing on which to focus is that if
ps < 15/16, player 2 will definitely play A at information set 9, and so on.
In particular, if pong < 1023/1024 for n > 10, player 2 will definitely play
A at information set Zn +1. And then, prior to this, player 1 will play A at
node @n)t, for n > 11. But pana < .999 < 1023/1024 for every n, since .999
"In defense of our claim that the game has a unique sequential equilibrium, we later
argue that this knife-edge case doesnt happen given the initial conditions specified for the
game.
14.6. Reputation redux: Incomplete information 541
is the prior. For most of the game, until the last 22 or so moves (out of 198),
player 1 (in both halves of the game) and player 2 both choose A for sure,
which is completely the reverse of what they are meant to do according to
subgame perfection in the simple centipede game.
Of course, this is rather complex. The final 22 or so moves involve a
complicated dance of mixed strategies that keep player 2 willing to randomize
so that player 1 is willing to randomize so that ...; I am not claiming that the
precise equilibrium is very intuitive. But, setting aside those final twenty-two
moves, the main effect does have a good deal of intuition to it.
Player 2 risks one unit of payoff by choosing A instead of D. The potential
gains are substantial. If there is a moderate chance of reaping those gains, it
would be worthwhile to give A a try. But that isn't all there is to it. Note
that the potential gains are on the order of 100. And the chance that player 1
will always play A is only .001. So if player 1 in the top half of the game
were always to play D, this wouldn't be a worthwhile investment for player 2.
What makes it worthwhile is that it is in the interests of 1 in the top half of
the game to convince 2 to keep trying A. Hence it is in 1's interests to play A.
And 2, recognizing this, has it in her own interests to play A.
Do not be misled by this argument into thinking that this is simple or
straightforward. Exactly the same argument could be made for the original
centipede game, and in the original game this argument isn't consistent with
any equilibrium. Perhaps the best way to put it is: It is in the interests of
both 1 and 2 to play A until near the end of the game. But each.one will do so
(in equilibrium) only if she believes that she can, on average, beat the other
player to the punch. In an equilibrium, their beliefs have to be consistent, and
it is inconsistent in the original game for each to think that she will outguess
the other. But when we add a little incomplete information about player 1,
player 2 can believe that he will outguess player 1 because, with small
probability, player 1 will permit herself to be outguessed. From this small
wedge, we are able to get them both to play A happily until near the end of
the game.
How tied is this to the precise specification of incomplete information
that we used? Certainly the number of rounds back and forth plays no role
at all, once that number gets beyond the twenty-two nodes needed to reach
a point where each plays A for sure. If you look over the proof, it doesnt
matter whether there are 198 nodes, or 28, or 199,998; except for the last
twenty-two, each side plays A with certainty. The size of the probability
that 1 is benevolent isnt so important. If we changed the .001 to .0001 (one in
ten thousand!), it would take four more pairs of rounds from the back to get
to the point where both sides choose A with probability one. The nature of
1's jrrationality isnt so crucial; the same basic conclusion would be derived
if player 2 assesses small probability that player 1 will play A until sometime
in the last ten rounds. And it isnt even necessary that 2 have any real doubts
about 1's rationality. Imagine a game of incomplete information in which there
are three possible initial nodes. The first has probability .998, and player 1
has precisely the payoffs as in the original centipede game. The second has
probability .001, and player 1 has precisely the payoffs as in the original game.
And the third has probability .001, and player 1 is benevolent. Moreover,
542 Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
player 2 knows when the first starting point prevails, but is unsure when
one of the second two prevails which it is. And player 1 is unsure when
one of the first two starting points prevail which it is. In other words, with
probability .998 player 1 is rational and player 2 is aware of that. But in that
event, player 1 isn't sure that player 2 is aware of that; player 1 thinks there
is a small chance that player 2 thinks there is a good chance that player 1 is
benevolent. Player 1, in this case, will give the move to player 2 to see if
player 2 is perhaps confused (which player 2 indicates by giving the move
back to player 1). And player 2, even if he isn't confused, gives the move
back to player 1; the same sort of construction works.
These are Very complex games with very complex equilibria. I do not
want to suggest that the equilibria are in any sense obvious solutions. Whether
people put in the position of having to play these games exhibit behavior that
conforms to these equilibria is a nontrivial empirical question. For some initial
investigation into this, see Camerer and Weigelt (1988).
At the same time, games like this demonstrate, I think, why the theo-
retical solution of the original centipede game isnt very intuitive. A one-in-
one-thousand chance that ones opponent is generous, or that ones opponent
assesses a substantial probability that oneself is benevolent, isn't much of a
change in the game. Yet it completely changes the theoretical prediction.
In any game where such a small change in the formulation can result in such
a large change in the theoretical prediction, one will want to be very wary
of the theoretical prediction. At the risk of confusing you unnecessarily, we
should backreference the discussion of chapter 13 on subgame perfection at
this poinf. The argument there was that if deviations can be attributed to
an a priori small chance that players have very different payoffs from those
in the model of the game, the motivation behind subgame perfection and
sequential rationality might be missing. Here we see something worse: For
games with this sort of back and forth structure, such attributions can lead to
behavior that is very different from Nash equilibrium behavior in the original
game, for reasonably sized perturbations. Let me put it this way: Before we
attacked subgame perfection on grounds that it wasn't robust to this sort of
perturbation. Now we are attacking the notion of Nash equilibrium, when
one has a game like the centipede game where the set of Nash equilibria is
not robust to these perturbations. *
And to tie this back to reputation and finitely repeated games: In the
finitely repeated prisoners dilemma, suppose one player assesses a small
probability that the second will irrationally play the strategy of tit-for-tat:
 There is a theoretical difference between the two points. In our constructions at the
end of chapter 13, used to show why a subgame imperfect equilibrium might be reasonable
prediction, we can make the small probability that a player is irrational as small as we
wish (if still strictly positive), and our argument is unaffected. In the construction here, if
the probability that player 1 is benevolent is, say, smaller than 1/2%9, then there is a sub-
stantial chance that player 1 will play D to start the game. (Put very mathematically, the
Nash equilibrium correspondence is upper semi-continuous in these sorts of perturbations,
for a fixed extensive form.) But this distinction is not of practical significance. If a 1/1000
chance of very different payoffs is enough to upset the analysis for a given.game, surely the
conclusions of the analysis are not altogether trustworthy.
14.7. Bibliographic notes 543
Do to your opponent whatever your opponent did to you on the previous
round. In a long-enough (but still finite) repetition of the game, if you think
your opponent plays tit-for-tat, you will want to give cooperation a try. And
even if your opponent isn't jrrational in this fashion, the rational thing
for her to do is to mimic this sort of behavior to keep cooperation alive.
Or, in the chain-store game, imagine that the long-lived player 2 with small
probability will fight any entry into any of his markets, even if it is financially
costly, because he just doesnt like entrants. A rational player 2 would
mimic this behavior to convince entrants that he will act in this fashion to
keep them from entering. And so entrants, afraid of being fought either
because 2 is really irrational or wishes to appear irrational, choose not to
enter.
We can think of these effects as reputation in the sense that a player
will act irrationally to keep alive the possibility that she is irrational, if
being thought of as irrational will later be to that player's benefit through its
influence on how others play. That is, in this sort of situation, players must
weigh against the short-run benefits of certain actions the long-run conse-
quences of their actions. I take this short- versus long-run trade-off to be the
hallmark of reputation, thus qualifying for this sort of model as an example
of the general phenomenon of reputation.
14.7. Bibliographic notes
When structuring a map of the literature on this topic, the following
categories are useful. Divide at the broadest level between (D) constructions
in the style of sections 14.2 through 14.6, which depend on an infinite
horizon, and (II) those that use a bit of incomplete information and so
can work in finite horizon models. At the next step, divide between A)
models where two or more players play the game repeatedly and (B) those
where one or more of the players are short-lived. Then divide into three:
(1) analysis of the average payoff criterion (and more sensitive criteria
related to it); (2) analysis of the discounted payoff criterion, for a fixed
discount rate less than one; and (3) analysis of the limit set of equilibria
in the discounted payoff formulation, as the discount factor goes to one.
Finally, we can divide between formulations (a) without and (b) with noisy
observables.
On repeated games and the folk theorem with an average payoff cri-
terion and no noise, or category (IAla), Rubinstein (1979) is a very good
place to begin. The seminal references for the case of noise (category
[IA1b]) are Radner (1985), Rubinstein (1979), and Rubinstein and Yaari
(1983). :
When we move to discounted payoffs, most of the action concerns
the structure of efficient equilibria. For the analysis without noisy ob-
servables (IA2a), consilt Abreu (1988). See also Abreu (1986) on applica-
544 Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
tions to Cournot competition, following on the seminal work of Friedman
(1971). When noise is added (IAZb), see Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti
(1989). Green and Porter (1984) and Abreu, Pearce, and Stacchetti (1986)
concern noisy observables in repeated Cournot competition. We should
also mention the classic, pregame theoretic paper on oligopolistic collusion
by Stigler (1964).
The limit set of equilibria as the discount factor goes to one, without
noise or category (IA3a), is the subject of the first half of Fudenberg and
Maskin (1986). With noise added (category [IA3b]), see Fudenberg, Levine,
and Maskin (1989) and Matsushima (1988).
Concerning models where there are short-run players, which we in-
troduced under the rubric of reputation, the basic notion goes back at least
as far as Simon (1951), who works with an example that we will discuss
in chapter 20. A number of applications have appeared since, but (to my
knowledge) the first formalization of a folk theorem for this situation is
Fudenberg, Kreps, and Maskin (1989), which covers categories (IB1) and
(IB3a). Fudenberg and Levine (1989) concerns category (IB3b).
Concerning cooperation and reputation in finite horizon models, Sel-
ten (1978) is the classic reference pointing to the problem, and Rosenthal
(1981) contains a very important commentary and prospectus for later
theoretical developments. Benoit and Krishna (1985) show how, when
the stage game has multiple equilibria, one can make folk-theorem-like
constructions even in a finite horizon model. Models using incomplete
information were first explored in Kreps, Milgrom, Roberts, and Wilson
(1982) (cooperation in the prisoners dilemma for two long-lived players),
and Kreps and Wilson (1982) and Milgrom and Roberts (1982) {entry de-
terrence in a case with one long-lived player playing against a sequence
of opponents). The back half of Fudenberg and Maskin (1986) concerns
folk-theorem-like results for this sort of model, when all players are long-
lived, while Fudenberg and Levine (1988) contains general analysis of the
problem with one long-lived player. Fudenberg and Kreps (1987) concerns
models of reputation where one player plays against many opponents si-
multaneously instead of in sequence. Hart (1985) analyzes the general
case of repeated games with one-sided incomplete information and no
discounting.
There is a large literature on repeated play of constant-sum games
with incomplete information about which we have said nothing. Aumann
(1985) provides a survey and introduction.
8 This paper is also the origin of the centipede game.
14.7. Bibliographic notes 545
References
Abreu, D. 1986. Extremal Equilibria of Oligopolistic Supergames. Journal
of Economic Theory 39:191-225.
1988. On the Theory of Infinitely Repeated Games with Dis-
counting. Econometrica 56:383-96.
Abreu, D., D. Pearce, and E. Stacchetti. 1986. Optimal Cartel Equilibria
with Imperfect Monitoring. Journal of Economic Theory 39:251-69.
. 1989. Toward a Theory of Discounted Repeated Games with
Imperfect Monitoring. Harvard University. Mimeo. Forthcoming in
Econometrica.
Aumann, R. 1985. Repeated Games. In Issues in Contemporary Microeco-
nomics and Welfare, G. Feiwel, ed., 209-42. London: Macmillan.
Benoit, J.-P, and V. Krishna. 1985. Finitely Repeated Games. Economet-
rica 53:905-22. }
Camerer, C., and K. Weigelt. 1988. Experimental Tests of a Sequential
Equilibrium Reputation Model. Econometrica 56:1-36.
Friedman, J. 1971. A Noncooperative Equilibrium for Supergames. Re-
view of Economic Studies 28:1-12.
Fudenberg, D., and D. Kreps. 1987. Reputation in the Simultaneous Play
of Multiple Opponents. Review of Economic Studies 54:541-68.
Fudenberg, D., D. Kreps, and E. Maskin, 1989. Repeated Games with
Long-run and Short-run Players. Massachusetts Institute of Technol~
ogy. Mimeo.
Fudenberg, D., and D. Levine. 1988. Reputation and Equilibrium Selec-
tion in Games with a Single Patient Player. Massachusetts Institute
of Technology. Mimeo. Forthcoming in Econometrica.
.. 1989. Equilibrium Payoffs with Long-run and Short-run Players
and Imperfect Public Information. Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology. Mimeo.
Fudenberg, D., D. Levine, and E. Maskin. 1989. The Folk Theorem with
Imperfect Public Information. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Mimeo.
Fudenberg, D., and E. Maskin. 1986. The Folk Theorem in Repeated
Games with Discounting or with Incomplete Information. Economet-
rica 54:532-54.
Green, E., and R. Porter. 1984. Non-cooperative Collusion Under Imper-
fect Price Information. Econometrica 52:975-94.
Hart, S. 1985. Nonzero Sum Two-person Repeated Games with Incom-
plete Information. Mathematics of Operations Research 10:117-53.
Kreps, D., P. Milgrom, J. Roberts, and R. Wilson. 1982. Rational Coopera-
tion in the Finitely Repeated Prisoners Dilemma. Journal of Economic
Theory 27:245-52.
Kreps, D., and R. Wilson. 1982. Reputation and Imperfect Information.
Journal of Economic Theory 27:253-79.
Matsushima, H. 1988. Efficiency in Repeated Games with Imperfect Mon-
itoring. University of Tsukuba. Mimeo. Forthcoming in Journal of
Economic Theory.
Milgrom, P., and J. Roberts. 1982. Predation, Reputation, and Entry
Deterrence. Journal of Economic Theory 27:280-312.
Porter, M. 1983. General Electric versus Westinghouse in Large Turbine
Generators. In Cases in Competitive Strategies, 102-18. New York: Free
Press.
Radner, R. 1985. Repeated Partnership Games with Imperfect Monitoring
and No Discounting. Review of Economics Studies 53:43-58.
Rosenthal, R. 1981. Games of Perfect Information, Predatory Pricing, and
the Chain-store Paradox. Journal of Economic Theory 25:92-100.
Rubinstein, A. 1979. An Optimal Conviction Policy for Offences that May
Have Been Committed by Accident. In Applied Game Theory, S. Brams,
A. Schotfer, and G. Schwodiauer, eds. Wurzburg: Physica-Verlag.
Rubinstein, A., and M. Yaari. 1983. Repeated Insurance Contracts and
Moral Hazard. Journal of Economic Theory 30:74-97.
Selten, R. 1978. The Chain-store Paradox. Theory and Decision 9:127-59.
Simon, H. 1951. A Formal Theory of the Employment Relationship.
Econometrica 19:293-305.
Smith, A. [1776] 1976. The Wealth of Nations. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Stigler, G. 1964. A Theory of Oligopoly. Journal of Political Economy 72:44~
61.
Sultan, R. 1975. Pricing in the Electrical Oligopoly. Harvard Graduate School
of Business Administration, Division of Research, research report.
14.8. Problems
a 1. In a number of places in this chapter, I used phrases like XYZ is an
equilibrium if (the probability of going on to the next round) or a (the
discount factor) is large enough. In this problem, you are asked to puzzle
through, What is large enough?
14.8. Problems 547
(a) In the prisoners dilemma game, we said that as long as g > 3/8, the
threat of any player to meet noncooperation with noncooperation forever
would sustain cooperation. Give the calculations that support the 3/8. We
also said that for large enough g, it would be enough to threaten to meet
noncooperation with one round of noncooperation. To be precise, assume
each player adopts the strategy: Play cooperatively unless and until ones
opponent plays noncooperatively. Then play noncooperatively for one
round. Then go back to playing cooperatively even if your opponent
didnt cooperate in the single round of punishment. And if, by chance or
otherwise, a player happens not to cooperate at a time when punishment
isnt called for, then the player does not cooperate for the one stage of
punishment. For which values of is this an equilibrium?
(b) In the discussion of Stackelberg leadership arising from reputation (near
the end of section 14.5), a large-enough a was claimed to be one greater
than 9/17. Give calculations that lead to this particular number.
m 2. In the discussion of noisy observables in section 14.3, we proposed
in passing the following sort of model for repeated play of the prisoners
dileruna. Players choose their intended strategies on each round, passing
instructions to a referee for implementation. The referee then implements
those intentions noisily: If told to play a noncooperative strategy, the
referee plays this strategy with probability .8, but with probability .2, the
referee plays cooperatively. If told to play cooperatively, the referee plays
cooperatively with probability .8 and noncooperatively with probability .2.
Players know what instructions they sent, and at the end of each round
the referees implementation of both strategies are revealed to both players.
But players dont know what instructions their opponents sent. Assume
that = .9 and that the random ending of the game in any round and
the referees random implementations of strategies are all mutually and
serially independent as random variables.
(a) Prove that it is a Nash equilibrium for players always to send instruc-
tions to play noncooperatively. What is the expected payoff to the players
in this equilibrium?
(b) Suppose players adopt the strategy: Instruct the referee to play cooper-
atively until either player fails to cooperate (in terms of the implemented
strategy) and thereafter instruct the referee to play noncooperatively. Is
this an equilibrium? If so, what are the expected payoffs to the players in
this equilibrium?
(0) Suppose players adopt the strategy: Instruct the referee to play coop-
548 Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
eratively until either player fails to cooperate. Then instruct the referee
to play noncooperatively for N periods. Then instruct the referee to play
cooperatively again until the next incident of noncooperation. For which
NN is this an equilibrium? For the smallest such IV, what are the expected
payoffs to the players in this equilibrium?
(d) Now suppose we have a less capricious referee one that follows
instructions with probability .95. Redo parts (a), (b), and (c).
83. In terms of reputation for quality, imagine that we have a firm that can
produce a good at any quality level in the interval [0,1], where 0 means
a good of low quality, and 1 means a good of exceptionally high quality.
Demand for the good depends on consumer perceptions of the good's
quality. If consumers anticipate that the good is of quality g, their demand
is given by P = 4 + 6g X, where X is the quantity demanded. Costs
of manufacture depend on the quality level of the good being produced;
it costs a constant marginal 2 + 6> to produce a unit of quality level g.
Consider the repeated setting described in section 14.5: In each period, the
firm chooses a quality level and price. Consumers see the price but not
(until after they have bought) the quality level. But consumers do know
the level of ualities the firm has produced previously. Assume the firm
discounts profits with a discount factor = .9. For which levels of quality
q is there a viable reputational equilibrium, that is, an equilibrium where
(along the path) the firm produces in each period at quality level g?
= 4. Recall our discussion of the prisoners dilemma game in circumstances
where one distinguished player plays a sequence of opponents. Each op-
ponent plays only once, but is able to observe what the one player did
earlier. We remarked that in this case even though the one player can
carry a reputation, it doesnt help because her opponents, who have no
reputation, will always play noncooperatively no matter what she does or
what she has done previously. In light of this, suppose we change the rules
of the prisoners dilemma so that first the opponent moves in full view of
the distinguished player, and then that player responds. Will reputation
help in this case?
m5. (a) What would happen to the Stackelberg leadership story at the end
of section 14.5 if competition in each period were Bertrand style instead
of Cournot style?
(b) What would happen to this story if we added noise as in Green and
Porter? That is, firms pick their output quantities, and price is then a
random function of the sum of the quantities. This is a very open-ended
14.8. Problems 549
question, but at least consider: Suppose we try to construct a trigger
price equilibrium, where if price is observed beyond the trigger, we revert
to the standard Cournot equilibrium for a while. Should the trigger be
above or below the average equilibrium price?
m 6. Prove that in the variation on the centipede game given in figure
14.5(b) the unique sequential equilibrium described is, in fact, the unique
Nash equilibrium. (Hint: Take some presumed Nash equilibrium and sup-
pose information set 2n+1 [for player 2] is the first unreached information
set.- Derive an immediate contradiction. Then suppose that node (2n)t is
the first unreached information set and derive a contradiction that is one
degree removed from immediate.)
a 7. The purpose of this problem is to explore what happens in duopoly
when the duopolists are able to use two-part tariffs.
(a) Imagine two commodities snaffle and manna. A single consumer
has a utility function of the form u(z,2) = z bz? + z, where z is the
amount of snaffle consumed, and z is the amount of manna. The price of
manna is always set to be 1. This utility function applies for all levels of
snaffle, which just goes to show that too much snaffle can be a bad thing,
Two firms sell snaffle, called Ace Snaffle Vendors (ASV) and United Zeus
Snaffle (UZS). Although it won't be relevant until the next part of the
problem, both of these firms have a simple production technology; they
can produce as much snaffle as they want at a variable unit cost of .1 per
unit. In addition, they each face a fixed cost K if they decide to produce
any snaffle at all; we dont preclude the possibility that K = 0. Each firm
charges a two-part tariff for snaffle; if a consumer buys any snaffle from
the firm at all, the consumer must pay k; up front, and in addition the
consumer must pay ; per unit snaffle consumed. Here, 7 =11 for ASV and
i =2 for UZS. (You may assume that both k; and ; must be nonnegative.)
Suppose our single consumer faces prices k; and ; from ASV and k, and
; from UZS. Snaffle is snaffle it doesnt matter from whom it comes.
Characterize as best you can the demand of the consumer.
(b) There is a large number of identical consumers in this economy 
say, 100,000. Suppose the snaffle market operates as follows. First, ASV
and UZS must declare (simultaneously and independently) whether they
wish to produce any snaffle. If they decide to do so, then they incur the
fixed cost K. Each sees whether the other has decided to be active or not,
and then the active firm(s) (simultaneously and independently) declares
its two-part tariff scheme k; and ;. Consumers see those two-part tariffs
550 Chapter fourteen: Repeated play: Cooperation and reputation
and then decide whether to order any snaffle at all, and from whom.
Consumers do this to maximize their utility. Firms act to maximize their
(expected) profits.
We are looking for all the subgame-perfect, pure strategy equilibria of this
game. As a function of K, what are they?
(c) Now suppose that this sort of game is repeated indefinitely. (N.B., in
each period, firms decide whether to be in or not [and thus incur the
fixed cost that period]; a firm can be out in one period and in the next.)
Consumers discount their utility in each period at discount rate .9 per
period. Firms discount their profits at the same rate. For K =1, which
of the following describe the outcome of a subgame perfect equilibrium.
Support your contentions.
(1) Firms are both active in every period, and each makes half of what a
monopoly firm would make.
(ii) Only one firm (UZS, say) is active in every period, and this firm makes
what a monopoly firm would make.
(iif) Only one firm (ASV, say) is active in every period, and this firm makes
zero profits fn each period.
corinne col
meer
ee eee met
ee ers lm
rea Wr ge
chapter fifteen
Bilateral bargaining
After discussing monopoly, many principles and intermediate microeco-
nomics books move on to the cases of monopsony (one buyer and many
sellers) and bilateral monopoly (one buyer and one seller). The analysis of
monopsony is straightforward after monopoly; the monopsonist, taking
his supply curve S(z) as given, equates the marginal value of the factor
to him with the marginal factor cost, or S(z) + 9 (z). Then there is
a paragraph or two about bilateral monopoly. Being unjust to many fine
textbooks, an abridged version of what is typically said follows:
In cases of bilateral monopoly, sharp predictions as to what will
happen cannot be offered. An efficient exchange between the
buyer and seller may be presumed where the marginal cost to
the seller is equated to the marginal value of the factor to the
buyer. [Many books will be more sophisticated than this and
indicate that inefficient trades may take place, owing to the bar-
gaining process.] But the price at which this exchange takes place
is indeterminate. The buyer and the seller will, we can safely as-
sume, not agree to a price where either is worse off than if no
exchange at all is made. But in general, many prices will meet that
requirement and which one will be agreed to is determined by
psychological factors; things that determine the bargaining abili-
ties of the two parties, things that are outside the ken of economic
science.
This sort of discussion is not limited to bilateral monopoly; in texts
that introduce the Edgeworth box and take it seriously as a model of
exchange between two individuals, the contract curve (locus of efficient
points) will be identified, and there will be a general presumption that
some exchange will take place on the contract curve between the indiffer-
ence curves through the endowment, but typically no prediction will be
offered about which point will be chosen.
In this short chapter we will see a bit of what noncooperative game
theory has to offer to this rather dismal state of affairs. One might hope
552 Chapter fifteen: Bilateral bargaining
that by being more precise about the protocol of bargaining the rules
by which offers are made and accepted or rejected we can get some
more definite idea about what will be the outcome. We will see that this
is a case where institutions matter (according to the theory), and rather
more than seems sensible, although the extreme and unintuitive sensitiv-
ity to institutional form that we see in the theory may be attributable to
the starkness of our models in terms of what players know about each
other.
15.1. Simultaneous offers and indeterminacy
To make the problem of bilateral bargaining as simple as possible,
consider the folowing one-dimensional version. Two parties, called 1
and 2, are put into a room and told to negotiate on the simple problem
of splitting one dollar. If they can agree on a division (within a specified
time period), the division they agree to will be implemented. If they fail
to agree, each gets nothing,
In fact, this is no more or less stark than the general bargaining prob-
lem of an Edgeworth box, if you think about the original endowment as
the no agreement point, and splits of the dollar representing points along
the contract curve inside the lens defined by the two indifference curves
through the endowment point. If we allowed the two parties to split the
dollar in ways that leave money on the table for example, 1 gets fifty
cents and 2 gets twenty-five then we would even have representatives
of points inside the lens that are off the contract curve.
What will happen here? To sharpen the question, but not the answer,
let us be more specific about the rules of this bargaining game. Suppose
that bargaining is to proceed as follows: The two parties simultaneously
and independently name a demand. Ms. 1 says, for example, that she
demands seventy-five cents, while Mr. 2 demands fifty cents. If these two
demands are compatible (which includes the possibility that they leave
money on the table), they are implemented and the game ends. If not, each
party, knowing what the other party demanded, decides between standing
firm on his original demand or acceding to the other's demand. These
decisions are made simultaneously and independently. If both stand firm,
both get nothing and the game is over. If one stands firm and the other
accedes, the demand of the first person is implemented. If both accede,
each gets his or her part of the other person's original demand, which
necessarily leaves money on the table.
What we have done here is to move from an ambiguous description of
bargaining to very specific, formal rules of negotiation. You should have
ct lm ey en a ol eee ere tn ements
a
-<
a
15.1. Simultaneous offers and indeterminacy 553
no trouble depicting the game just described as an extensive form game,
especially if we insist that the first round of demands must be in multiples
of a penny (so the game has finitely many strategies for each player). This
allows us to analyze bargaining using the tools of noncooperative game
theory.
For example, we can ask, What are the possible (Nash) equilibria of
the game described?, Imagine that 1 is playing the strategy: Demand n
cents on the first round and stick to that demand on the second, if there
is a second. Player 2's best response to. this is to demand 100 n or more
on the first round and to accede on the second if he demands more than
100 n on the first. Let us choose one of these for his strategy: He will
demand 100 n on the first round, and he will stick to that demand on
the second. Then 1's strategy is also a best response to 2s, and we have a
Nash equilibrium with the split n to player 1 and 100 n to 2. Since n
is completely arbitrary here (it even works if n = 0-or 100!), we see that
any division of the dollar is a possible equilibrium. (We can also construct
equilibria where the split isnt achieved until the second round.)
So we have offered a more precise description of the bargaining pro-
cess, but we have gotten back the basic indeterminacy of the answer. Given
the very simple nature of this bargaining protocol, we probably cant say
that the result will depend on the players relative bargaining abilities.
But assuming they play to an equilibrium, the players equilibrium expec-
tations are all-important.
This is not the only bargaining protocol that leads to this sort of in-
determinacy. Some variations with the same basic property include:
{a) Instead of the rules given above, each side simultaneously makes a
demand. If demands are compatible, the dollar is split. If not, each side
again makes a demand, and so on, for M rounds of demands. If no
agreement is reached by the end of M rounds, the game is over and each
side gets nothing.
(b) The same as (a), except there is no last round; they can make demands
for as long as it takes to reach an agreement. If no agreement is reached,
each side gets nothing. Or, instead, at the end of each round, either side
can simply quit.
(c) The same as (a), except that after each round one penny is removed
from the pot. In the first round, the players bargain to split a dollar; in
@ This equilibrium is not subgame perfect. To make it perfect, add: 1 accedes to 2 if 1
asks for more than n on the first round; 2 accedes to 1 if 2 asks for more than 100 nn on
the first round and 1 asks for n or less. Do you see why these modifications are needed?
|
554 Chapter fifteen: Bilateral bargaining
the second round, they bargain to split ninety-nine cents; and so on, until
all the money is removed (at which point the game is over).
Under any of the rules given, any split, achieved in the first round,
is a Nash equilibrium. You should be able to show that in the originally
named protocol or in the protocols given in (a) and (b) above, pure strategy
Nash equilibria that result in an agreement are always efficient, and the
only pure strategy equilibria that dont result in agreement are very special.
Protocol (c) opens other possibilities. Consider, for example, the strategies:
Demand sixty cents on the first two rounds. If your opponent
demands sixty cents on the first two rounds, demand forty-nine
cents on the third round. If your opponent does anything else on
the first two rounds, demand whatever is left in the pot less one
cent until.all the money is gone.
You should be able to see that this strategy is a best response against itself,
leading to a split of ninety-eight cents (only) on the third round.
15.2. Focal equilibria
If you sat actual players down to play exactly according to the rules
given above (one round of demands, then one round of stand or ac-
cede), you would find a large number of pairs playing the equilibrium
where the dollar is split fifty-fifty. The symmetry of this equilibrium makes
it focal. In a long series of experiments, Alvin Roth and his associates have
attempted to see just what makes for a good focal point. This series is sum-
marized in Roth (1983); one of his experiments will be reported here (this
one in collaboration with Schoumaker, reported in Roth and Schoumaker
[1983].
To begin, we change the rules a little bit. Instead of bargaining over
splitting a dollar, we imagine that the two parties are bargaining over one
hundred poker chips. The rules for bargaining are the same: One round
of simultaneous demands and, if necessary, one round of simultaneous
stand or accede. But prizes are awarded a bit differently. At the
start, each party is given a prize that he or she might win. Suppose, for
example, that 1 might win $20, and 2 might win $5. Each side knows
what the two prizes are, each side knows that the other side knows this,
 Does this strategy against itself constitute a subgame perfect equilibrium? Why not?
How could you modify the pair of strategies so that they give a subgame perfect equilibrum
while retaining the basic character of the outcome?
15.2. Focal equilibria 555
and so on. (In other experiments, Roth tried variations in which one party
knew the value of both prizes but one party only knew the value of his
own.) Suppose the two agree to split the chips: sixty for 1 and thirty-five
for 2, leaving five on the table. Then 1 is given a .6 chance of winning
her prize of $20, and 2 is given a .35 chance of winning his prize of $5. In
other words, each chip is worth a one percent chance of winning a prize,
whatever that prize is. (If no agreement is reached, neither side is given
any chance at his or her respective prize.)
Just as in the simple split-the-dollar game, any division of the poker
chips is a Nash equilibrium of the game; you should have no trouble
adapting the old argument to this new setting. But now a fifty-fifty
split is no longer so obviously focal. Now there are at least two
competitors:
(a) Give all the chips to 1, since she has the bigger prize.
(b) Split the chips twenty to 1 and eighty to 2. The virtue of this split
is that it gives player 1 an expected prize of (.2)($20) = $4 and it gives
player 2 an expected prize of (.8)($5) = $4. That is, this split equalizes the
expected prizes of the two.
In earlier experiments, both the fifty-fifty focal equilibrium and the
twenty-eighty focal equilibrium had been observed. (Giving all the chips
to 1 was not observed.) So Roth and Schoumaker tried the following ex-
periment. All bargaining was done via a computer, so that players never
saw each other. Thus Roth and Schoumaker could condition their sub-
jects by having them bargain with computers for a while. Subjects played
the bargaining game (via a computer) a number of times. Unbeknownst
to them, in the first few rounds their opponent was the computer. For
some subjects, the computer was programmed to play the fifty-fifty split.
For others, the computer was programmed to play the twenty-eighty split.
In this way, some subjects were conditioned to believe that the fifty-fifty
split was fair or appropriate, while others were conditioned to believe in
the twenty-eighty split. And then conditioned subjects were mixed, with
results that you can no doubt anticipate: When two subjects who had
been conditioned in compatible fashion were paired, they happily went
along with the equilibrium they had been taught. When two subjects
were paired, one of whom thought he deserved only twenty chips, while
the other was willing to settle for fifty, money was left on the table, at
least for a while. And when someone who had been trained to expect
eighty was paired with someone who had been conditioned to think that
fifty-fifty was right, disagreement outcomes were reached.
556 Chapter fifteen: Bilateral bargaining
This experiment reinforces the notion that the bargaining outcomes
depend on individual's expectations as to what the outcomes should be.
In fact, it makes this point vividly by showing how those expectations
can be manipulated through experience. Insofar as noncooperative game
theory is silent (or nearly so) on the subject of where equilibrium expecta-
tions come from, it seems that the basic textbook commentary on bilateral
monopoly and bargaining had it right.
15.3. Rubinsteins model
Before giving up on noncooperative game theory as applied to bar-
gaining, however, let us look at one more bargaining protocol, back in the
context of splitting a dollar. Imagine that the two players take turns mak-
ing offers ahd counteroffers. Player 1 goes first, say; she proposes a split.
Player 2 may accept that split immediately or, after a five second delay,
make a counteroffer. Player 1, in response to a counteroffer, may accept
immediately or, after a five second delay, make a counter-counteroffer, and
so forth.
One further feature is added: Players would rather have the money
sooner than-ater. We suppose that both players discount any money they
receive at a rate of, say, 10% per year. So if player 1 obtains n immediately
after her first offer, this is worth n to her. If she obtains n after player 2's
first counteroffer, this is worth slightly less; it is worth n, where, by the .
rules of continuous compounding, = .999999985 approximately. If she
obtains nn on the third round (on her second offer), it is worth only &*n to
her, and so on. The same is true for player 2.
This, you might think, changes very little. Suppose, for example,
player 1 plays the strategy: Demand n the first round and refuse to accept
any offer or make any offer that gives her less than n. It would seem that
2's best response to this, no matter what n is, is to give in immediately.
But this doesnt constitute a subgame perfect equilibrium for, say, n = 60.
To see why, note first that
2 +606 < 100.
In case this isn't obvious, we give a proof. Consider the function f(z) =
z/6 + (100 5). Its derivative is 1/6 which, for <1 is greater than
zero. Now let n* = 1006/(1 +6). Note that n* is a tiny bit less than 50, for
Bre enn
15.3. Rubinstein's model 557
the particular with which we are working; in particular, n* > 40. As a
matter of simple algebra,
n*
5 + (100 n*) = 100.
(Do it!) So
2 +606 = f40) < f(n*) = + (100 n*) = 100.
Let be half the difference between 100 and 40/6+606. And consider
the following strategy by player 2. Refuse to take only 40 on the first
round. Offer instead to take 40/6 + on the second round. If this offer
is accepted, player 2 is better off by e for having made the offer instead
of accepting 40. Will player 1 accept? If she thinks that by turning this
offer down she will net 60 on the third round of offers, player 1 does better
to accept player 2's offer. By accepting player 2's offer, player 1 obtains
6(100 40/6 ) = 8(606 + ) in units that are discounted back to the start
of the game. If she spurns player 2's offer, and if she expects to get 60
when it is again her turn to offer, she nets 606% discounted back to the
start of the game. So she is better off accepting 2's offer, and 2 is better off
making this offer than to accept 40 only on the first round.
The basic result, with proofs
The only place that 60-40 played a role in this argument came where
we stated that 40/6 + 606 < 100. That will be true of any split where
player 1 gets more than 100/(1+6). And it suggests the following remark-
able result:
Proposition 1 (Rubinstein, 1982). The unique subgame perfect equilibrium in
the alternating offers model just given is for the player making the offer always
to offer to take 100/(1 +8) for himself and leave 1006/(1 + 6) for the other party,
and for the other party always to accept this offer or any better and to spurn any
offer that is worse.
We have to show that this is a subgame perfect equilibrium and that it is
unique. Showing that it is a subgame perfect equilibrium is not difficult.
Imagine first that it is your turn to make the offer. If you offer to take
100/(1 + 6), your offer will be accepted. There is no reason, then, to offer
to take anything less. If you ask for more, you will be turned down, and
558 Chapter fifteen: Bilateral bargaining
your rival next time will offer you only 100 100/(1 + 6) = 1006/(1 + 6).
You are meant to accept this, so from the point where you are making
the offer, the strategy described above is unimprovable for you in a single
step.
is more interesting to consider whether your strategy is unimprov-
able when you are being made an offer. Suppose your rival offers to take
n, leaving you with 100 n. If you reject this offer and then conform
to the equilibrium above, you will get 100/(1 + 6) next time. In current
value units, this is worth 1008/(1 + ) to you today. So you should accept
whenever 100 n > 1005/(1 + 6), reject when the inequality is strict the
other way, and do either when there is equality. But if you work through
the algebra, this is precisely the strategy you are meant to be carrying out.
We have equality when n = 100/(1+6), and we resolve the knife-edge case
of equality by having you accept.
Thus we have a subgame perfect equilibrium. The remarkable part
of the proposition is that this is the unique subgame perfect equilibrium.
We will sketch an argument due to Shaked and Sutton (1984).
Step 1. Let v be the largest amount that any player can achieve in any subgame -
perfect equilibrium when the player is making the offer. We claim that v <
100/(1 + 6). The proof essentially uses the argument we gave just before
the proposition. First, if v is the Jargest amount that a player can achieve
in any subgame perfect equilibrium when it is his turn to make the offer,
then an offer to give a player v-+e for any e > 0 is sure to be accepted; the
best that a player receiving this offer can do by rejecting it is v a period
later, which nets v in current value terms, which is less than the v +
that is offered.
Second, if v is the largest amount that a player can achieve in any
subgame perfect equilibrium when it is his turn to make the offer, it must
be achieved by making an acceptable offer on the first round. If the first
offer is rejected, then the second player can offer, say, (6v+v)/2, which the
first player is bound to accept by the argument just given (since (fv+v)/2 >
v). But (6 +v)/2 < v, and since it is delayed for a period, it is worth
8(6v +v)/2, which is even less.
So v must be achieved by making an initial offer that is accepted. 
Suppose v > 100/(1 + ) and the first player demands v. The second
player can reject this and offer ov +e, for equal to half the difference
 This is a bit sloppy, in that it presumes that the least upper bound on subgame perfect
payoffs is achieved in a subgame perfect equilibrium. If we were being careful, we would
have be the supremum over all subgame perfect equilibrium payoffs and then show that
any demand sufficiently close to will be rejected if v > 100/(1 +6).
15.3. Rubinsteins model 559
between 100 and 6v + (100 v)/, which is positive if v > 100/(1 + 6).
This is sure to be accepted by the first paragraph. And it gives the second
player a payoff of 1006ve = (100)/+e next period, or 100v+d in
present value terms, which is better than the 100 obtained by acceding
to the initial demand of the first player. Hence a demand of v will be
rejected if v > 100/(1 + 6), and v > 100/(1 + ) cannot be a subgame
perfect equilibrium payoff for the first player.
Step 2. Given this, any player can be certain that any offer to give more than
1006/(1 + 6) will be taken. By rejecting this offer, the best ones rival can
do is 100/(1 + 6) starting with her next offer, which is strictly worse than
1006/(1 + 6) + for any > 0, however small, immediately.
Step 3. The party to whom the first offer is made can never have a payoff exceeding
1006/(1 + 6). For if this party had a payoff exceeding this level, the payoff
to the party making the first offer would have to be less than 100/(1 +4),
which contradicts step 2.
Step 4. In equilibrium, any offer to give less than 1008/(1 + 8) will certainly be
rejected. In fact, the party to whom the first offer is made is assured of a payoff (in
present value terms) of at least 1006/(1 + 6). If offered less than 1006/(1 +6),
one can reject and offer a bit more than 1006/(1 +6) to the other side next
time. This is sure to be taken, by step 2. But this means you can be sure to
get any amount strictly less than 100/(1 +6) next time, some one of which
will be better than taking something less than 1006/(1 + 6) this time.
Step 5. In the unique subgame perfect equilibrium, the party making the first
offer proposes to take 100/(1 + 6) and to give 1005/(1 +6), and this is accepted
with certainty. No offer to give more can be part of an equilibrium, by
step 2. No offer to give less can be part of an equilibrium. It will certainly
be rejected by step 4, and then the best one can do, starting from the next
period, is less than 1006/(1 +6) (by step 3). This is worse than taking
something a bit less than 100/(1 + 6), which is certain to be accepted, by
step 2. So the only possible equilibrium offer is 100/(1+6). And that must
be taken with certainty in any equilibrium: If not, the party making the
first offer would do better to offer slightly less than 100/(1 + 6) and be
certain of acceptance.
Where, you may ask, did we use subgame perfection? We used it
very directly in steps 1 and 2, when we said that an offer would certainly
be taken, even if the offer is out of equilibrium, because the person to
whom it was made could not do better by rejecting it. If we looked only
560 Chapter fifteen: Bilateral bargaining
at Nash equilibria, players responses to counteroffers that are made out
of equilibrium are not bound by rationality constraints of this sort.
At the risk of overdoing it, we claim a further result: The equilibrium
described above is the only equilibrium that survives iterated elimination
of dominated strategies. We will only get the argument started and leave
it to you to finish. (a) Suppose player 1 offers to player 2 that he (player 2)
may have more than 1008. Then player 2 is bound to accept; if he rejects,
he must wait a period (that is, five seconds) and then the best he could
conceivably do is to get the entire dollar, which is worth (in present value
terms) no more than 100. That is, we can remove from consideration
any strategy that includes rejection of such a generous offer. (b) Suppose
player 1 offers to player 2 something less than (1001008). Then player 2
should definitely turn this down, because he can, in his turn, offer to
player 1 that she take 1006 and be sure to be accepted. This would (next
period) leave him with no worse than (100 1006), which in present value
terms is no worse than (100 1008)6. There is no reason to take less
today. Thus we can remove from consideration any strategy that includes
acceptance of such a miserly offer. (c) The argument in (b) means that a
player can never hope to get more than 100(1 + *). Suppose, then,
one player offers something more than 1006(1 & + 6%) to his rival. If she
turns it down, she can hope to do no better than 100(1 + 6%) starting
next period, which is worse. So she is sure to accept. We can remove
strategies that include rejection of such generous (but less generous than
in [a]) offers. (d) Now that you know a slightly wider band of offers that
are sure to be accepted, return to part (b) and expand the set of offers that
are sure to be rejected, and so on. In the end, all strategies that accept
less or reject more than 1006/(1 + 6) are removed, and the equilibrium is
forced.
Bargaining over general issues
The result just given extends far beyond splitting a dollar. Imagine two
players bargaining over many different commodities or many different clauses
in a contract. In general, we might imagine that some abstract set X rep-
resents the range of possible agreements. For example, if the two parties
are bargaining over how to split a bundle R* of commodities, then
X = {(&,z2) R : 2, + 2; < e}, with the interpretation that the point
z = (z1,72) represents an agreement where the first person gets the bundle
xz, the second gets z;, and e =; zz is left on the table. Or we could
imagine two parties bargaining over a labor contract, and then the various
components of z represent the basic wage rate, the level and nature of over-
time wages, the level and nature of health benefits, work rules, and so on.
VI first heard this argument from Drew Fudenberg.
rrr an
15.3. Rubinsteins model 561
Each of the two parties derives utility from the various possible splits; we
let ui(z) be the utility that obtains (immediately) from an agreement on z.
If agreement is delayed until time , 1 derives net utility *ui(z), with u;
normalized so that no agreement gives zero utility. Finally, we imagine alter-
nating offer bargaining; the first player makes an offer (of the form =) at date
0, to which the second player can agree or not. If the second player rejects
this offer, then the second party can make a counteroffer after a delay of one
period, which the first player accepts or rejects, and so on.
As long as the preferences (utility functions) of the two players are com-
mon knowledge between them, this situation is not much more complex than
the basic model of splitting one dollar. There is a set of feasible utility imputa-
tions, the image of X in R* under the vector function (u;,u,) (see section 5.1
if you've forgotten about utility imputations), and the two are (essentially)
bargaining over which point in the set of feasible utility imputations to select.
We will write V' for the space of feasible utility imputations, and V* for
the space of feasible utility imputations that are as good as the no-agreement
outcome; ie, v = (w,v) V* if v = (u(x), u,(z)) for some = X and
vy, v2 > 0. :
Assume that V* is a compact, convex set. Assume that the Pareto fron-
tier of V is strictly downward sloping. And assume there is some point v*
in V* that is strictly better for both players than disagreement. (You may
wish to consider more fundamental assumptions that would justify these as-
sumptions.)
Proposition 2. The (essentially) unique subgame perfect equilibrium of this bargain-
ing game has player 1 offering a point , whenever it is her turn to offer, player 2
offering a point x, and both sides accepting the other's offer, where =; and z, are
Pareto efficient agreements satisfying the equations
Sure) = wiz) and Su(e?) = wplz?).
We have called this an (essentially) unique equilibrium because the utility
imputations v' = (w{z"), 2(z")) and v* = (uz), u(x?) are unique. But
there may be more than one pair of points z' and z* that give these utility
imputations.
The proof is left as an exercise, or see Binmore, Osborne, and Rubinstein
(forthcoming). If you take on this exercise, you may find it interesting to
consider what happens to the solution as goes to one. (Assume the Pareto
frontier of V* is given by a differentiable curve.)
Variations
If it seems remarkable that with these rules we get such definite pre-
dictions, let us observe that similar arguments give even more remarkable
results. We will give five variations on proposition 1 (so we are back to
splitting one dollar), each of which you can prove using the techniques
sketched previously.
562 Chapter fifteen: Bilateral bargaining
(1) Outside options. Suppose that the bargaining game is just as before, ex-
cept that player 1 has an outside option. Specifically, she can, after hearing
an offer from player 2, choose to accept, to make a counteroffer (after five
seconds), or to break off negotiations and take her outside option, which
gives her, say, forty-five cents and leaves player 2 with nothing.
Your intuition might be that this strengthens the bargaining position
of player 1. But in terms of the theory it does not; the old subgame perfect
equilibrium remains the unique subgame perfect equilibrium in this case.
(This depends on our choice of ; in general, it requires that 6/(1+6) > 45.)
(2) Different discount rates. Suppose that the bargaining game is as above,
except that player 1 discounts her payoff at an interest rate of 5% per
year, and player 2 discounts his payoff at 15% per year. Then the unique
subgame perfect equilibrium gives approximately seventy-five cents to
player 1 and twenty-five cents to player 2.
This may not seem entirely unintuitive to you. Player 1is in a stronger
bargaining position because she is more patient. But it may be surprising
that, when offers are made every five seconds, the difference in levels of
patience should have such dramatic results in terms of the outcome.
(3) Differente speeds of response. Suppose that the bargaining game is as
before (with both parties having the same discount rate), but player 1
can make a counteroffer two seconds after hearing player 2's offer, and
player 2 takes six seconds to formulate and make a counteroffer. Then
the unique subgame perfect equilibrium gives approximately seventy-five
cents to player 1 and twenty-five cents to player 2.
(4) A variation on different speeds of response. Suppose that the bargaining
game is as before, with two changes: Player 1 can respond two seconds
after player 2 makes an offer, and player 2 can respond six seconds af-
ter player 1 makes an offer. And acceptance is delayed as much as a
counteroffer; e.g., if player 1 makes an offer, player 2 cannot respond in
any fashion either to accept or to counteroffer for six seconds. Then the
unique subgame perfect equilibrium gives approximately twenty-five cents
to player 1 and seventy-five cents to player 2.
(5) Costs of rejecting offers instead of discounting. Suppose that the players
are bargaining to split $10. In this formulation, they take turns making
offers, but there is no discounting. Instead, every time player 1 turns
down an offer of player 2, she must pay a fee of $.10, whereas every time
player 2 turns down an offer of player 1, he must pay a fee of $.11. Then
the unique subgame perfect equilibrium is: If player 1 is making the offer,
she proposes to take the entire $10, to which player 2 agrees. If player 2
~~
15.3. Rubinsteins model 563
is making the offer, he offers to take $.10 and to give her $9.90, to which
she assents.
Although we didnt say it, in each of these variations, all the subgame
perfect equilibria have the initial offer accepted with probability one.
(Readers often find the result for variation (5) astounding, so let us
sketch the argument here. Let z be the highest subgame perfect payoff
player 2 can get if he makes the first offer. Suppose z > $.11. Then if
player 1 has the initial offer, she can offer z .11 + to player 2 and be
sure it will be accepted, for any e > 0, since if player 2 rejects, the best
he can do is = .11. If player 2 proposes, in his turn, to take z and
leave player 1 with $10 z, player 1 will reject the offer, since she can
get $10.00 z + .11 next time, at a cost of only $.10. This will leave
player 2 with z .11 + e next time, which is certainly less than z. So
there is no way that z can exceed or equal $.11.% Suppose z <.11. Then
player 1, when she has the offer, can be sure of acceptance if she proposes
to take the entire $10.00. Hence she will not agree to take anything less
than $9.90 when it is 2's turn to offer; better to refuse and then pocket the
entire $10.00. The rest of the argument is easy.)
What lies behind these results
If the result that there is a unique subgame perfect equilibrium is sur-
prising, some of the further results listed above are positively astounding.
You might make the case that (1) while perhaps a bit counterintuitive is
not outlandish. And there is even some sense to (2), although the differ-
ences in discount rates seem to lead to quite extraordinary differences in
the outcome. But what are we to make of (3), (4), and (5)? The solution
bounces around an incredible amount for what seem to be insignificant
differences in the bargaining protocol. And, in any case, you might won-
der why alternating offer bargaining leads to such different results than
simultaneous offer bargaining. Is it the alternation per se?
To understand what is driving the basic Rubinstein result and why
we get such extraordinary results in the variations above, consider the
following very simple form of bargaining over a dollar, in a situation
where players discount their payoffs at a rate of, say, 10% per year. Player 1
makes the first proposal and, at the same time she makes her offer, she is
able to lock her offer for any length of time she desires up to, say, one
hundred years. That is, she can say, I propose to take ninety-five cents and
to leave five cents for you. And I hereby disable myself from amending
9 This last step is a little sloppy, and we leave it to the careful reader to make it right.
564 Chapter fifteen: Bilateral bargaining
this generous offer or from accepting any counteroffer you might choose
to make for ninety-eight years. What is your response?
Player 2, faced with this offer, is going to accept (if he doesnt get
mad, a sentiment with which we will deal in a bit but ignore for now).
If he rejects this offer, he will be unable to do anything for ninety-eight
years. And even if after ninety-eight years he gets the entire one dollar, it
will be worth far less to him (when discounted) than five cents today.
The point is that player 1 by locking her offer puts the onus entirely
on player 2. If player 2 wants a better deal, he must wait; he alone can
avoid the waiting period by accepting player 1's offer.
This is what is going on in Rubinstein-style bargaining. Once one
party makes an offer, the other party alone can avoid the expense of wait-
ing by accepting. If the offer is insufficiently generous, the respondent
may indeed wish to suffer the cost of waiting. But then the party making
the offer, in equilibrium, makes an offer just sufficiently generous so that
the other party is indifferent between accepting or waiting the necessary
length of time and then making an offer that is just sufficiently generous so
the first party is indifferent between accepting or waiting. ... The unique-
ness result is not quite intuitive or obvious, but you should be convinced
that what drives these equilibria is that each party when it is making an
offer is able to put the onus of waiting entirely on the other side.
With this in mind, consider variations (3) and (4) above. In varia-
tion (3), player 1 makes an offer that player 2 can accept or reject imme-
diately. But if player 2 wishes to counteroffer, he must wait six seconds.
Player 1, on the other hand, must wait only two seconds before coun-
teroffering. Hence, having heard player 1's offer, if player 2 wishes to
counteroffer, he must pay three times the waiting cost that player 1 must
pay if she wishes to counteroffer. In variation (4), player 1's offer cannot
be accepted by player 2 for six seconds, which is the same length of time it
takes player 2 to formulate a counteroffer. So the waiting cost to player 2
of counteroffering is not six seconds he must wait that long anyway
 but the two additional seconds it takes player 1 to accept or counter.
And the waiting cost incurred by player 1 of rejecting an offer of 2 is the
six further seconds it will take 2 to respond in any fashion. Hence in (4),
player 1 pays the much heavier waiting cost, and her bargaining position
is much weaker.
Alternating offers, per se, are not the key here. This point can be
made by considering the model of Perry and Reny (1989). In this variation,
players can make offers whenever they wish. That is, at any point in time
a player is able to make an offer, even if his opponent is simultaneously
making an offer. But there is one limitation: If player 1 makes an offer
15.4. The experimental evidence about alternating offers 565
at time , then she cannot change the offer she has made for a set small
amount of time, say for six seconds. And player 2 cannot change his offer
for some given amount of time, say two seconds. Otherwise, when offers
are made is entirely up to the players; there is no alternating structure of
anything like that. Bargaining terminates when the two offers made are
compatible. Payoffs are discounted at given rates which, for the sake of
exposition, we take to be identical.
This game doesnt quite have a unique subgame perfect equilibrium,
but it comes close. Specifically, every subgame perfect equilibrium gives
players payoffs that are approximately seventy-five cents to player 1 and
twenty-five cents to player 2. How does this work? Imagine that the very
best equilibrium outcome for player 1 gives her appreciably more than
seventy-five cents. Look at some equilibrium that supports this outcome.
Player 2 can deviate from this equilibrium by proposing slightly better
terms for himself at a time when player 1 is either free to move or is just
about to become free to move. By doing so, player 2 freezes. his own
ability to move for two seconds. Now everything is up to player 1. She can
agree to what player 2 has just proposed, or she can counterpropose, but if she
counterproposes, she knows that player 2 is unable to respond for two seconds.
The cost of waiting those two seconds is entirely on her shoulders; player 2 is
committed for this length of time. This is just the wedge we had before in
alternating offers, and it works virtually the same way here, even though
there is no set order of moves and simultaneous offers are feasible, in
principle. The key to bargaining power here, in Rubinsteins model, and
in the other variations given comes from the ability to put the onus of
waiting entirely on the other party.
154. The experimental evidence about alternating offers
While the logical key to Rubinstein-style results may now be clear, this
isn't to say that we believe these results are empirically valid. To take an
analogy, we may understand why the unique subgame perfect equilibrium
of the centipede game is for the first player to move to end the game, and
at the same time we may give little weight to this analytical conclusion
as an empirical prediction. We are motivated, therefore, to seek evidence
concerning what happens when individuals do bargain in the fashion of
alternating offers.
 There are some mathematical niceties to be observed to make sure that everything is
well-defined. And the definition of subgame perfection is not entirely straightforward. We
give here a synopsis only. The reader should consult Perry and Reny (1989) for details.
566 Chapter fifteen: Bilateral bargaining
Ochs and Roth (1989) give a survey and some fresh results of their
OWT. concerning experiments with alternating offer bargaining. In the pa-
pers they survey and in their own experiments, the bargaining protocols
used are different from Rubinsteins in one important way: Inall the exper-
iments, time horizons are very short sometimes two, sometimes three,
and (very rarely) five rounds of bargaining at most. That is, one player
makes an offer, the second may counteroffer, and the first may, perhaps,
counter-counteroffer, but that is all. If the third offer is not taken, the game
is over and neither side wins anything.
This doesnt compromise the theory much at all; if anything, it makes
ita good deal simpler. In finite horizon, alternating offer bargaining, if you
accept the complete information bargaining model, backwards induction
gives you the answer quite quickly.? (See problems 6 and 7.) So it is the
predictions of backwards induction in the context of bargaining that are
being tested.
Ochs and Roth were led by the data they reported to the conclusion
that whatever drives the outcomes in alternating offer bargaining is some-
thing more complex than the theoretical considerations provided by back-
wards induction. In particular, notions of equity intrude: In cases where
backwards induction yields a very unequal split, proposals for splits that
are so unequal are often rejected, even though by rejecting the offer the reject-
ing party is. giving up money for Sure.
For example, imagine two rounds of bargaining according to the fol- .
lowing rules. Player 1 can propose any split she wishes of $10.00. Player 2
can accept or reject. If player 2 rejects, he can propose any split that he
wishes, except that $9.00 of $10.00 is removed; he can propose a split
of $1.00. (This is like a discount factor of .1) If player 1 rejects player 2's
proposal, the two walk away empty-handed. Backwards induction in this
case tells us that player 2, in the event that he is given the opportunity to
propose a split, proposes to take $1.00 or $.99, to which player 1 accedes.
As player 2 cant possibly do better than $1.00 in the second round, player 1
in the first will propose that she will take $9.00 or perhaps $8.99, which
he will accept. But experimental results don't conform to this prediction.
In cases where player 1 proposes to take $8.99, player 2 sometimes rejects,
presumably on grounds that player 1's excessive greed should not be
rewarded.
Of course, this sort of consideration puts bargaining in quite a different
light from that cast by the theories described above. If player 2 in the
2 The theory of finite horizon, alternating offer bargaining is developed in Stahl (1972).
3 Because there are ties in the game tree and money is not really perfectly divisible, the
predictions are not quite sharp.
ma tie
em
sli mnie coy <i re
a
15.4. The experimental evidence about alternating offers 567
situation described has some personal notions of what constitutes equity
or excessive greed, and if player 1 is unsure what those notions are, then
player 1's initial offer will have as much to do with her assessment about
player 2's notions as with the amount of money that will be left on the table
if player 2 is allowed to counteroffer. Insofar as one player will not know
for sure what his rival views as greed or equity, the simple models of
complete information that we have analyzed are missing important pieces
of the puzzle.
Moving beyond the experimental evidence so far collected, imagine
that we stage infinite horizon bargaining experiments where subjects dis-
count rates are different. How would we go about controlling discount
factors in the laboratory? One experimental procedure that could be fol-
lowed, which gives discount rates .99 and .97 to the two bargainers, is
easily described. First (and for reasons to be explained later), rather than
have players bargain over some monetary sum directly, we have them
bargain over a unit of probability. If they split this unit with .643 going
to player 1 and .324 going to player 2 (which leaves probability .033 on
the table), then player 1 is given a .643 chance of winning some monetary
prize, and player 2 is given a .324 chance of winning some (other) prize.
From the point of view of the theory, it doesnt matter what these prizes
are or that they are the same, or even that each player knows what prize
the other player is going to get; in essence, as long as winning the prize
is better than not, players are bargaining over expected utility, and the
theory above applies. But to be definite, we will assume that the players
know each others prizes, know that each knows this, and so on. Play-
ers negotiate via computer terminals. Player 1 types in an initial offer,
which appears on 2's screen. Player 2 can accept 1's offer or can propose a
counteroffer. Player 1 can accept 2's counteroffer or can propose a counter-
counteroffer, and so on. And to simulate discount rates, instruct players
as follows (for example): Player 1 makes the first offer =, for herself,
and =, for player 2, where z; +z; <1. If player 2 accepts, then player 1
is given an z; chance of winning her prize, and player 2 is given an =z,
chance of winning his. Or player 2 can counteroffer, proposing y, for
himself and y; for her, where y; +y, < 1. If player 1 accepts this, player 2
is given a .97y, chance of winning his prize, and player 1 is given a 99%
chance of winning hers. Or player 1 can counter with 2 and z,. If this
is accepted, player 1 is given a 9922, chance of winning her prize, and
player 2 is given a .97z, chance of winning his, and so on. (Of course, if
players value the time they spend in the laboratory bargaining, then we
have not completely controlled for the costs they expend in back-and-forth
bargaining. Perfect experimental controls are not going to be possible.)
568 Chapter fifteen: Bilateral bargaining
If we run the experiment just described, with (say) the prize of player 1
being $20 and the prize of player 2 being $5, the theory predicts that
the players will settle on player 1 getting approximately a .75 chance of
her prize and player 2 getting a .25 chance of his.* If we change the
discount factors so that player 1 discounts with .97 and player 2 with
.99, but we keep the prizes the same, the theory predicts that the agreed-to
probabilities will reverse. Since to my knowledge this experiment hasn't
been rum, it is not possible to say what will result. But my personal
conjecture is that the results will not confirm the theory.
Now consider the following elaboration, in the spirit of Roth and
Schoumaker (1983). Have the players bargain via computer and exactly
as in Roth and Schoumaker (1983) train the parties to expect a particular
split. By having players first play against computer programs, train some
players to think that a .2-.8 split is the right thing to do (where the 8
goes to player 2 because his prize is smaller), and train others to think
that a .5-.5 split is what one does in this case. Do this under a number
of alternating move protocols, with discount factors varied (but kept close
to one). This elaboration is offered to propose the hypothesis that equi-
librium expectations, developed by the conditioning phase, will organize
the data of-subsequent bargaining much better than will the theoretical
predictions based on models of complete information. Institutional de-
tails concerning who has which discount rate and what is the precise
protocol of bargaining will be swamped by expectations as to what one
can expect to get and what one expects must be given in order to come to
agreement.
15.5. Models with incomplete information
Assuming the conjecture just offered is correct, the theorists response
is clear: Move beyond models of complete information. By moving to
models with incomplete information, one hopes that the extreme and un-
intuitive sensitivity of equilibrium outcomes to small changes in the
bargaining protocol that we saw above will disappear.
At the same time, a striking feature of the Rubinstein equilibrium
is:that agreements are always Pareto efficient; in particular, agreement is
* We have players bargaining over probabilities so that they can have different monetary
valumtions for the rgingl nit over which they bargain. We could as well have had them
bargaining over one hundred chips, with different dollar:chip exchange rates. That is, each
chip could be worth $.20 to player 1 and $.05 to player 2. But on theoretical grounds, having
them bargain over probabilities is cleaner, because attitudes toward risk are not impounded
into the experiment. See Roth (1985) on this general point.
pn ee Gyre mere
15.5. Models with incomplete information 569
immediate. Recall the abridgement from standard textbooks with which
we began this chapter and in particular the remark that one might obtain
inefficient trades because of the bargaining process. We see nothing like
this in the Rubinstein equilibrium; we see no inefficiencies of any sort.
Given the prevalence of labor disputes and other forms of protracted (and,
presumably, wasteful) negotiations in reality, it seems that the Rubinstein
equilibrium is missing something. The theorist response to this has been
that what is missing is missing from the game that is formulated, where
the preferences of both sides are common knowledge; what is needed to
get delay to agreement and other sorts of inefficiencies is some sort of
incomplete information.
Accordingly, much of the recent literature on bargaining and espe-
cially on alternating offer bargaining concerns models with incomplete
information. In these analyses, it has been typical to base the incomplete
information on something tangible about the bargainers. For example, we
might imagine the two parties negotiating on a selling price for some as-
set, where the value of the asset to the potential buyer is not known to the
seller. If the buyer values the asset highly, he (the buyer) is more impa-
tient to conclude negotiations; this is meant to make the buyer weaker
in any negotiations. There has also been some investigation of models
with two-sided incomplete information, where in addition to uncertainty
about the buyer's valuation of the asset the value of the asset to the seller
is unknown to the buyer.
These formulations do not directly address what we see in the exper-
imental literature and what we have conjectured will be found in subse-
quent experiments. There is no tangible uncertainty at work in the Ochs
and Roth experiments. Rather, what seems to be at work are the beliefs of
one player concerning equity and greed and the assessment of the other
player about the beliefs of the first. It is not clear a priori that the forms
of incomplete information that have been investigated so far will speak
adequately to effects driven by these other sorts of considerations. But
any opinions about this are dangerous; this is an area of active and on-
going research, and opinions rendered here will probably be obsolete in
very short order.
In any event, the analysis of bargaining with incomplete information
very quickly becomes very complex (try the last piece of problem 8 and
problem 9 if you want evidence) a level more complex, for example,
than the analysis of the centipede game in chapter 14. (This is so because
while one has the same back-and-forth structure as in the centipede game,
now what a player can do in his turn, namely make an offer, is a lot richer
than the simple binary choice present in the centipede game.) Hence we
570 Chapter fifteen: Bilateral bargaining
will not pursue this topic further here; the literature awaits the interested
reader.
15.6. Bibliographic notes
The development of noncooperative models of bargaining has been
one of the most important and active areas in microeconomics and game
theory in the past decade. There are far too many important papers to
list them all here. Begin with Nash (1950), who notes the basic problem
of indeterminacy in simultaneous offer bargaining. And the classic paper
on alternating offer bargaining, Rubinstein (1982), should not be missed.
But rather than give references beyond these, I suggest that the reader
continue with Osborne and Rubinstein (forthcoming), which provides a
comprehensive survey of the field, including work on bargaining with in-
complete information. Included also in Osborne and Rubinstein is a topic
we have not discussed at all connections between bargaining theory
and the institutional foundations of Walrasian (price) equilibrium.
For results in bargaining experiments, the cited papers by Ochs and
Roth (1989) and Roth (1983) are good places to start.
Given the lack of sharp predictions in simultaneous offer bidding,
much attention has been paid to the axiomatic analysis of bargaining. Ina
typical analysis, one poses a number of desirable properties for a function
that will associate to each bargaining problem out of a class of bargain-
ing problems a solution, and then one sees whether those properties (a)
can be satisfied and (b) pin down the solution. The classic example of
this sort of analysis is the Nash bargaining solution, as developed origi-
nally by: Nash (1953). This form of analysis, which is more in the style of
cooperative game theory, is surveyed in Roth (1979).
References
Binmore, X., M. Osborne, and A. Rubinstein. Forthcoming. Noncoopera-
tive Bargaining Models. In The Handbook of Game Theory, R. Aumann
and S. Hart, eds. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Nash, J. 1950. The Bargaining Problem. Econometrica 18:155-62.
1953. Two-person Cooperative Games. Econometrica 21:128-40.
Ochs, J., and A. Roth. 1989. An Experimental Study of Sequential Bar-
gaining. American Economic Review 79:355-84.
Osborne, M., and A. Rubinstein. Forthcoming. Bargaining and Markets.
Boston: Academic Press.
15.7. Problems 571
Perry, M., and P. Reny. 1989. Non-cooperative Bargaining without Pro-
cedures. University of Western Ontario. Mimeo.
Roth, A. 1979. Axiomatic Models of Bargaining, Lecture Notes in Economics
and Mathematical Systems no. 170. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
. 1983. Toward a Theory of Bargaining: An Experimental Study
in Economics. Science 220:687-91.
1985. Laboratory Experimentation in Economics. In Advances
in Economic Theory, T. Bewley, ed., 269-99. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Roth, A., and FE Schoumaker. 1983. Expectations and Reputations in Bar-
gaining: An Experimental Study. American Economic Review 73:362~
72.
Rubinstein, A. 1982. Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model. Econo-
metrica 50:97-109.
Shaked, A., and J. Sutton. 1984. Involuntary Unemployment as a Perfect
Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model. Econometrica 52:1351-64.
Stahl, I. 1972. Bargaining Theory. Stockholm: Economics Research Institute.
15.7. Problems
a1. Consider two firms, one of which is the sole producer of a factor input
that is used solely by the second. The producer of this good is character-
ized by increasing marginal costs of production for the good in question,
and the user obtains decreasing marginal benefit (measured in terms of
impact on profits) as it increases the scale of its use of this good. Both
firms seek to maximize their profits. (You may assume that the marginal
cost to produce the first unit of this good is less than the marginal value to
the user of the first unit, and for some large enough amount the marginal
cost exceeds the marginal value. You may also assume that marginal cost
and marginal benefit functions are continuous.)
We asserted at the start of this chapter that this is a special case of an
Edgeworth box. How is it special? (Hint: Your first task is to identify the
second good.)
m 2. Consider the bargaining protocol described in section 15.1 one
round of simultaneous demands, and then (if a deal is not struck in the
first round) simultaneous declarations that players stand firm or accede.
(a) Build a subgame perfect, pure strategy equilibrium for this bargaining
protocol in which agreement is not reached on the first round, and the
572 Chapter fifteen: Bilateral bargaining
equilibrium split is n to player 1 and 100 n to player 2. Be careful in
describing the strategies; this isn't hard, but it isn't trivial either.
(b) Show that for any pure strategy equilibrium that results in agreement,
no money is left on the table. Show this as well for variations (a) and (b)
in section 15.1. Describe the pure strategy equilibria that leave money on
the table (if any exist). Are the equilibria you describe subgame perfect?
(c) Build a subgame perfect equilibrium for this bargaining protocol in
which money is left on the table and there is agreement with positive
probability. (This will involve mixed strategies, according to part [b].)
8 3. (a) Provide a proof of proposition 2. Before doing this, you might
wish to explore part (0).
(b) Suppose that the Pareto frontier of V* is differentiable. What happens
to the equilibrium in proposition 2 as approaches 1? (What happens if
the frontier of V* is not differentiable?)
(0) In the context of proposition 2, suppose that V* is the unit square.
That is, V* = {(v;,%2) : 0 < v; <1 and 0 < v, < 1}. What are the subgame
perfect equilibria for alternating offer bargaining in this case?
8 4. For each of the five variations on the basic Rubinstein model outlined
in section 5.3, show that there is a unique subgame perfect equilibrium
that gives the outcomes claimed. (You were given quite a good start on
variation [5]!)
5. Suppose we have the basic Rubinstein model, except that for reasons
of feasibility, the only splits of $1 that can be proposed are those that
involve integer multiples of $.01. Suppose that =.9999. What happens
to proposition 17
m 6. Take the simple Rubinstein alternating offer structure where both
players have the same discount factor per bargaining period. Imagine,
though, that there are only two rounds of bargaining. Player 1 makes an
offer, which 2 can accept or reject. If player 2 rejects player 1's original
offer, he can make a counteroffer, which player 1 can accept or reject. What
is (are?) the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game?
87. Redo problem 6, but assuming that precisely NV rounds of bargaining
are permitted. What is the limit of the equilibrium outcome as N ap-
proaches infinity? Repeat this exercise for each of the five variations on
the basic Rubinstein model outlined in section 5.3.
r+ se
15.7. Problems 573
= 8. Suppose we have one-sided bargaining. Player 1, say, proposes a
split which player 2 can accept or reject. If player 2 rejects, player 1 can
propose another split for 2s consideration, and so on, until an agreement is
reached. Each time player 1 makes an offer, the prizes eventually achieved
are discounted by 6, for some 6 < 1.
What is (are?) the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game? Do you
believe this as an empirical prediction? (A real challenge: Build a model
of this sort of bargaining, where player 2 has an equity threshold; he
won't take any offer below this threshold, and player 1 is unsure what 2's
threshold is.)
9. Consider the following incomplete information variation on the Ru-
binstein model. Two players are bargaining over splitting $10.00. They
take turns making offers, with discount factor =.999999 applied every
time an offer is rejected. Player 1 seeks to maximize her expected payoff.
There is incomplete information about player 2. Player 1 assesses prob-
ability m that player 2 seeks to maximize his expected payoff, and she
assesses probability 1 that he will ask for $8.00 precisely every time
he is able to offer, and he will resolutely turn down any offer that leaves
him with less than $8.00.
(a) Construct a sequential equilibrium for this bargaining game for the
case 7 =.2. (This is hard, but not impossible.)
(b) Construct a sequential equilibrium for this bargaining game for the
case w = .8. (This is harder.)
(c) Construct a sequential equilibrium for every possible value of 7 (and,
in particular, for = very close to one). (Good luck!)
part IV
Topics in information
economics
rrr
CP a
chapter sixteen
Moral hazard and incentives
Prologue to part IV
We turn now to the subject of information economics. Information economics
is a broad subject with many variations and subtopics, and we will not
do anything close to full justice to it here. In this chapter, we consider the
- | problem ofmoral( hazard, where one party to a transaction may undertake
I certain actions that (a) affect the other partys valuation of the transac-
| tion but that () the second party canaot (monitor enforce (perfectly. Als
classic example here is fire insurance, where the insuree may or may not
exhibit sufficient care while storing flammable materials. The he (solution|
to a problem of moral hazard is the use of(incentives structuring the *
| transaction sg that the party who undertakes the actions will, in his own!
Dest interests, take actions that the second party would d (relatively) _pre-
fer. For example, fire insurance is often only partial insurance so that the
insuree has a financial interest in preventing a fire.
In chapter 17 we look at problems of(adverse(selection where one party
to a transaction knows things pertaining to the transaction that are rele-
vant tod Bn own by the second party. Here a classic example is life
insuranc ere the insuree may know things about the state of her health
that are unknown by the insurer. The solution to problems of adverse] 
-| selection is (market (signaling, where the party in possession of superior in-
i formation (signals what she knows through her (actions. For example, an |
. Insurance company may offer life insurance on better terms if the insuree
is willing to accept very limited benefits for the first two or three years
the policy is in effect, on the presumption that someone who suffers from
ill health and is about to die (or has substantial probability of dying) is
unwilling to accept those limited benefits.
Whenever there are informational problems of these or other sorts it
 lis natural to ask (What is the(best(contract that can be @evised?. We will] -
_ linvestigat te (optimal (incentives(design in_a simple setting in this chapter,
but a more general attack onloptimal(contract and (mechanism(design stressing. 
cases of adverse selection, which makes use of the(revelation(principle, will]
be given in chapter, 18:
578 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
These three topics are all important, but they do not even begin to
exhaust the important category of models and concepts from information
economics. Particularly noticeable by their absence are models of optimal
search and coordination failures, where parties desirous of making a partic-
ular exchange must search for potential trading partners and where the
need for search discourages certain otherwise beneficial trading activity,
and models of rational expectations, where some parties have information
that would be useful to others, information that is conveyed at least in
part by equilibrium prices themselves.
All these situations and others as well fall under the broad rubric of
information economics because in each case the driving factor is the lack of
information on the part of some market participants, whether about what
others are doing, or what others know, or where the best trading oppor-
tunities are to be found. This feature was ignored in part II of the book
(with a very few exceptions, notably in the analysis of price discrimina-
tion). Now this feature becomes the center of attention.
16.1. Introduction
As noted above, this chapter concerns transactions taken under con-
ditions of moral hazard Gr, as it is sometimes called, hidden action We
have already introduce one example: In the fire insurance business, an
insurance company would want the insuree to store flammable materials
carefully, keep quality fire extinguishers on hand, etc. To take other ex-
amples: If I lease a car from you that I return to you in three years, you
want me to have it serviced regularly, to drive it carefully (no redlining),
and so forth. If you hire me to do a particular arduous job, you want me
to work hard at the tasks that are set for me.
In each of these examples, it is possible to monitor and enforce levels
of care, or servicing, or effort. Insurance companies will send out inspec-
tors, and some insurance contracts provide that no benefits wil" be paid
if it can be shown that the insurer did not provide sufficient due care.
1 The terms of information economics, such as moral hazard, adverse selection, hidden
action, hidden information, signaling, screening, and so on, are used somewhat differently
by different authors, so you must keep your eyes open when you see any of these terms in a
book or article. For example, we just equated moral hazard with hidden action; you will read
elsewhere that there is a serious distinction between them. (My own opinion is that there isa
distinction, but it is hardly serious.) I do not wish to subject you to a precise categorization,
largely on the grounds that very interesting problems mix more than one form, and then
how would we call them? As a consumer of the literature, you should pay less attention to
these labels and more to the rules of the game the author specifies who knows what
when, who does what when.
_, {structure the(transaction sO that the party who is taking the hidden ac-
16.2. Effort incentives: A simple example 579
A car lease contract may require that routine maintenance is performed.
If I am working for you, you might hire monitors to observe my level of
effort.
But in each case, perfect monitoring and enforcement may be impossi-
ble, and hence the transaction might befstructured : so that the party taking
. ithe action has relatively greater({incentive to act in a way the second party
prefers. The insurance company may only insure up to 90% of the build-
ing. If the leased car is sold after the lease period, the contract may call
for the party that leased the car to get a share of the proceeds from the
sale And you might tie my compensation to some observable measure
of how hard I work. 
From the point of view of providing (incentives, we would like to!
tion bears\fully the(consequences of his(actions. The insurance company
may refuse to give insurance; instead of leasing the car, you may simply
sell it to me; you may pay me as a function of the output I produce, us-
ing (for example) a piece-rate system, where I am paid a set amount for
each piece of output I produce. But in each of these cases there may be
- inefficiencies in such a (contractual form: A company owning a ware-
house, if closely held by a few individuals, may be less able to bear the
risk of having the warehouse burn down than is an insurance company
with many shareholders. A leasing arrangement may produce tax sav-
ings relative to a direct sale, owing to pecularities in the tax system.
Piece-rate systems may be infeasible because the work involved is ma-
chine paced, or because the quality of worksmanship as well as quan-
tity may be important, or because the piece-rate system may subject the
worker to risks that the worker is less well equipped to bear than is the
firm for which he works. 80 a(balance must be struck between providing
fncentives and (exploiting all the (ther (advantages of trade in a particular |
setting. ;
16.2. Effort incentives: A simple example
All these words and vague generalities may be a bit hard to parse,
so let us turn to an illustrative example. Imagine a situation in which
one party, called the principal, hires a second party, called the agent, to
perform some task. The agent is drawn from a large population of similar
2 you don't see this in most car lease contracts in the United States, largely because leasing
is motivated by tax considerations, and such a contract would void the tax savings.
3 You may wonder why such a tax system would be created, but that is well beyond the
scope of this book.
580 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
agents and is willing to undertake this task as long as his net utility from|
(performing the task is(at (least as(large as he can get at his(next best
opportunity; we refer to this level of utility as the agent's (reservation level +
- > Of(utility. The agent, if and when he is hired, must then decide whether to
_wotk hard or not on this particular job. Hard work is not to this particular
agent's taste, and so, all other things equal, he would prefer not to work
hard. Whether this agent works hard or not determines the value to the
principal of having this agent work. If the agent is not going to work
hard, then the principal will get very little from the deal so little that
it is not worth her while to pay the agent his reservation wage (a wage
high enough so that combined with not working hard the agent's net
utility exceeds his reservation level of utility). But if the agent does work
hard, then the principal will get enough out of the transaction to make it
worthwhile for both sides.
Specifically, suppose that the agent's (reservation level of (utility is
(completely arbitrarily, as the scale doesnt mean anything) 9. The agent
derives utility from how much he is paid, w, and how hard he works,
a. The level of a can be hard or high, which we denote a = 5, or it
can be not hard or low, denoted by a = 0. The agent's overall (von
Neumann-Morgenstern) utility from w and a is given by
Uw, a) = Vw a.
If the agent works hard, the accomplished task is worth $270 to the prin-
cipal. And if the agent doesnt work hard, the task will be worth only $70
to the principal.
To get the agent to work at a low level of effort, the principal must
offer the agent wages high enough so that v/w > 9, or w > $81. Since the
job, if done with low effort, is worth only $70 to the principal, there will
be no deal of this sort.
(But if the agent can be persuaded to expend high effort, then the
principal must offer the agent wages high enough so that /w 5>9, or
vw > 14, or w > $196. Since the principal values the job done with a
high level of effort at $270, this is a worthwhile deal for her. She should
fry to arrange this.
How? Perhaps she should write a contract that offers the agent $197
(be generous!) for performing the task, and trust that the agent will indeed
work hard. Trust is nice and can work (although we might try to think
why it does), but the title of this chapter is moral hazard, so we assume
this won't work. If the principal offers this agent a fixed fee contract, we
te nie emi reer
16.2. Effort incentives: A simple example 581
|assume that the agent will take the money, put in low effort, and leave the
principal paying $197 for a task that is worth to her only $70.
> Another possibility is tofoffer a(contract that calls for the agent's pay to
depend on how much effort he puts in. The contract might read something
like I (the principal) agree to pay the agent $197 if he works hard, and
- > $25 (say) if he doesnt. {f this\contract is(enforceable, then the agent will
optimally work hard doing so gives him a utility of (slightly more than)
9, while taking the contract and not working hard would net V25~0=5,
which is less than his reservation utility level.
But is this contract(enforceable? Suppose the agent signs it, doesnt
work hard, and then claims that he did work hard. The principal will
need some tangible evidence that he didnt work hard, evidence that will
stand up in some legal proceeding. It may be that no tangible evidence
exists, p even that the principal is @nable to(see any(conclusive(evidence
about how hard the agent worked. (This may seem a bit strange to you,
because the principal's valuation of the task depends on how hard the
agent worked. But, in a bit, we'll see why there might be no conclusive
evidence.) There may be (conclusive evidence, but awt evidence(that a|.
court of{law, or whoever is going to enforce this contract, would accept
as evidence. @r it may be that{court (costs are(too(high to make one side
wish to enforce such a contract. For any of these reasons, writing this sort
_of(contract might mot(work.
We could have the principal monitor the agent's efforts, with a con-
tract that gives the principal the right to fire the agent (at a low level of
severance pay) if he doesnt work hard. Of course, the principal might
still have to go to the courts to justify a termination, so the problems just
mentioned might still be present. And there will be some(cost of(moni-_
toring the agent; the principal, presumably, has better things to_do with
her time. The principal, if her time is especially valuable, might think
of hiring some third party to monitor the agent. But then she'll have to
pay this monitor, and she might be concerned that the monitor and the
agent will collude against her; the agent might offer the monitor a bribe
if the monitor will say that the agent did indeed work hard. Finally, the
agent mightnt sign any such contract, fearing that the principal will fire
him just before the task is completed. (In chapter 20, we'll consider how
the principal's concern for her reputation among workers in general might
reassure this particular worker on this count.)
Even if the principal cannot tie the worker's wage directly to his level
of effort, the principal might be able to find some indirect measure of effort
to which wages can be tied in a contract that will stand up in court. To give
an example of this, we have to be a bit more specific about what this agent
582 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives 16.2. Effort incentives: A simple example 583
+
is doing. We suppose that the agent is a salesman, who will be representing (b) Take the contract and put in a low level of effort. This will net expected
the principal to a particular client. There are three possible outcomes to } utility
this interaction: The client can place no order with the principal; the client
can place an order that is worth a (gross) $100 with the principal; or the (1)(236) + (.3)(64) + (.6)(164) 0 = 94.
client can place an order that is worth a (gross) $400 with the principal. i
, Thelagent's level of effort affects the{odds of each of these three outcomes. + - : (c) Take the contract and work hard. This will net expected utility
(the agent works(hard at making the sale, then a $400 sale results with
probability .6, a $100 sale with probability .3, and no sale with probability t (.6)(236) + (.3)(64) + (1)(164) 25 = 81.
1.2 the agent doesft work hard, there is a $400 sale with probability .1,
a $100 sale with probability .3, and no sale with probability .6. The size
1of the sale is observable, and (we assume) the agent's wages can be made
: contingent upon this variable.
The principal is risk neutral. Note, in particular, where the $70 and 
| Son
| The agent is just indifferent between options (a) and (c), and if the principal
4 _, (sweetens the(contract just a(bit, the agent will prefer (c). The principal is
quite happy with this. The agent, in his (own(interests now, will work| 
hard. Indeed, the principal's net from the sale net of the payment to the
{ $270 figures came from; these are the{expected (gross (profits from the sale, |< ; : agent is $164 (less any sweetening) with certainty!
for low- and high-effort levels, respectively. Note also that, unless the What our principal has done is to get the agent to internalize the effect
principal can observe the effort level of the agent directly, the data received '
(size of the order placed, if any) do not tell conclusively what level of effort
was put in. A $400 sale indicates that a high level of effort was(more likely, .
 but it isi Diconclusive.
of his effort decision. The agent now bears fully the cost of putting in less
_than a high level of effort.
rs en men
Case 2. A risk averse agent
} Now go back to the original formulation, where the agent's (utility -
_ function is u(w, a) = v/w a, his reservation utility level is 9, and a =5 for
high effort and a = 0 for low. If we could write a contract contingent on
the effort level of the agent, then the best contract for the principal to write
a bit.) By this we mean that the agent's(utility function is u(w,a) =W0. is one in which the agent gets $196 (plus a bit, perhaps) if he works hard
For the duration of this case, we assume that the agent's reservation level and some low amount (such as $0) if he doesnt. This leaves the principal
of utility is 81, and high and low effort correspond to a =25 and a = 0, , with an expected net profit of $270 - $196 = $74.
respectively. With these new numbers, the same problem as we had before : But we assume that the principal can only make the agent's wages
presents itself: The principal would be willing to hire the agent and pay contingent on the (gross) size of the sale. In case 1, we could still find a
him a bit more than $106 if hard work could be guaranteed. This would contract that would make the principal as well off as if she could write a
Case 1. A risk neutral agent
Now imagine that the agent is also(risk(neutral. (Note well: This it).
what we assumed above, and we'll get back to our earlier assumptions in
es or
nme el =
leave the principal with a net profit of $270 - $106 = $164. But the principal contract contingent on actual effort level. But)in this case we carafo. Two
princip p 7 ontrac z frubi 
would be unwilling to expend the $81 it would take to get the agent to { countervailing forces are at work in this case:
work if the agent puts in low effort. And she would certainly be unhappy | Co oo
if she hired the agent for $106 and then he put in low effort. t (2) In this case, where the principal is risk neutral and the agent is risk
But now there is a simple solution. (Offer the agent the following | .~ averse, the most efficient arrangement is one in which the agent's wage
is certain. Why? In general, @f{one party to a(transaction is(risk (averse and) 
the(other is \risk(neutral, then it is (efficient (for the(risk (reutral party to (bear fl. bl
the(risks. In the somewhat different context of syndicate theory in chapter
5, you saw this proved formally. The same formal techniques work here.
So instead of subjecting you for a second time to the formal proof, let us
(2) Turn down the contract, and get reservation utility level 81. give the (intuition: If the principal pays the agent a random wage, then
>|(contingent contract: If you make no sale, you pay me $164. If you make
a small sale (worth $100 gross), you only pay me $64. And if you make or
a large sale, you will be paid $400 - $164 = $236. The agent, offered this,
can choose one of the following three courses of action:
584 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
the agent evaluates the wage according to his expected utility. Being risk
averse, if the wage is at all risky the agent values it at less than its expected
value, Bug the principal, being risk neutral, values the cost of the wages
paid at their expected value. If we imagine that the agent's wages had
expected value @, then the principal would see this as an outflow from
cher pocket equivalent to w@, but the agent would see this as an inflow to}
vhis pocket of something less than @ as long as there is any risk at all. 
1(b) On the other hand, if we give the agent a riskless wage, the agent
has no incentive to work hard. And if the agent doesnt work hard, the
principal doesnt want to enter the transaction.
} | the efficiency that is/obtained(by putting all thetrisk on the principal. The
| question is, How can we do this as efficiently as possible?
To answer this, suppose that we form a contract in which the agent
is paid $2? if no sale is obtained, $z? if the small sale is made, and $x? if
the large sale is made. I am squaring the values so that when I apply the
agent's utility function his utility in each contingency will be z; a, for
i=0,1,2. Hence, offered this confract, the agent has three choices:
(a) Refuse the coniract, and get reservation utility 9
(b) Take the contract and put in a(low level of effort, for an expected utility
of
(.6)zy + (Dz; + (Dz,
(c) Take the contract and put in a(high level of effort, for an expected utility
of 
(Dz + (3)z; + (6), 5
Assume for the moment that we wish to write the(best(possible(contract] oo
(from the point of view of the principal) subject to the(constraints that the 
agent will take the contract and put in a high level of effort. Then we wish
fo
minimize (aj + (.3)z? + (.6)z3
(Tolinduce the agent towork(hard, we will have to(giv up{some of |< -
16.2. Effort incentives: A simple example 585
subject to
(Dz + (Iz; + (.6)z, -5 > 9
and
(Dzo + (3)z1 + (6)3, 5 > (.6)3 + (Bz; + (Dz,
perspective of the principal) subject to two (constraints; the first is that
the agent should sign on the dotted line, and the second is that the agent
should then choose to put i in the high level of effort. (We should add
constraints that the z; must all be nonnegative, but I'll proceed without
them and add them in later if necessary.) These two constraints have
names: The first is often called the (individual (rationality or participation
constraint, and the second is called the incentive constraint. _
You should have no difficulty solving this constrained optimization
problem. To spare you all that needless effort, let us simply give the
solution here: z, = 5.42857, = 14,7, = 15.42857. Both constraints bind
at the optimum, which is fairly intuitive: The principal doesnt want to
pay the agent any more than necessary to get him to work, and she doesnt
want to put any more risk on the agent than is necessary to get the agent
to work hard, because it is costly to her to put risk on the agent. Thus we
have the following as the optimal contract, if our objective is to get the
agent to take the job and to put in high effort:
J. | That is, we wish to (minimize the(expected (wage (since we are taking the
If no sale is made, wages are 5.428572 = $29.46
If a $100 sale is made, wages are 14% = $196
If a $400 sale is made, wages are 15.428572 = $238.0407
The expected wage bill is (.1)(29.46) + (.3)(196) + (.6)(238.0407) = $204.56,
which leaves the principal with an expected profit of 270204.56 = $65.44.
Compare this with the first best contract the contract where the
principal gives the agent a flat wage of $196 and relies on trust 1 the
compulsion of a monitoring scheme to ensure that the agent puts in a
- high level of effort. Tolgive the agent the(right{incentives, we had to(have
more likely if he puts in greater effort. This(cost the(principal an expected
$8.56. :
_him bear some of the(risk{by{rewarding him inlcase of the outcome that is
586 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
16.3. Finitely many actions and outcomes
A general formulation
The technique just used generalizes very nicely to a class of principal-
agent problems. We imagine an agent who may agree to undertake a task
for a principal, and who then chooses an action a to take out of some
finite set A ={a1,... ,an }. The action choice by the agent is not observed
by the principal; instead the principal sees an imperfect signal of what
the agent did. We model this by saying that the principal (and the agent)
observe a signal s that is drawn from a finite set S = {s1,...,sm}. If
the agent chooses action an, the probability that signal sm is produced is
Tnm, Where MM Tin = 1 for each n. The principal is unable to write
a contract that makes the agent's compensation directly dependent on a;
the best she (the principal) can do is to make his compensation a function
of s.
Note carefully that we refer to the agent's choice of action instead of
his choice of effort. We do not preclude the interpretation of a as a level
of effort, and in a later subsection we will specialize to a case that has
that interpretation quite naturally. But for now we dont rule out other
interpretations.
Both for ease of exposition and for some of the results we later give,
we make our first assumption: 
Assumption 1. The probability Tom > 0 for all n and m.
In words, every outcome is possible under every action.
The agent's utility depends on the wages he receives, denoted by
w, and the action he takes, denoted by a. His preferences over lotteries
concerning his income obey the von Neumann-Morgenstern axioms, and
Thao = wr dD his von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function.
Note carefully that we assume that U(w,a) is additively separable into a
piece that depends on wages, u(w), and a piece that depends on the action
selected, d(a). (Theletter d hereisa mnemonic for disutility.) We assume
that the agent has a reservation utility level u,. And we add the following
inmocuous assumption. me
OC Os =
Assumption 2. The function u is strictly increasing, continuously differentiable,
and concave.
Concavity of u is just risk aversion for our agent (in terms of lotteries over
his wages). We don't preclude that u is linear.
rier mea wr Ym rr 0
16.3. Finitely many actions and outcomes 587
The principal cares about the action chosen by the agent and about
the wages she pays to him. Specifically, we suppose that B(a) for some
function B gives the gross benefits to the principal of hiring the agent if
the agent chooses action a, and the principals net benefit is B(a) less the
expected wages she must pay.
This formulation is far from general. We are assuming that the principal
is risk neutral, and we assume a very special form of utility function for the
agent. Much of what follows can be extended somewhat to encompass more
general formulations. In particular, Grossman and Hart (1983), from whom
a lot of what follows is taken, assume throughout that the agent's utility
function takes the somewhat more general form U(w,ae) = fla)u(w) d(a)
for a strictly positive function f. You will be asked to look at more general
formulations in the problems.
- Solving the basic problem
The basic problem is to find the optimal incentive scheme for the
principal to offer the agent. To solve this problem, we proceed as follows.
Step 1: For each arn, A, what is the cheapest way to induce the agent fo
take the job and choose action an? Cheapest here is measured in terms of the
expected wages that must be paid. Following the pattern of our example
from the previous section, we solve this problem by solving a constrained
maximization problem.
The variables in this maximization problem are the levels of wage-
utility the agent is given as a function of the signal s. That is, we take
variables zn, for m = 1,...,M, where if w(s.,) is the wage paid to the
agent if the signal is sm, then
Top, = wWw(sm)).
We assume the u(-) is a strictly increasing and continuous function, and
we let v be the inverse of u; that is, v(z) = w if u(w) = 2. Thus the wage
paid to the agent if signal sm is produced, as a function of the variable
Tm, 15 just
w(sm) = v(zm).
Thus, as a function of the variables {z1,... , za +, the expected wages
the principal must pay if the agent takes action an is
M
3 Tm UT).
m=1
588 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
If the agent is offered wages as a function of signal as given by u(zm),
what constraints must be met to be sure that he will select action a,?
We first must be sure that in choosing a, the agent achieves at least his
reservation level of utility,
M
So nm dan) > Up.
m=1
Note two things here. First, the expected utility of wages to the agent is
yt Tamu(u(2m)), Which since v is the inverse of u is just Te Tamm -
Second, we have a weak inequality, which means that if the constraint is
binding the agent is indifferent between taking the job or not. It is standard
to work with weak inequalities, presuming that the agent, if indifferent,
will resolve ties in the interests of the principal. (See the later subsection
on game theoretic connections.)
We must be sure that choosing a, is better than choosing some other
action n. This is modeled by imposing the constraints
M M
Se) Tamim ~ dan) > So tn'm@m dan), n' =1,...,N.
ml me=1
The two comments made in the previous paragraph apply here as well.
Note that we have included the constraint for n = n, although it is satisfied -
trivially.
There may also be constraints on the level of wages that can be paid.
A standard constraint of this sort is that wages may be constrained to
be nonnegative. For example, this was implicit in our example, since the
agents square-root utility function is not defined for negative wages. In
such cases we would add constraints such as 2,, > v(0). We will not carry
constraints such as this along in our formulation, although at one point
we will comment on the effect that such a constraint might have.
So we have step 1: For each action a,
M
minimize > %nmt(Cm)
m=]
M
subject to So tnm@m ~ dan) > up, and
Mw M
So tamBm dan) > So tam Em dan), n =1,...,N.
m=] m1
ee oe can
wer
een
\
i
4
}
|
i
16.3. Finitely many actions and outcomes 589
Call the value of this problem (that is, the value of the objective function
at the optimal solution) C(a,). This is the minimal expected cost of inducing
the agent to select action a,. We will use the label (Cn) for this problem,
a mnemonic for cost of action number n. The first constraint is called
the participation constraint, and the other constraints are called the relative -
incentive constraints.
For readers who know about such things: Because u is concave, v is
convex, and this is a well-behaved mathematical programming problem. We
are minimizing a convex function subject to linear constraints, so that satisfac-
tion of the first-order equations and the complementary slackness conditions
{and the problem constraints) is necessary and sufficient for a solution. Gen-
eral convex programming algorithms can be employed to solve this problem
numerically.
For a given ay, there may be no solution at all on grounds that the set
of values (tm) that meet all the constraints is empty; examples are easy to
construct. In this case we would say that C(a,) = too. Note that Clan) is
finite for at least one 7. If we set tm = to + min, d(a,), then the constraints
are all satisfied for the problem (Cn*) where n* is the index of the effort
level that has minimal disutility. In fact, for cases where u is concave this is
the solution to (Cn), a result that you should find easy to prove following
chapter 5 or from the first-order equations. (See later.)
The problem of nonexistence of any solution to the constraints is the only
sort of problem concerning existence of a solution to (Cn) that may arise: If
there is some set of variables (c), which meets all the constraints, then there
isan optimal solution. You are asked to show this in problem 9; hints as to
how to prove this are given there. It is worth noting that this result depends
crucially on the assumption that tam > 0 for all n and m: see problem 7.
Step 2. For which a A is B(a) Cla) maximized? This is a simple
maximization problem.
Since we know that C(an+) is finite where n* is as before, and since
each C(a,) is either finite or equal to +00, there is always a solution to the
principals overall problem. .
If we wish to be very careful about this, we have to wonder what happens
if B(a) < C(@) for all a. Is it viable for the principal to refuse to hire the
agent at all or, rather, for the principal to make a wage offer that the agent is
sure to turn down? If so, what are the consequences for the gross benefits of
the principal? We will not be tidy about this possibility but instead implicitly
assume that some level of effort can be implemented at a cost sufficiently
low to make it worth the principal's while to do so.
The key to this technique is the way that it takes the problem in steps.
First we find the minimum cost way to induce action a for each a A,
and then we choose the optimal a by. comparing benefits and costs.
590 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
Basic results and analysis
Within the context of this somewhat general formulation, we can ob-
tain a result along the lines sketched in the previous section.
To set a benchmark, consider the solution to the problem if it is pos-
sible to specify (and enforce the choice of) the action in the contract. From
results in chapter 5, since the agent is risk averse (possibly risk neutral)
and the principal is risk neutral, the cheapest method of guaranteeing the
agent a given level of utility is with a fixed payment. (If the agent is risk
neutral over some range, other schemes may be equally cheap, but none
will be cheaper.) So the cheapest way to get the agent to accept a contract
that specifies action choice ar is to offer to pay him
Ca) = vlug + dian).
To be very formal about this, this is obtained from the solution of the
problem
M M
minimize > Tam v(@m) subject to > Tamm dan) = uo-
 m=1 m=1
This is the same as the problem (Cn) except that the relative incentive
constraints are missing. We don't need them because the contract, by
assumption, can specify which action is taken. Since the problem is just
like (Cn) but with some constraints eliminated, it is evident that Can) <
O(a) for all n. We can go on to
maximize Blan) Can);
the effort level that solves this problem is called the first-best level of effort.
We are supposing, however, that the principal cant write an enforce-
able contract that specifies the first-best or any other level of effort. As in
the example of the previous section, we obtain the following result:
Proposition 1. If the agent is strictly risk averse, C%an) < Clan) for any
action a, that is more onerous than some other action; ie., such that d(an) >
ming da).
The proof is fairly simple. If the agent is strictly risk averse, then the
unique efficient risk-sharing arrangement is for the principal to bear all
16.3. Finitely many actions and outcomes 591
the risk; the agent gets a sure wage. But if the agent is given a wage that
is independent of the signal, he will choose the least onerous action. *
We next address the question Is the participation constraint binding at
the optimal solution? The answer is (a qualified) yes. In fact, for any ef-
fort level a, such that the constraints defining (Cn) can be satisfied, in
the solution of (Cn) the participation constraint is binding (with qualifi-
cations). To see why, suppose that (zr) is a solution of (Cn) such that
M Tnm@m daz) =u > up. Consider the alternative incentive scheme
given by a, = Zn u' +uo. This clearly. satisfies the participation constraint
(with equality!), and since we decrease each z., by the same amount, sat-
isfaction of the relative incentive constraints is guaranteed. But if v is
strictly increasing, this lowers the cost to the principal, which contradicts
the assumption that (z,) is a solution of (Cn). Nothing very mysterious
is going on here. We simply are taking the same amount of wage-utility
away from the agent at every outcome, which doesn't affect his relative
incentives at all.
What is the qualification? Suppose there were constraints on the vari-
ables zm such as zm > u(0). Then we could not be sure that z!., which is
zm less some amount, would continue to satisfy such constraints. In fact, it
is easy to construct examples where, because of the presence of constraints
such as zm > u(0), the participation constraint does not bind. To be sure
that this problem doesnt appear, we need to be sure that we are always able
to lower the utility levels received by the agent; essentially, u should have
range that is unbounded below. (If the domain of u is all of R, this will hold
automatically since u is concave. So this qualification pertains to cases where
the domain of u is itself bounded below.)
As a final piece of basic analysis, we turn to the first-order condi-
tions (and complementary slackness conditions) of the problem (Cn). Our
reason for interest in these conditions is straightforward. As we noted
before (in the small type), assumption 2 implies that satisfaction of the
first-order and complementary slackness conditions of (Cn) is necessary
and sufficient for an optimal solution of (Cn).
Letting A be the multiplier on the participation constraint and fj
be the multiplier on the relative incentive constraint for action an, the
% In the previous section we had something of a converse to this proposition, namely that
if the agent is risk neutral, then max, Bla) C%a) = max. B{a) ~ C(a); the principal can
achieve her first-best outcome. We dont obtain that result in this general formulation; it
must await a specialization to be given in the next subsection.
592 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
first-order condition for z,, is
N
vu! (Sm) = A+ Som (1 Tr! =) .
t
nal nm
(This is after some algebraic manipulation, which you should replicate.)
This has a very clean and intuitive explanation. Recall that the multipliers
must all be nonnegative and, from the complementary slackness condi-
tions, 7): Will be strictly positive only if the relative incentive constraint
on action a, is binding. Note that since v is convex, v' is an increasing
function. Thus a larger right-hand side in the first-order condition means
a larger value of z,,. With these preliminary observations, think of the
scheme (a,,;) as follows:
(a) A base payment (measured in utility) is made to the agent, given
by the equation v'(tm) = 4. If none of the relative incentive constraints
bind, then this is the first-order equation, and we have the result that
Im is constant inthe outcome m.* This is not surprising; we are just
rediscovering the result from chapter 5 that when there are no incentive
problems the optimal arrangement gives the risk-averse agent a constant
wage.
(b) But when there are binding relative incentive constraints, the wages
of the agent are not constant. Specifically, if qm, > 0, then the right-
hand side, and hence the agents wages, are increased at outcomes m
such that 1pm/%nm <1 and they are decreased at outcomes m such that
Trim/Tnm > 1. When tam/tam <1, outcome m is less likely if the agent
takes action n than if he takes the desired action n. So this does indeed
seem a good time to pay him more to get him to choosen over n. And
the agent is penalized if the outcome is an 8, such that tpm/fam > 1,
an outcome that is more likely under the action choice n than under the
desired n.
That, pretty much, is all there is to it. Of course, the levels of the
basic marginal utility wage 4 and the relative effort multipliers yj, all
must be determined, and they must work together in a fashion that causes
all the initial constraints and the complementary slackness conditions to
be met. But the essential idea is simple: At the optimum, you reward the
agent if the outcome is relatively more likely if he took the desired action,
* To be precise, it is constant if u is strictly concave, hence v is strictly convex, and hence
vu is strictly increasing.
Nt ne tt MO ee Mee fe eonannn cee nt Otm coger nt tn
16.3. Finitely many actions and outcomes 593
and you penalize him if the outcome is relatively less likely, relative to the
actions that bind in the relative incentive constraints.
The formulation: A special case
We next make use of a special case of the formulation given above. To
begin, we imagine that the signals s,, are levels of gross profit accruing
to the principal, exactly as in the example of the previous section. In this
case B(a,) = ye Tnam$m- ;
With this specialization, we can give the converse to the proposition
from the previous subsection: |
Proposition 2. For a.risk neutral agent, max, B(a) C%(a) = max, B(a) 
C(a). In fact, if a* achieves the maximum in max, B(a)C(a), one scheme that
implements this action is for the principal to pay the agent Sm, B{a*) + C%(a*)
if the gross profits are sm, 80 the principal receives B(a*) C%(a*) for sure and
the agent bears all the risk.
We will not go through the proof of this result except to note the intuition:
If the agent is risk neutral, efficient risk sharing between the principal and
agent is consistent with the agent bearing all the risk. And by having the
agent bear all the risk, we have him bearing entirely the consequences of
his action choice. It is as if the principal sold the venture to the agent,
who is now sole proprietor and is working for himself, and who now
chooses the optimal action in his own sole and best interests,
To continue our specialization, we further imagine that the actions are
levels of effort that the agent might select, ordered in terms of increasing
disutility. That is,
dar) < dan) <... < day).
In this case, there is no reason to carry around the extra baggage of the
function d; we can use a, for the disutility of effort choice n, so that
U(w, a) = u(w) a, and the condition becomes <a <...< ay.
Finally, we imagine that higher (i.e., more onerous) levels of effort
result in higher gross profits for the principal. To write this assumption,
we assume that the gross profit levels s,, have been arranged in increasing
b Perhaps now is the time to ask, Why couldn't we give this proposition before we special-
ized to this case? If the answer isnt obvious, consider what would happen in the previous
subsection if the number of signals, M1, was one.
a
594 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
order: ; < 52 < ... < sp. To assume that higher levels of effort lead
to higher profits, we might simply assume that >M Tm Sm is Increasing
in n. But usually something more stringent is assumed, namely that an
increase in effort results in a higher probability of higher levels of profit.
Formally:
Assumption 3. For all pairs n and n' such that n' > n and for all m =
1,...,M,
M M
> ns < > ww
i=m i=
with for each n and n' a strict inequality for at least one m.
q
For those who know the terminology, assumption 3 states that increased
effort results in a first-order stochastic increase in the levels of gross profits.
Although it may not be immediately evident to you, this does imply that
TM TnmSm is increasing in n. (See problem 10.)
We motivate the analysis to come by asking the following question:
Is the wage paid, or equivalently the wage-utility level Tm, nondecreasing with
increases in the level of gross proffts?
Since the principal will wish to reward the agent for higher levels of effort, .
and since higher levels of effort go wi higher levels of profit, it may
seem natural to suppose that the answer will be yes. But the answer is no
in general. An easy-to-comprehend example where it fails runs as follows.
There are three possible levels of gross profit, $1, $2, and $10,000,
and two possible effort levels, a; = 1 and a; = 2. (Remember that we
identify an effort level with its disutility in this specialized formulation.)
Tf the agent chooses effort level ai, the outcomes are $1 gross profit with
probability .5, $2 gross profit with probability .3, and $10,000 gross profit
with probability .2. If the agent chooses effort level a,, the outcomes have
probabilities 4, .1 and .5, respectively. Note that as promised, higher effort
leads to higher probabilities of better outcomes in precisely the sense of
assumption 3.
We leave it to you to flesh out this example so that the agent has a
strictly concave utility function for wages u and a reservation utility level
up such that the solution to the principal's problem is to provide the agent
 The use of strict inequalities here may trouble the very picky reader. In essence, we are
assuming that the only information upon which contracts can be written is the level of gross
profits.
16.3. Finitely many actions and outcomes 595
with incentives to choose a,. This shouldn't be hard to do. Expected gross
profits if the agent chooses a; are $2,001.50, while they are $5,000.60 if he
chooses a,. This gives the principal a strong reason to create incentives
or as.
When you do this, the multiplier on the relative incentive constraint
for choosing a, instead of a; will necessarily be strictly positive. Why?
Because if it isnt, in the first-order conditions we will get a flat wage
payment to the agent, and we know that this will cause him to choose a;.
(Go slowly here. I'm skipping steps to force you to think this through.)
So the three first-order equations will be
vz) =X +n (5/4) =X~- 257
Vz) = A +71 (3/1) = A 27, and
v'(zs) = A +71 (2/5) = A+ .67,
where z; is the wage-utility level corresponding to $1 gross profits, z,
corresponds to $2, and =z; corresponds to $10,000, A is the multiplier on
the participation constraint, and 7 is the multiplier on the binding relative
incentive constraint. The point, simply, is that if 5 > 0, which it must be,
then z; > Z,.
There should be no mystery why this is. While higher effort shifts
upwards the probability of higher gross profits in the sense of assumption
3, the ratio of the probability of the outcomes under a, to their probability
under a; goes down and then up. Evidently, to get an affirmative answer
to the question posed above, we need something stronger than assumption
3.4 We seemingly need
Assumption 4. The monotone-likelihood ratio property. For any two effort
levels a, and ans such that n <n, and for any two gross-profit outcomes sm
and spy such that m < m', the relative likelihood of the better outcome under
the higher effort level to the lower is at least as large as this likelihood ratio for
the lower outcome. Or, in symbols,
Tn'm! > n/m
Tam! Tam
d . .
You should verify that assumption 4, which follows immediately, is indeed strictly
stronger than assumption 3. In fact, if you know about first-order stochastic dominance,
you might wish to ponder the connections between that property and assumption 4.
596 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
Is assumption 4 enough to get an affirmative answer to our motivating
question? It is certainly moving us in the right direction, but even this it
is not enough. To see why, go back to the first-order equations for (Cn),
for the effort level a, that the principal optimally chooses to implement.
Insofar as the only binding relative incentive constraints are for effort levels
less than ay, we are okay. Because v is convex, the sign of =, zm for
m < m is the same as the sign of v'(z;m)v' (zm). But from the first-order
conditions,
N
Tnlm! nt
oz) VU (Tm) > | nm! .
nf=1 nm Tnm
As long as n < n, assumption 4 says that the sign of each term in the
brackets is nonpositive, hence (since multipliers are all nonnegative) the
sum is nonpositive, which is just what we want.
But if nis positive for some n > n, then we may be sunk; now the
monotone likelihood ratio property runs the wrong way.
It may seem incredible to you that, in any problem (Cn), the relative
incentive Constraints for greater levels of effort than the one desired will
be binding. Or rather, it may seem incredible that this would hold in the
problem (Cn) for the a, that is optimal for the principal. After all, if the
agent wants to choose a higher level of effort, why would the principal ever,
wish to stop him from doing so? There is a reason why. It is true that the
principal benefits from higher levels of effort by the agent in terms of the
function B(a). But for a given wage schedule, there are also costs that the
principal incurs: Insofar as higher wages are paid for better outcomes, by
expending more effort the agent increases his expected wages. It is possible
to construct examples where there are three levels of effort, a;, a,, and a3,
the monotone likelihood ratio property holds, the middle level of effort is
optimal, and, in the problem (C2) both relative incentive constraints bind
in a way that gives optimal wages that are not nondecreasing in gross
profits. The details of this example are not illuminating; if you wish to
see them, consult Grossman and Hart (1983, example 1).
What is needed in addition to assumption 4 is an assumption that
implies that the only binding relative incentive constraints in (Cn) for the
optimal effort level a, are constraints corresponding to levels of effort
lower than a,. We proceed to develop one condition, which Grossman
 Test your understanding of this by answering the following question before reading fur-
ther. Why is it impossible, in this case, that only the relative incentive constraint for a3 binds
in (C2)?
ere aa bt ces sn mn sri eee en
16.3. Finitely many actions and outcomes 597
and Hart attribute to unpublished work by J. Mirrlees. (This condition will
play a role in later analysis as well, which is the excuse for not shifting to
the smaller type size just yet.)
Assumption 5. If an, an, and ape are effort levels such that a, = Bay, +(1
Bann, then for each m=1,...,M,
M M M
> ws > BD Tn: + (1 - BY Tons.
i=m i=m
i=m :
This is called the concavity of the distribution function condition. To aid in
making comparisons with the literature and, in particular, with the treat
ment in Grossman and Hart (1983), recall that here we are identifying the
effort level a, with its disutility. To interpret this assumption (and for
later purposes of notation), let (an) = 3, mni- That is, IT.(ay,) is the
probability of seeing a gross profit level at least as large as s,, if effort
level an, is taken. Then, roughly, the assumption says that increases in
effort (as measured by their disutility) have decreasing marginal impact
on the probabilities of better outcomes. You can see this most easily if you
think of an, ans, and a,~ such that Gn = Gp' = Gs apr > 0. This gives
 =1/2 in the assumption. Then the increase in disutility in moving from
the lowest level of effort a, to the intermediate level a, is the same as
the increase in moving from a, to a,. And according to the assumption,
for each m, II (an) In(ane) > II(an) IIn(ans).
What does this assumption do for us?
- Proposition 3. If assumptions 1, 2, 4, and 5 all hold and wu is strictly con-
cave, then the optimal wage-incentive scheme for the principal has wages that are
nondecreasing functions of the level of gross profits.
The proof of this proposition is a bit much for ones first pass through
this subject, so we relegate most of the details to smaller type. But before
switching type size, we record the first step along the way, which we will
need in the next section. We first give a piece of notation. For any fixed
wage-incentive scheme (wy), let U(a,) be the overall expected utility of
the agent under this scheme if he chooses effort level ay. That is,
M
Ulan) = > Trim UW) Qn. 
m=l
598 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
Lemma. Fix a wage-incentive system that is nondecreasing in the gross profit
of the firm. (That is, wy SL wp < ++ SUM .) If assumption 5 holds, Ua) is a
concave function of a.
Note carefully: This is true of any nondecreasing wage-incentive system.
As you will see in the proof, it doesn't depend at all on an assumption 4
or even on an assumption 3. And all that is required from assumption 2
is that is nondecreasing.
Proof of the lemma. Write om for u(ws). If the function u is nondecreasing
(which is assumed), then so is the sequence Zm. Write = z; and, for
m=2,...,M, let bm = Tm Tm1- Note that 6., > 0-for all m >2. Then
LM M M kidd
Forreston Srna 3 [rn 35]
m=1 m=l
m=l j=
M M M
= 3 oo oo =6+ 3 6m Im (an).
mel m=2
The first, second, and fourth equalities are just a matter of rewriting; it is the
third equality that may not be immediately obvious. But if you consider the
matter carefully, you will see that this is correct. Hence
M
Ulan) = 6 +3 bmlm(an) - On.
m=2
This is the sum of a constant, nonnegative weightings of concave functions
of an, and a linear function of an. Hence it is concave in an.
With this lemma in hand, we can proceed to a second lemma. To set up
for this, consider, for each n= 1,2,...,N, the problem
M
minimize > Frm (Tm)
mad
M
subject to > Tamm dlan) > uo, and
T=]
M M ,
> Tamem dan) > > TatmTm dan), 7 =1,...,nL
msl m=l .
5 The notion of a concave function on a discrete domain may be a bit mysterious to you,
but the idea is that if a = fa + (1 Ba for a,a, and a" all in the domain of U and
8 10,1], then SUG) +0 AHUE") LU).
16.3. Finitely many actions and outcomes 599
To see the difference between this and (Cn), look closely at the range of nin
the third line. This problem is just the same as (Cn), except that the relative
incentive constraints for effort levels greater than n are missing. We will call
this problem (C*n).
Lemma. If assumptions 1,2, and 4 hold and w is strictly concave, then any solution
(zm) of (C*n) is nondecreasing: = < =; < ... < eur. If, in addition, assumption
5 holds, then any solution of (C*n) is a solution of (Cn).
Proof. A necessary condition for a solution of (C*n) is the first-order condi-
tions. If u is strictly concave, the values of the =, at any solution are strictly
increasing in the right-hand sides of the first-order equations. And in (C*n),
as long as assumption 4 holds, those right-hand sides are nondecreasing in
m. The last assertion follows because, by construction, in (C*n) we only
have relative incentive constraints for effort levels less than the one being
implemented. This gives the first assertion of the lemma.
For the second assertion, we consider cases. For n = 1, strict concavity
of u ensures that the solution of both (C*n) and (Cn) is a constant wage set
equal to reservation wage of the agent. For n > 2, we know that the solution
to (C*n) involves a nonconstant wage, because at a constant wage a; would
be chosen. From the first-order conditions this implies that at least one of
the relative incentive constraints must have a positive multiplier, which by
complementary slackness implies that this constraint must be binding. Let n'
be the binding constraint, which of course has n' < n. Fix the wage-incentive
scheme that solves (C*n), and consider, as in the previous lemma, U(a) as
a function of a for j =1,..., NN, at this wage-incentive scheme. By the first
assertion of this lemma combined with the previous lemma, U(:) is concave
in a. By construction, Ulan) = Ula) (and these are at least as large as Ula;)
for every j < nm). But then the concavity of Ula) in a for all implies that
Ula;) < Ulan) for all j > n. To see this, suppose that Ufa;) > Ulan) for
some j > n. Since an is a strict convex combination of a; and a,/, we would
know that U(a,) must be at least the corresponding strict convex combination
of Ula;) and Ula), which would contradict Ula.) = Ulan) < Ula;).
Thus we know that at the optimal solution of (C*n), Ula;) < Ulan)
for all > n. But this says that the solution of (C*n) solves the additional
constraints imposed in (Cn), and so it is a solution of (Cn). This completes
the proof.
Proof of Proposition 3. Suppose that the optimal solution of the principals
problem corresponds to implementation of effort choice an . Then the solution
of (C*n), which is a solution of (Cn), is nondecreasing. Strict concavity of u
implies that the solution of (Cn) is unique. (If there are two solutions, take
a convex combination of them. All the constraints continue to be met and
since is strictly convex, the expected wage paid at the convex combination
is less.) That gives the result.
One can go on to examine conditions under which the optimal wage-
incentive schedule is convex or concave as a function of gross profits.
Grossman and Hart (1983, proposition 9) give a result along these lines.
600 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
A further specialization: The case of two outcomes
Instead of pursuing this, we turn to a different sort of question. So far
we have been concerned primarily with properties of the optimal incen-
tive wages. The results we have derived have concerned solution of the
subproblem (Cn) without any real use or mention of the larger problem of
choosing an effort level to implement. You might wonder what can be said
about the level of effort that the principal optimally chooses. An intuitive
case might be made that the principal would always choose to implement
a level of effort less than or equal to the first-best level, since risk-sharing
between the agent and principal entails shielding the (risk-averse) agent
from some of the consequences of his effort in terms of profits, while he
bears fully its disutility. (If you are sceptical about this intuition, dont
worry; scepticism is appropriate.)
We will examine this issue in a very special setting. As in the previous
subsection, we hold to the story of the action choice being effort measured
along a one-dimensional scale of disutility, and we continue to assume
that the only signal received about what effort the agent chose is the gross
profit received. But we further specialize by assuming that gross profits
can take on only two possible levels: s; and s, > 5;. In words, we imagine
that the agent's efforts result in either failure or success of some venture,
and profit depends solely on whether the venture succeeds.
In this setting, our assumptions translate as follows: Assumption 1
simply says that both success and failure are possible outcomes at any .
level of effort; assumption 2 is not changed or reinterpreted; assumption 3
is that higher levels of effort lead to increased chances of success, and
this implies, with no further restrictions, that assumption 4 holds. That
is, the monotone likelihood ratio property is redundant in this special
situation, given assumption 3. Finally, assumption 5 states simply that the
probability of a success is a concave function of the effort level.
Given assumption 3, we do not require assumption 5 in this case to
obtain the result that the optimal wage incentive scheme is nondecreasing
in effort if u is strictly concave. To see why, note that with two outcomes
the only way one can fail to have a nondecreasing wage-incentive schedule
is if failure is rewarded more than success. But given assumption 3, for
any such wage-incentive schedule the agent will choose the lowest level
of effort. And we know that (for strictly concave u) a better way to
implement the lowest level of effort is to have constant wages.
Hence, with assumption 3 alone, we can think of wages in this case as
being of a particularly simple form. The agent has a base wage, denoted by
by, to which is added a bonus b, > 0 in the event of a successful outcome.
16.3. Finitely many actions and outcomes 601
If we write = by/(s, 51) the agents wages are b; and b; +o(s, 57), ora
base wage plus a share of any exira gross profits accruing from a success.
We know that > 0, and we know that o > 0 if the principal wishes to
implement any effort level above the minimal level possible (why?). We
can also bound from above.
Proposition 4. If u is strictly concave, then o < 1 at the optimal wage-incentive
schedule.
The idea here is that if o > 1, then the principal prefers that the outcome is
failure, ex post. This can never be part of an overall optimal scheme. The
proof is surprisingly difficult and is omitted here. See Grossman and Hart
(1983, proposition 4), who gave the result generalized suitably to cases
with more than two outcomes.
Now we return to the question with which we began. Can one say
anything in general about how the effort level the principal chooses to
implement compares with the first-best effort level? An example will il-
lustrate the difficulties.
Example, part 1: There are two outcomes and two possible effort levels.
Effort level a; = 0 gives a .9 probability of failure and .1 of success, while
effort level a, = .1 gives probabilities .85 and .15, respectively. The agent
has utility function U(w,a) = In(w) a. The reservation utility level is 0.
Success is worth $10 to the principal, and failure is worth $0.
It is immediate that to implement effort level a,, the principal should
pay a constant wage of $1, which nets her $0; the $1 gross expected profit
Just goes to pay the agent's wages.
If the principal could write a contract that specified (in enforceable
fashion) effort level a,, the optimal contract would give the agent wages
of *! = $1.105 regardless of action, for an expected net profit of $1.50 
$1.105 = $.395. Hence the first-best effort level is a,.
But to implement the first-best level of effort, the principal must pay
the agent higher wages in case of success than in case of failure. It is
easy to work out the optimal wage-incentive contract. In the problem
(C2), both the participation and the sole relative-incentive constraints must
bind. (Why?) These are two linear equations in two unknowns and solving
them gives wages of $.8187 if the outcome is failure and $6.04965 in case
of success. (You should do the arithmetic if you are at all unsure where
these numbers come from.) This has an expected cost (in terms of wages)
of $1.6034, which means that the principal's net profit from implementing
602 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
a, is a loss of $.1034. Hence the principal chooses to implement a; with a
flat $1 wage.
Example, part 2: Now we add a third possible effort level, a; = 2.27, which
gives a .99 chance of success. Note that assumption 5 is satisfied in this
case.
First we look at what the principal could make if she could write
an enforceable contract that speciffed a;. The optimal wages in such a
contract would pay = $9.6794 regardless of outcome, for a net to
the principal of $9.90 - $9.6794 = $.2206. Hence the first-best effort level
remains as.
(Although it isnt germane, we can ask whether the addition of this
third action changes the cost of implementing a;. If a; can be imple-
mented, it must be at wages where the participation and relative-incentive
constraint for a; bind. (Why?) So we know that the wages must be as
in part 1 of this example, and the only thing to check is whether, at these
wages, a; is better than az for the agent. (What would happen if a; turned
out better than a, at these wages? What would C(a,) be in that case?) In
fact, this does work out at the wages computed in step 1, actions ; and
a; give the agent expected utility of 0, while a; gives him an expected
utility of 49.)
What does it cost to implement as? When solving the subproblem
(C3), we know that the participation constraint must bind. We also have .
two relative-incentive constraints and only two unknowns. So, unless
there is a coincidence, one of those two relative-incentive constraints will
bind and the other will be slack. (Why cant they both be slack at the
solution of [C31?) If you try each possibility in turn, you will find that it is
the relative-incentive constraint for a, that binds, giving wages of $.7501 if
the outcome is failure and $9.9327 if the outcome is success. This costs the
principal an expected $9.8409 in wages, for a net profit of $.0591. Hence
this is the solution when there are three possible effort levels.
This covers all the possibilities. In the case of only two effort levels,
the principal chooses an effort level lower than the first-best. With the
third added, she chooses to implement an effort level that is higher than
the first-best. (You should have little problem creating an example where
she chooses the first-best level itself.) All that remains is to see why this
is happening.
The basic idea is that in our example effort level a, while first-best,
gives very weak statistical evidence against the hypothesis that the effort
16.3. Finitely many actions and outcomes 603
level chosen was a;. Relative to what one gains from implementing a,
in terms of gross profits, the cost of separating a, from a, is substantial.
Effort level a3, on the other hand, gives a very different statistical pattern
of outcomes, and so it is not so costly to separate from the others, relative
to what is gained in gross profits.
To drive this point home, imagine that az ensured success. (This
violates assumption 1 and so is only for purposes of discussion.) Then
we could get incentive schemes that implement a; with costs arbitrarily
close to the first-best cost of a;. We would do this with dire threats in case
the outcome is a failure wages very close to zero. The agent can avoid
the threat by choosing as, if a; ensures success. But threats of this sort
are terrible in case the agent contemplates any action that has a nonzero
chance of failure, since In(w) oo as w 0. For more on this point,
see problem 7.
Connecting to game theory
The analysis that we have conducted has not been couched in game
theoretic terms, but it is easy enough to do so. The game that is being]
, played can be thought of as follows: The principal (offers a contract to an|
agent, who then either(accepts or(rejects the contract and Af he (accepts it,
Ichooses an(action to take. The space of (contracts that the principal may
offer is limited exactly as we have postulated; the(payoff of the agent if!
he rejects the contract is his reservation level of utility; and the(payoffs to]
both principal and agent are computed in obvious fashion.
yl They solution! concept we have been using, at least for the game just
- + described, is{subgame (perfect Nash(equilibrium. Note where we use the
subgame perfection: We @ssume that the (agent (accepts the contract and] <
. 'ichooses his action(optimally( given the (contract. We could easily construct
subgame imperfect equilibria where the agent threatens to reject any con-
tract that doesnt give him some amount more than his reservation level
of utility. (Or he could threaten to accept such a contract but then take an
action that, while suboptimal for him, is disastrous for the principal) We
have implicitly ruled out such threats.
It sometimes troubles readers that in our equilibria the agent is in-
different between many courses of action, and we assume he chooses the
one we or, rather, the principal desires. But this is standard fare for this
form of analysis. Thinking of this as a game, it is the continuous action
space for the principal that forces this in our solutions. If, for example, we
tried to require that the principal offer a contract that makes acceptance
strictly better than rejection, there would be no optimal contract at all: At
any contract where the participation constraint doesnt bind, we can de-
sign a better contract where it still doesnt bind. And there would be no
subgame perfect equilibrium of our game. If the agent used the strategy
of rejecting contracts that gave him precisely his reservation utility, the
principal's better response (assuming she gets positive net profits at the
optimal scheme) would be to sweeten the contract just a bit, so the agent
isn't indifferent. But there is no optimal amount of sweetener to put in;
there is no single best response. The only way we get equilibrium is to
assume that ties are broken in a fashion that favors the first mover. This
is a problem with the style of analysis we use that you should learn to
live with, because it is pervasive in the literature.
16.4. Continuous actions: The first-order approach
If you consult the early literature on the principal-agent model, you
will find models that assume that both the possible signals and the possible
actions or effort levels are not finite in number. The typical model will say
that the agent can choose any effort level drawn from some interval [ao, a,]
and that the range of possible gross profit levels is RB or some appropriate
subinterval.
Some technical difficulties arise if there are infinitely many possible
signals or outcomes. These are especially associated with assumption 1:
You can't say that every outcome has positive probability when there are
uncountably many. The important part of assumption 1, though, is that
likelihood ratios are uniformly bounded and bounded away from zero, for
any two actions, as we vary the signals. These are technical difficulties,
and while there is some economic intuition to them (see problem 8), we
will not pursue them here.
We should, however, discuss the technical difficulties that arise when
actions or effort levels are chosen from some interval. To fix matters, we
use the model of two possible outcomes, success and failure, and an action
choice that bears the interpretation of effort. Effort is chosen from an
interval [aq,a;] where effort is measured on the scale of disutility; ie.,
Uw, a) = u(w) a for some function v satisfying assumption 2. If effort
level a is chosen, then the probability of a successful outcome is (a),
where 7(-) is a strictly increasing function.
How are we to construct the subproblem analogous to (Cn) in this
fOr, tobe very precise, this is so in cases where the first mover has a rich enough strategy
space so that she could, at vanishing cost, enforce the choice she wants.
16.4. Continuous actions: The first-order approach 605
case? If we want to discover the minimal cost of implementing a*, we
would seem to want to solve
minimize (1 w(a*)v(zy) + 7(a*)v(z,)
subject to (1 7(a*))z r+ 7m(aNzs a* > ug
and (1 m(a*)zs + 7(a*)z; a* >
(1 7(a)zs + wla)zs a forall a lag, a1],
where the decision variables z; and z, are the utility wage levels contin-
gent on failure and success, respectively.
The last constraint, which is really an infinite number of constraints,
is a killer to handle analytically. So in much of the early literature the
following reasoning was employed. The last constraint can be recast as:
The function
Ula) = (1 w(a))zs + wla)z; a
should be maximized at a = *. The maximand of this function, assuming
that it doesnt fall at one of the endpoints of [ag,a;], can be found from
the first-order condition U'(a) = 0 or
7 (@)zs zs] = 1.
So simply substitute this first-order condition into the subproblem for-
mulation in place of the last constraint. That is, rewrite the problem of
implementing * at minimal expected cost as
minimize (1 m(a*))v(zy) + 7(a*)v(z,)
subject to (1 7(a*)z + n(a*)z, a* > up
and 7'(a")[z; z7] = 1.
Fixing a*, this gives us two equations in two unknowns (assuming both
constraints bind), and we are virtually home free.
Or are we? Is it legitimate to replace the infinite set of relative-
incentive constraints with a single first-order constraint? In general, it
is not. But one can give conditions under which this approach does work.
Suppose assumption 5 holds. In this context, this is just a statement that
m() is a concave function. Then for any nondecreasing wage-incentive
scheme (that is, any scheme that pays at least as much for success as for
606 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
failure), we know from earlier analysis that the agent's expected utility
function U(a) as defined above is concave. If (-) is assumed to be differ-
entiable, then U(-) is also differentiable. And we then know that solution
of the first-order condition is necessary and sufficient for an optimum, at
least off the boundary. Moreover, in this two-outcome case, it is easy to
argue from first principles that the optimal incentive-wage system is non-
decreasing. So we know indeed that this approach is valid in this case
if assumption 5 holds. But if assumption 5 doesn't hold, then one doesn't
always obtain the optimal solution by this process. In particular, a scheme
designed to satisfy the participation and first-order constraints may not
satisfy all the relative-incentive constraints; i.e., it may not even be a fea-
sible solution to the original problem.
When you read in the literature about the first-order approach to the
principal-agent problem and about problems in that approach, it is this to
which reference is being made.
Let us harvest at least one simple result from this first-order approach.
Assume that w(-) is concave, so the approach is valid, and assume that
n() is continuously differentiable. Consider the problem of implementing
effort level a. The first-order constraint is
1
(az; z5l=1 or zs zp = wD
Substituting this into the participation constraint, we obtain the solution
sla) =u +a m0) ond zs(a) = up +a+ 1rd) ra),
(a)
w'(a)
Hence the expected level of wages that must be paid to implement a is
Cla) = (1 m(@)(z (a) + m(@)v(zs(a)).
Note well: This doesnt apply to Cla); by the (I hope by now) obvious
argument, to implement the lowest level of effort the principal should pay
constant wages of v(ug + ao), which gives Clag) = v(up + ag). We have:
Proposition 5. Assume that w is strictly concave and that assumptions 1 through
5 all hold.
(a) The function x(a) is nonincreasing in a.
(b) The function z,(a) is nondecreasing in a.
16:4. Continuous actions: The first-order approach 607
(c) The function Ca) is increasing in a.
(d) All of these functions are continuous for a > ao. At a = ay they jump as
follows: zs jumps down; z5 and C jump up.
We leave the proof to you, with the following hints. For (a) and (b), take
the derivatives of these functions, being careful about the value ay. For
(0), use parts (a) and (b), the fact that (1 m(a)zs(a) + mla)zs{a) = uo +a,
and the convexity of v. (Draw a picture of v, and locate the points z(a)
and z (a) for two values of a.) Continuity of all these functions for a > a
follows from the fact that they are made up of continuous functions. The
jump discontinuities rely on the fact that (ag) > 0, which follows from
concavity of = and assumption 3.
An economically interesting part of this lemma is the upward jump
in C at ay. Since B(a) is a continuous function of a, we will not tend to
find optimal incentive schemes that implement a small amount of effort
relative to the lowest possible level. A discrete cost must be paid to get
the agent to do anything above the minimum, and that discrete cost must
be covered by a discrete increase in benefits, which in turn requires a
discrete step-up in the amount of effort chosen by the agent.
Since you will see it in many papers on the subject, let us close here with
the formulation in the case where the set of outcomes is an interval [so, 51]
from R. (To follow precisely what comes next, you need to know about
Lagrangians for problems with infinitely many decision variables. But even
if you don't know about such rarified optimization theory, you may get the
basic idea by reading on.) We assume that as a function of a the distribution
of outcomes is given by the cumulative distribution function &(s;a), which
is assumed to have a continuous density function (s;a). We write (s) for
the wage-utility if the outcome is s. Then for a fixed incentive scheme given
by z(-), the utility to the agent of expending effort a is
/ z(s)p(s; a)ds a,
so the first-order condition that * is optimal is
/ z(s)pa(s;a)ds = 1,
where .(s;a) means the partial derivative of (s,a) with respect to a.
The subproblem with this first-order constraint put in place of the relative
t
608 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives 16.5. Bibliographic notes and variations 609
incentive constraints is - markets where {moral(hazard is a problem. In each of these cases, there
} _.|are reasons why it is zig? (desirable to have the (agent (fully (internalize
- | the (consequences of his (actions: In the context explored in this chapter
minimize / v(z(s)) p(s; adds
subject to / z(s)d(s; a)ds a > ug
and I z(s)da(s; a)ds = 1.
Letting A be the multiplier on the participation constraint and 7 the multiplier
on the first-order constraint, the entire problem has first-order condition
v'(z(s) = \ + 7 (ize)
(When and if you see this in other places, you may see the left-hand side
written as 1/u/(w(s)), where the decision variable is the wages paid if the
gross profit level is 5s. Of course, by the formula for the derivative of the
inverse of a function, these come to the same thing.)
Our remarks about when the first-order approach is valid in the case
of two signals carries over to this situation. If the appropriate analogue of
assumption 5 holds, then the agent's objective function is concave for any
nondecreasing wage-incentive scheme, and the agent's optimal response is
characterized by the first-order condition. Moreover, in the spirit of our anal-
ysis in the previous section, one can show that the optimal wage-incentive
scheme will be nondecreasing if, in addition to the analogue of assumption 5,
the appropriate analogue of the monotone likelihood ratio property holds.
From this first-order equation one can obtain a number of interesting
results. In particular, watch out for the so-called Holmstrom informativeness
condition (Holmstrom, 1979; Shavell, 1979), which concerns when information
will be used in an optimal incentive scheme.
16.5. Bibliographic notes and variations
The story developed in sections 16.2, 3, and 4 is the basic principal-
agent problem, the starting point of the literature on(incentives. We have
dealt primarily with the problem in the context of labor (contracts, where|
the notion is to(induce an(effort-averse worker to(choose a desired(level of
effort. But other contexts have been explored. These ddeas appear in the,
Arce em +e eee =
ee rr ee a eo
aera
and in the context of hazard insurance, to share risk efficiently; and to
promote equity or provide public goods in the context of public finance.
- | Thelhallmark of these(models is the {rade-off between having the agent |
bear (fully the(consequences of his actions andbbtaining the (other sort
| of(desirable(end.
J. Mirrlees (1975) has made many of the significant contributions to the
development of this theory, but his contributions are largely unpublished.
The treatinent given here relies heavily on Grossman and Hart (1983), and
you would do well to see also Holmstrom (1979), Shavell (1979), Rogerson
(1985), and Jewitt (1988) for related developments of the basic model.
A very large number of variations and elaborations on the basic model
have been analyzed, some of which lead to results that cast quite a dif-
ferent light on the entire picture. We cannot hope here to give a complete
survey, but we can offer a quick overview of a few interesting variations.
(The references that are supplied are convenient and very far from exhaus-
tive.) You may think of these variations as following (or combining) four
basic lines: Incentive problems where the action choice is not interpreted
as simple effort; problems where more than one agent and or principal is
present; problems where time plays a significant role (the principal and
agent deal not once but repeatedly and, perhaps, interactively); and prob-
lems concerning incentives when agents interact in imperfectly compet-
itive environments.
Incentives to take appropriate decisions
The effort-aversion story we have given is not all that palatable in
many contexts. When we think of providing incentives for managers, for
example, it is not that the managers are necessarily effort averse, but that
they tend to bend their efforts in directions that the principal might not
particularly desire. (For the perspective of a sociologist on this, see J. Baron
[1988].) This has led researchers to look into different sorts of formulations
of the moral hazard problem, where incentives are designed to motivate
agents to work according to the desires of the principal. Included here
are studies of situations in which the agent will before taking an action
receive some information that will be useful in making the decision. (Cases
{realm of(public(finance; one issue that is explored there is the {design ofan. - !
- + (income(tax that maximizes net tax revenue (or maximizes some particular
social welfare functional), recognizing that fworkers(may work(less if the
where the agent already possesses the information prior to the stage where
marginaltax(rate is(high. These ideas also appear in the realm oftinsurance ~
he must accept or reject the contract are another variation, but this blends
together material from this chapter and the next two.)
610 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
The general technology of section 16.3 can be adapted to analyze
such situations. In essence, one specializes not with the story of effort
aversion that we analyzed in some detail but with some other special
structure.
There is a large variety of models of this sort in the literature, and
any list is bound to be woefully incomplete. Moreover, many of these
variations are set up to interact with factors that arise in multiperson or
multiperiod situations to be discussed in a moment. A short list would
include: Incentives for managers to invest capital fruitfully instead of in
perks (Grossman and Hart, 1982); incentives to invest in human capital
(Holmstrom and Ricart i Costa, 1986); incentives to obtain information
about and invest in risky assets (Lambert, 1986); incentives issues in de-
fense contracting (Baron and Besanko, 1987); incentives issues in regulated.
industries (Baron, 1989); incentives to obtain and use information in gen-
eral (Demski and Sappington, 1987).
Multiple agents and multiple principals
Suppose that the principal in section 16.2 had not one but two sales-
men going after different sales. Suppose that the reason one cant be sure
what size sale will be made given the level of effort is that a competi-
tive product might be better. Insofar as this competitive product affects
the outcome to both salesmen, ohe would expect the outcomes that they
achieve to be correlated. If one makes a large sale, then it is more likely
that the competitive product is not so good. This increases the odds that
the other will make a large sale, if he puts in the effort. In such a case, the
principal might do well to structure the incentives so that the payment to
one salesman depends on the outcome achieved by the other. For exam-
ple, the principal might give them base wages, commissions on their own
levels of sales, and a special bonus to the top salesman of the month/year.
Or the principal might use an incentive scheme that is purely ordinal: So
much for the agent who does the best, so much for the agent who comes
in second, and so on. The literature on tournaments is about this sort of
comparative incentives system.
More generally, when the random factors that affect the measured
performance of one agent are correlated with factors that affect the mea-
sured performance of others, it can make sense to engage in relative per-
formance evaluation. Analyses include Baiman and Demski (1980), Green
and Stokey (1983), Holmstrom (1982b), Lazear and Rosen (1981), Mookher-
jee (1984), and Nalebuff and Stiglitz (1983). An issue that arises is whether
agents will play the desired equilibrium when there is relative performance
16.5. Bibliographic notes and variations 611
evaluation; see Demski and Sappington (1984) and Ma, Moore, and
Turnbull (1988).
For an example along these lines, see problem 3.
In the literature on tournaments and relative performance evaluation,
it is usually assumed that each agent has a project on which he works, and
for each project there is some (imperfect) indication of how hard the agent
worked. A different situation arises when there is group production; a
number of individuals all contribute to a single project, with a single signal
produced of how hard they (collectively) worked. This leads in turn to
questions concerning internal versus external monitoring and incentives
and to questions about task design and work-group composition. (Do
you put all the hardworkers in one group or do you spread them among
several groups?) For models along these lines, see Holmstrom (1982b),
McAfee and McMillan (1986), and Lazear (1989). In a variation each agent
has his own project, but can devote some time and effort to helping fellow
agents. The principal in such a case may wish to provide incentives that
promote helping efforts. See, for example, Itoh (1988).
A different sort of multiperson variation concerns situations where
one agent works simultaneously for many different principals. Think,
for example, of a consultant who is kept on retainer or a salesman who
sells products for many different companies. In this case there would
be competition among the principals to get the agent to devote relatively
more time and effort to their interests at the expense of the interests of the
other principals. See Bernheim and Whinston (1986).
Mutltiperiod incentives
When the relationship between the principal and agent is of longer
duration, then opportunities may appear to improve the incentives given
to agents. Radner (1985) suggests that with many independent signals of
how hard an agent is working one can use the law of large numbers to
provide first-best incentives. Fudenberg, Holmstrom, and Milgrom (1988)
provide further analysis of this and argue that the result is due more to
the ability to spread risk through time in a multiperiod setting.
The models we analyzed suggested that optimal incentive schemes |
will in general be very complex, depending on the very fine structure of the ;
environment. This is not a prediction that is verified empirically; incentive
schemes in practice are usually quite simple. One explanation might be
 If the question here seems cryptic, wait until chapter 18.
612 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
that our models assume the principal has very precise information about
the (distribution of) consequences of the agent's actions; if the details of the}
situation are somewhat hazy (which, presumably, one could model with
incomplete information), then incentive schemes that are more robust tol
|changes in the fine structure of the model might be_more likely to bel
employed. A second explanation is offered by Holmstrom and Milgrom
(1987). Within the context of a multiperiod, stationary environment, they
show that optimal incentives will be linear in an appropriate sense. In
essense, the idea is that the agent's ability to change his actions through
time as consequences are realized gives him a great deal of control over the
overall outcome. This, in turn, gives the agent the ability to manipulate
| any incentive scheme that depends on the fine details of an outcome; to
avoid this, the principal chooses an incentive scheme that depends coarsely
"and simply on the overall outcome.
In the models so far discussed, the characteristics of the agent and the
various tasks were held fixed and were assumed to be known to both the
principal and the agent. But in many applications of interest, the difficulty
of a particular task is not known a priori. In multiperiod contexts this
complication multiplies. The principal observes what outcomes the agent |
|obtains in early periods to try to gauge the difficulty of the task. If the
lagent does well early on, the principal will come to believe that the task
is relatively easy, and she will, therefore, lower the incentive wages she
is willing to pay. An agent who knows this is going to happen will in
response tend to underperform early on to make the principal think that
the job is relatively difficult. The principal, in equilibrium, is not deceived
by this, but still in equilibrium the agent will hold back early on, so as not |
to convince the principal that the task is very easy. In general, the principal :
would benefit if, ex ante, she could commit to an incentive system that
will not change as results unfold. But when she cannot so commit, this
sort of ratchet effect complicates both the incentive system she puts in place
and the agent's response to that system. For discussion and analysis, see
Gibbons (1987) and Laffont and Tirole (1988).
; The other side of this coin finds the principal unsure, a priori, how |
much ability the agent has. We imagine that the measured outcome of :
an agent compounds the agent's effort and some exogenous noise, as in
this chapter, but also the agent's ability. Moreover, we imagine that the
principal is willing to pay relatively more for a more able agent. (Think of
there being a competitive market for labor services, although see the next
paragraph.) Then insofar as a high level of output from an agent early on
is taken as (partial) evidence that the agent is more able, the agent has a
relatively greater personal incentive to work hard earlier; th principal, in
et me ei. he eet et en 1 ee
16.5. Bibliographic notes and variations 613
response, may have less need to provide for immediate direct incentives.
An early model along these lines is provided by Holmstrom (1982a).
Continuing along these lines, the question how an agent's immediate
output affects the evaluation of the agent and his subsequent opportuni-
ties and pay has been the subject of much analysis. The general question
of career concerns and its effect on incentive structures is investigated
by Holmstrom (1982a). Milgrom (1988) and Milgrom and Roberts (1989)
explore the incentives for workers to exert influence on their superiors
and the consequences (in terms of optimal incentive structures) for orga-
nizational design. Another subject of interest is the existence of so-called
internal labor markets, where employees of one firm rise within the firm;
that is, workers join the firm primarily at low level ports of entry and
then progress through the ranks. See Gibbons (1985) and MacLeod and
Malcolmson (1988) for two analyses.
Incentives for agents who interact
Imagine a duopoly in which the firms compete in, say, Cournot fash-
ion. Suppose that one firm is managed by its owner, but the second firm
has a manager who is distinct from the owner. The owner of this second
firm wishes to provide an incentive contract for her manager that will
leave her (the principal) with as much net profit as possible. Beyond the
sorts of issues that we considered, a new issue intrudes here: How will
the incentive scheme employed for the manager of the second firm affect
the production decisions of the owner-manager of the first firm? If, to take
a simple example, the owner of the second firm could give her manager a
contract where he only made money if he chose the von Stackelberg level
of output, and if the owner-manager of the first firm knows this, then
the owner-manager of the first firm will not respond (in equilibrium) as
aggressively as if the second firm also had 'an owner-manager.
In general, when one provides incentives to an agent who interacts
with others in a gamelike situation, the incentives provided can affect
both what the agent and others do. This can significantly complicate the
problem of designing incentives. See problem 2 for an example, and see
Fershtinan and Judd (1987) and Maksimovic (1986) for analyses.
Contextual applications
In the literatures of academic accounting, finance, operations, and
marketing one can find many interesting applications of incentive theory.
These applications are especially interesting because the models are often
created with very specific institutions in mind. Some of the papers cited
above are drawn from these literatures, and I will not attempt here to list
614 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
others. But in looking for applications and variations, one should consult
not only the economics journals but also journals such as the Journal of
Accounting Research. Your attention is called in particular to one contextual
application the effect of the tax code on incentives, as studied in Scholes
and Wolfson (forthcoming).
Tt would be easy to go on for pages more, listing interesting variations
on the basic story given in this chapter. And a book of quite substantial
length could be written giving details. Not having that much space, we
suspend discussion here, although you will quickly realize that most of
the remainder of the book deals in varying levels of formality with the
problem of incentives to do one thing or another.
References
Baiman, S., and J. Demski. 1980. Economically Optimal Performance
Evaluation and Control Systems. Supplement to the Journal of Account-
ing Research 18:184-220.
Baron, D. 1989. Design of Regulatory Mechanisms and Institutions. In
Handbook of Industrial Organization, R. Schmalensee and R. Willig, eds.
Amsterdam: North Holland.
Baron, D., and D. Besanko. 1987. Monitoring, Moral Hazard, Asymmet-
ric Information; and Risk Sharing in Procurement Contracting. Rand
Journal of Economics 18:509-32.
Baron, J. 1988. The Employment Relation as a Social Relation. Journal of
Japanese and International Economies 2:492-525.
Bernheim; D., and M. Whinston. 1986. Common Agency. Econometrica
54:923-42.
Demski, J., and D. Sappington. 1984. Optimal Incentive Contracts with
Multiple Agents. Journal of Economic Theory 33:152-71.
1987. Delegated Expertise. Journal of Accounting Research 25:68
79.
Fershtinan, C., and K. Judd. 1987. Equilibrium Managerial Incentives in
Oligopoly. American Economic Review 77:927-40.
Fudenberg, D., B. Holmstrom, and P. Milgrom. 1988. Short-term and
Long-term Agency Relationships. Yale University. Mimeo. Forth-
coming in Journal of Economic Theory.
Gibbons, R. 1985. Incentives in Internal Labor Markets. In Essays on Labor
Markets and Internal Organizations, Ph.D. diss., Stanford University.
16.5. Bibliographic notes and varingtions 615
. 1987. Piece-rate Incentive Schemes. Journal of Labor Economics
5:413-29.
Green, J., and N. Stokey. 1983. A Comparison of Tournaments and Con-
tracts. Journal of Political Economy 91:349-64.
Grossman, S., and O. Hart. 1982. Corporate Financial Structure and
Managerial Incentives. In The Economics of Information and Uncertainty,
J. McCall, ed., 107-40. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
1983. An Analysis of the Principal-Agent Problem. Economet-
rica 51:7-45.
Holmstrom, B. 1979. Moral Hazard and Observability. Bell Journal of
Economics 10:74-91.
. 1982a. Managerial Incentive Problems A Dynamic Perspec-
tive. In Essays in Economics and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck.
Helsinki: Swedish School of Economics.
. 1982b. Moral Hazard in Teams. Bell Journal of Economics 13:324
40.
Holmstrom, B., and P. Milgrom. 1987. Aggregation and Linearity in the
Provision of Intertemporal Incentives. Econometrica 55:303-28.
Holmstrom, B., and J. Ricart i Costa. 1986. Managerial Incentives and
Capital Management. Quarterly Journal of Economics 101:835-60.
Itoh, H. 1988. On Incentives to Help in Multi-Agent Situations. Univer-
sity of California at San Diego. Mimeo.
Jewitt, I. 1988. Justifying the First-Order Approach to Principal Agent
Problems. Econometrica 56:1177-90.
Laffont, J.-J., and J. Tirole. 1988. The Dynamics of Incentive Contracts.
Econometrica 56:1153-76. ,
Lambert, R. 1986. Executive Effort and the Selection of Risky Projects.
Rand Journal of Economics 16:77-88.
Lazear, E. 1989. Pay Equality and Industrial Politics. Journal of Political
Economy 97:561-80.
Lazear, E., and S. Rosen. 1981. Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum
Labor Contracts. Journal of Political Economy 89:841-64.
Ma, C., J. Moore, and S. Turnbull. 1988. Stopping Agents from Cheating.
Journal of Economic Theory 46:355-72.
MacLeod, W., and J. Malcolmson. 1988. Reputation and Hierarchy in
Dynamic Models of Employment. Journal of Political Economy 96:832
54.
616 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
Maksimovic, V. 1986. Optimal Capital Structure in Oligopolies. Ph.D. diss.,
Harvard University.
McAfee, R., and J. McMillan. 1986. Optimal Contracts for Teams. Uni-
versity of California at San Diego. Mimeo. oo
Milgrom, P. 1988. Employment Contracts, Influence Activities, and Effi-
cient Organization Design. Journal of Political Economy 96:4260.
Milgrom, P., and J. Roberts. 1989. An Economic Approach to Influence
Activities in Organizations. American Journal of Sociology 94:154-79.
Mirrlees, J. 1975. The Theory of Moral Hazard and Unobservable Behav-
ior, Part 1. Nuffield College, Oxford. Mimeo.
Mookherjee, D. 1984. Optimal Incentive Schemes with Many Agents.
Review of Economic Studies 51:433-46.
Nalebuff, B., and J. Stiglitz. 1983. Prizes and Incentives: Towards a
General Theory of Compensation and Competition. Bell Journal of
Economics 13:21-43.
Radner, R. 1985. Repeated Principal-Agent Games with Discounting.
* Econometrica 53:1173-98. :
Rogerson, W. 1985. The First-Order Approach to Principal-Agent Prob-
lems. Econometrica 53:1357-68.
Scholes, M., and M. Wolfson. Forthcoming. Taxes and Business Strategy: A
Global Planning Approach. Englewood-Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Shavell, S. 1979. Risk Sharing and Incentives in the Principal and Agent
Relationship. Bell Journal of Economics 10:55-73.
16.6. Problems
= 1. To test your understanding of the model in section 16.2 consider the
following reparameterization. The reservation utility level of the agent is
only 3. A high level of effort gives a = 3, while a low level gives a = 0.
(Thus, if we can contract contingent on the level of effort, we would have
to pay $9 for a low level of effort and $36 for high.) A high level of effort
gives no sale with probability .2, a $100 sale with probability .4, and a $400
sale with probability .4. For a low level of effort, the three probabilities
are 4, 4, and .2.
(a) What is the optimal way to induce the agent to put in a low level of
effort, if you can contract contingent on the size of the sale (only)?
(b) What is the optimal way to induce the agent to put in a high level of
effort?
16.6. Problems 617
(c) What is the optimal contract (if you are a risk neutral principal) to offer
this agent?
a 2. The point of this problem is incentives meet duopoly theory. Consider a
simple duopoly problem, with two firms that are identical except in one
important sense. The two produce an undifferentiated good, the (total) de-
mand for which is given by the demand curve P = AX, where P is price
and X is total quantity produced. The two compete as Cournot competi-
tors; each names a quantity supplied, simultaneously and independently
of the other, and market price is set so that demand equals the sum of the
two supplies. Both firms have zero marginal costs of production. (So far,
completely standard.)
One firm is owner managed. The quantity decision for this firm is made
by the owner, who retains any profits. This owner is risk neutral.
The second firm is not managed by its owner. The owner of the second
firm has hired a manager and has given this manager a contract wherein
the compensation paid to the manager is a linear function of the profits
the firm shows, 7, and the quantity that the firm sells, z,. Specifically,
this contract calls for the manager to be paid ar + fz, where and g
are given constants. The owner retains any profits made by the firm, net
of pay to the manager. Note well that the manager makes the quantity
decision and not the owner, and the manager does so to maximize her
compensation and not the net profits of the owner.
(a) What, in this case (for given a and B), is the Cournot equilibrium in
the market? What (as a function of a and fg) are the profits of the first
firm, the manager's compensation, and the net profits (to the owner) of
the second firm?
(b) The owner of the second firm is interested in designing the optimal
contract for her manager. The contract must, in equilibrium, provide the
manager with a reservation level of income . Other than that, the owner
can choose any linear contract she wishes; and fg are chosen to maximize
her net (after compensation) profits. The owner-manager of the first firm
and the manager of the second firm will behave in Cournot fashion after
this contract is chosen. If you are worried about such things, the owner-
manager of the first firm will know the contract terms under which the
manager of the second firm operates. What is that optimal coniract? (Hint:
Draw pictures!)
(c) Suppose now that both firms are managed by managers distinct from
owners, both managers are paid according to contracts that have com-
618 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
pensation linear in profits and sales quantity, and both managers have
a reservation level of compensation that must be met. The two owners
simultaneously and independently set the terms for their managers (re-
spective) contracts. What will be the equilibrium in this game?
(d) We can imagine, in (c), many possible ways this game is played. Here
are two extremes.
In the first, the two owners simultaneously name contract terms for their
managers. Those terms are named publicly, so each manager sees the
terms offered to the other. The two managers then decide whether to take
the contract offered. They do so if, in the subsequent round of quantity
setting, they will get their reservation level of compensation. Then the
managers set quantities. If only one manager signs, the other firm (the
one without a manager) is out of the market, and the one with a manager
acts as a (compensation-maximizing) monopolist.
In the second extensive form, the two owners simultaneously name con-
tract terms, and the two managers either sign or not and choose quantities
without knowing what is going on at the other firm. If the manager at a
firm doesnt sign, then that firm cannot produce.
We're only looking for (subgame) perfect equilibria. Then does the formu-
lation matter? In particular, which (if either) of these formulations have
you assumed in your answer to part (?
a 3. In this problem, we will deal with incentives for multiple agents. You are
a manager in charge of two workers. Bach worker is asked to perform
a particular task, and each can either work hard at the task or loaf. The
value to you of each task will be either $10 or $0. The value is determined
in part by how hard the worker works, but there are also some random
factors not within the control of the worker. The following data apply:
If the worker works hard, there is a .7 probability that the value to you
will be $10 and a .3 chance that the value will be $0. If the worker loafs,
these probabilities reverse, so that there is a .3 chance of a $10 outcome
and a .7 chance of a $0 outcome.
Moreover, there is correlation between the outcomes of the two tasks:
o If both workers work hard, then there is .6 joint probability that each
will produce a $10 outcome
o If both loaf, there is a .2 joint probability that each will produce a $10
outcome
16.6. Problems 619
o If one loafs and the other works, there is a .25 joint probability that each
will produce a $10 outcome
(Start by putting together joint probability tables from the data above.)
Each worker has a utility function that depends on the amount of money
received and the amount of effort expended. The form of the utility func-
tion is
Ulw, a) = yw a,
where w is the amount of money received, and a = 0 for loafing and
a = .8 for working hard. The two workers have the same utility function,
and each has a reservation utility level of 1. The worker's expected utility
must be 1 to get the worker to take the job.
You as the employer are risk neutral. You seek to maximize your net profit
from these two workers.
(a) Suppose that you could at zero cost monitor the efforts of the two
workers. Would you want to make them work hard, or is it better to have
them loaf? What payments would you offer them?
(b) Suppose that you cannot monitor the efforts of the two workers. You
can, however, sign a contract of the form: I agree to pay $X if the task you
perform has value $10 to me, and $Y if the task has value $0. Subject to
the constraints that the worker must be willing to sign, and the worker,
seeing what is being paid, will choose how hard to work, what is the best
contract of this form for you? (The worker will resolve all ties in his utility
in your favor.)
Now suppose that you cannot monitor the two, but you can offer them
more complex contracts, of the following form: I agree to pay $X if both of
you produce a $10 outcome for me, $Y if you produce a $10 outcome and
your fellow worker produces $0, $Z if you produce $0 and your fellow
worker produces a $10 outcome, and $W if you both produce $0.
(c) What contracts of this form are optimal if you want to induce both
workers to loaf?
(d) Suppose that you wish to offer contracts that will induce both to work
hard. Imagine that this means you must meet the following constraints:
Each worker must be induced to take the contract; each worker, assuming
that his fellow worker is going to work hard, must be induced to work
hard. What is the optimal contract to offer in this case?
620 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
_ {e) You are worried that the contract offered in (d) might induce the follow-
ing behavior: Each worker will loaf. You would feel less worried about
this possibility if you knew that each one, given the other was loafing,
would prefer to work hard. If you add this constraint to part (d), is the
old solution still valid? If not, what is the new solution?
(f) Can you do better to induce one worker to loaf and the other to work
hard? How well do you do in this case?
m4. I am trying to decide on the scale of investment that I will make in
a particular project. The returns on my investment will depend on the
scale of the investment and one environmental variable that will either
be S or F. Right now, I think that the probability of S is .7. But out
there is someone who could, with some effort, refine that assessment.
This individual can run a test that will give one of two outcomes s or f,
each with probability .5. If the test gives outcome s, then the posterior
probability of S is .9, while if the outcome of the test is f, then the
posterior probability of is .5.
1f I hire this individual, I cant observe whether she has run the test or, if
she has, what outcome she actually got. She can report to me the outcome,
but I will have to take her word for the fact that she ran the test and
reported truthfully what the test result was. If she is indifferent between
two reports or between running the test or not, she will resolve ties in the
way that is most favorable to me.
I can pay this individual depending on her report and on the ultimate
outcome S or F of the environmental variable.
Her von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function is given by
+/Dollar payment to her f(effort), ;
where f(no effort) = 0 and f(run the test) = f > 0. She has a reservation
expected utility level of f.
My utility takes the form
Expected Gross Benefits(my investment decision, true state)
 Expected payment to her.
I need some help in deciding whether to hire this person and, if I hire
her, how to structure the payments I make to her. Help me. Write a
(maximum) two-page memo to me outlining what I should do and why.
16.6. Problems 621
Please note that you dont have enough data to tell me whether to hire, or
what contract to give her exactly. All that is desired is an outline of how
I should go about solving the problem (justifying your suggested method
of solution).
m 5. Consider an individual who owns a warehouse that is subject to a
fire danger. Suppose that the warehouse, if it burns at all, suffers damage
that has a uniform distribution over the range from $10,000 to $190,000.
The owner of this warehouse can take precautions against the event of
fire for simplicity, we imagine that the owner can either take care or
be negligent. The owners decision whether to take care or be negligent
affects the probability whether there is a fire at all: If she takes care, the
probability a fire occurs m, while if she is negligent, the probability of
a fire is m, > mm. The extent of damage is independent of the action the
owner takes, if there is a fire. -
The owner's preferences are described by a von Neumann-Morgenstern
utility function U that depends on the level of damages incurred in a fire
(if any) and the actions she takes to prevent a fire. We write her utility
function as U(K I E) where K is some constant, L is the size of her
loss, if any, and E = 0 if she is negligent and E = $10,000 if she takes
care. Note that if there is no fire, her utility will be U(K E). Assume
that U is concave.
This individual has the opportunity to insure against her loss by fire. A
typical insurance contract will take the following form: The owner pays
a premium P up front; if the owner sustains a loss of size L, then the
contract specifies an amount (L) that is returned to the owner. In this
case, the owner's utility is U(K L + o(L) E P) if she has a fire with
loss at level L and U(K E P) if she has no fire. (We implicitly assume
that (0) =0.)
The insurance companies with which she might deal are all regulated by
government authorities, and they are required to offer insurance at pre-
miums that on average will net zero profit. That is, the premium P must
be set to equal the expected payout on the insurance policy. (If you want
to make the problem more realistic, you can change this. Assume instead
that the insurance company is regulated so that some fixed small percent-
age of the premium it charges is taken as profit. This will, however, make
some of the answers obtained below less clean than in the formulation we
gave.) The owner can deal with at most one of these insurance companies.
(a) Suppose that insurance companies are compelled to offer complete
coverage: o(L) = L. What will be the results in terms of the insurance
policy that is offered and the level of care the warehouse owner will take?
(b) Suppose insurance companies can offer insurance that insures only a
portion of the loss incurred: oL) = vL for some v < 1. Show by means
of a numerical example that this might make the warehouse owner better
off than if the insurance companies were compelled to offer full coverage.
(c) Suppose insurance companies can offer insurance that insures the full
loss but with a deductable: o(L) = max{L D,0} for some fixed de-
ductable D. Show by means of a numerical example that this might make
the warehouse owner better off than if the insurance companies were com-
pelled to offer full coverage.
(d) Consider the problem of designing an insurance policy of the sort
given above (where there is a fixed premium and a payment given back
to the owner in the event of a fire in an amount that depends on the losses
sustained) that is optimal in the sense that it makes the warehouse owner
as well off as possible, given the regulatory constraint that the insurance
company must break even on average. How would you go about finding
this optimal policy? Can you say anything about the function o(L) at the
optimal policy? For example, does o(L) rise with L?
(e) Suppose that the size of the loss sustained by the warehouse owner,
given there is a fire, depends on the care she did or didnt take. More
specifically, suppose that she is more likely to sustain a larger loss, given ~
she has a fire at all, if she is negligent than if she takes due care. How
does this affect your answers to part (d)?
m 6. Consider the basic problem of section 16.3, but in a situation where
the agent's utility function U(w, a) is not necessarily additively separable.
We assume that for each fixed a, w U (w, a) is continuous, strictly
increasing, and concave. Reformulate the method of solution of the basic
problem in this case. (About the only thing to do here is decide on what
you will make your decision variables and then write things down. Dont
look for great mysteries or complications.)
The next three problems concern assumption 1. Problem 7 is relatively easy, and
everyone should try it. Problem 8 is a bit more difficult. Problem 9 involves a
fairly high level of skill at mathematical analysis.
m 7. Suppose that we have a two-action, two-outcome principal-agent
problem. The outcomes are denoted s; and s, and represent gross profits
to the principal with s; > s;. The two actions are effort levels, denoted a
pe.
at rng nm lp ei
16.6. Problems 623
and a, with a; < a;. The agent's utility function is of the form Ulw,a) =
e~ a, where a denotes effort and w is the wage payment. The first
effort level results in outcome s; with probability .1 and s, with probability
.9. The second effort level results in outcome s, with certainty. Show that
it is possible, with a contract that depends on gross profit levels only,
to implement the action choice a, at an expected wage payment that is
arbitrarily close to the cost of implementing a, in a contract that can specify
the action choice. (Note well: We dont constrain the wage payments to
be nonnegative.)
m 8. Suppose that we have a two-action, principal-agent problem where
the range of possible outcomes is the entire real line R. As in problem 7,
outcomes are gross profit levels. The agent's utility function is precisely
as in problem 7. If the agent takes action a,, the level of gross profits
is Normally distributed with mean px; and standard deviation > 0,
whereas action a, gives gross profits that are Normally distributed with
mean pu, and standard deviation o for p, > p;. Show that it is possible
with a contract that depends on only gross profit levels to implement the
action choice a, at an expected wage payment that is arbitrarily close to
the cost of implementing a, in a contract that can specify the action choice.
89. Prove that if assumptions 1 and 2 hold and if there is any set of decision
variables (z,,) that satisfies the constraints of the problem (Cn) for given
n, then the problem (Cn) has a (finite) solution. (Hints: To prove this,
consider separately the case where u is linear and where it is not. When
u is linear, think of the problem as a linear programming problem. The
only way we could fail to find a finite solution is if we found an infinite
ray along which the objective function decreased indefinitely. But from the
participation constraint, we know that pu TrmV(Tm) is bounded below
by am + up. If, on the other hand, u is not linear, but concave, you can
show that any unbounded sequence of solutions (z%,) of the participation
constraint (where k indexes the sequence) must have an objective function
value that diverges to +oo. Hence you can restrict attention to bounded
sequences of solutions of the constraints.)
a 10. Prove that if assumption 3 holds, then >M TnmSm Is increasing in
n. (Hint: Read the proof of the first lemma after assumption 5. The key
step is the interchange of the order of addition right near the start. If you
understand that step, you'll see how to prove this.)
a 11. Consider the second part of the example in the subsection of section
16.3 on the two-outcome case. What would happen if a; turned out better
624 Chapter sixteen: Moral hazard and incentives
i and
than a, at these wages? (Can you change the numbers so that this is s0?)
What would C(a,) be in that case?
a 12. Prove proposition 5.
w 13. Return to the finite action, finite outcome formulation o* section
16.3 in the specialization ners a is effort ad the, gn 0 re re,
its. Assume that assump , 2,
 Be Te concave An alternative to assumption > = Tere ae very
robability distributions (r},...,T},) and (r,s it su tha for every
ction a, there is a number a, [0,1] with Tm = ent + L on) re
et aramtend? Show tat tis alternative
i is ?
ons PI PL is c ificiont to show that the optimal wage
incentive scheme is nondecreasing in gross profits. (Hine ne A
prove that the only binding relative incentive constraints he
index lower than the effort level that is being implemented.
chapter seventeen
Adverse selection and
market signaling
Imagine an economy in which the currency consists of gold coins. The
holder of a coin is able to shave a bit of gold from it in a way that is
undetectable without careful measurement; the gold so obtained can then
be used to produce new coins. Imagine that some of the coins have been
shaved in this fashion, while others have not. Then someone taking a
coin in trade for goods will assess positive probability that the coin being
given her has been shaved, and thus less will be given for it than if it
was certain not to be shaved. The holder of an unshaved coin will there-
fore withhold the coin from trade; only shaved coins will circulate. This
unhappy situation is known as Gresham's law bad money drives out
good.
17.1. Akerlofs model of lemons
Gresham's law has had more recent expression in Akerlof (1970). (See
problem 12 after you finish this section, however) In Akerlofs context,
Gresham's law is rephrased as Bad used cars drive out good. Tt works
as follows. .
Suppose there are two types of used cars: peaches and lemons. A
peach, if it is known to be a peach, is worth $3,000 to a buyer and $2,500
to a seller. (We will assume the supply of cars is fixed and the supply
of possible buyers is infinite, so that the equilibrium price in the peach
market will be $3,000.) A lemon, on the other hand, is worth $2,000 to a
buyer and $1,000 to a seller. There are twice as many lemons as peaches.
If buyers and sellers both had the ability to look at a car and see
whether it was a peach or a lemon, there would be no problem: Peaches
would sell for $3,000 and lemons for $2,000.
Or if neither buyer nor seller knew whether a particular car was a
peach or a lemon, we would have no problem (at least, assuming risk
neutrality, which we will to avoid complications): = A seller, thinking she
626 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
has a peach with probability 1 /3 and a lemon with probability 2/3, has
a car that (in expectation) is worth $1,500. A buyer, thinking that the car
might be a peach with probability 1/3 and a lemon with probability 2/3,
thinks that the car is worth on average $2,333.33. Assuming an inelastic
supply of cars and perfectly elastic demand, the market clears at $2,333.33.
Unhappily, it isnt like this with used cars. The seller, having lived
with the car for quite a while, knows whether it is a peach or a lemon.
Buyers typically cant tell. If we make the extreme assumption that buyers
cant tell at all, then the peach market breaks down. To see this, begin by
assuming that cars are offered for sale at any price above $1,000. All the
lemons will be offered for sale. But only if the price is above $2,500 will any
peaches appear on the market. Hence at prices below $2,500 and above
$1,000, rational buyers will assume that the car must be a lemon. Why else
would the seller be selling? Given this, the buyers conclude that the car is
worth only $2,000. And at prices above $2,500, the car has a 2/3 chance of
being a lemon, hence is worth $2,333.33. There is no demand at prices above
$2,000, because (a) above $2,333.33, there is no demand whatsoever no
buyer is willing to pay that much and (b) below $2,500 there is only
demand starting at $2,000, since buyers assume that they must be getting
a lemon. Se we get as equilibrium: Only lemons are put on the market,
at a price of $2,000. Further gains from trade are theoretically possible
(between the owners of peaches and buyers), but these gains cannot in
fact be realized, because buyers cant be sure that they aren't getting a |
lemon.
Note that if there were two peaches to every lemon, the story wouldn't
be so grim. Then, as long as cars reach the market in these proportions, a
buyer is willing to pay $2,666.67. And that is enough to induce owners of
peaches to sell; we get the market clearing at this price, with all the cars
for sale. (What does the demand curve look like in this case? What does
the supply curve look like? Are there other market clearing prices? See
problem 1.) Owners of peaches are not pleased about those lemon owners;
without them, peach owners would be getting an extra $333.33 for their
peaches. But at least peaches can be sold.
This is a highly stylized example of Akerlofs market for lemons. It
illustrates the problem of adverse selection. Assume a particular good comes
in many different qualities. If in a transaction one side but not the other
knows the quality in advance, the other side must worry that it will get
an adverse selection out of the entire population. The classic example of
this is in life/health insurance. If premiums are set at actuarially fair rates
mee nnn rarer 
17.1. Akerlof's model of lemons 627
for the population as a whole, insurance may be a bad deal for healthy
people, who then will refuse to buy. Only the sick and dying will sign up.
And premium rates must then be set to reflect this.
The problem noted above becomes worse the greater the number of
qualifies of cars and the smaller the Valuation gaps, the differences be-
ee " In
tween what a car is worth to a buyer and a seller, assuming they have the
same information. Imagine, for example, that the quality spectrum of used
cars runs from real peaches, worth $2,900 to sellers and $3,000 to buyers,
down to real lemons, worth $1,900 to sellers and $2,000 to buyers. Between
"the two extremes are cars of every quality level, always worth $100 more
to buyers than to sellers. Suppose that the distribution of quality levels is
uniform between these two extremes. To be very specific, suppose there
are 10,001 cars, one of which is worth $1,900.00 to its owner and $2,000.00
to buyers, a second worth $1,900.10 to its owner and $2,000.10 to buy-
ers, and so on. What will be the equilibrium then? (Continue to assume
inelastic supply and elastic demand at every level of quality.)
Let us draw the supply curve first. At price p = $1,900 there is one
car offered for sale; at p = $1,901 there are 11 cars offered, and so on.
At p = $2,900, all 10,001 cars are offered for sale, and that is all that
_ is offered at any higher price. If we smooth out supply over the small
discrete bumps, we get the supply curve shown in figure 17.1(a).
Price Supply Price
$2900
$2100 }---== Teen
$1900 : Demand
2,001 10,001
Quantity
Quantity
(a) (b)
Figure 17.1. Supply and demand with adverse selection.
In (a), we have supply and demand for the second version of the lemons
market. In (b), we depict the sad situation of upward sloping demand
and a market that shuts down completely.
628 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
As for demand, at a price p between $3,000 and $2,000, buyers assume
that only sellers who value their own cars at p or less are willing to
sell. Hence a car being sold at price p has a quality level that makes
it worth between $2,000 and $(p + 100) to buyers, with each value in
this range equally likely. Therefore, the average car being sold is worth
$(2000 + p + 100)/2. If p exceeds $2,100, this average value is something
less than p, and there is no demand. If p is less than $2,100, this average
value exceeds p, and there is infinite demand. At p = $2,100 (plus or
minus a penny) the average car offered for sale is worth $2,100, and buyers
are indifferent between buying and not. So we get the demand curve
shown in figure 17.1(a) no demand at prices exceeding $2,100, perfectly
elastic demand at p = $2,100. The market equilibrium is where supply
and demand cross, or p = $2,100, at which only 2,001 of the 10,001 cars
change hands. (And if the $100 difference in valuations between buyers
and sellers is $50 instead, then the equilibrium price is p = $2,000, and
only 1,001 of the cars change hands.) NB
Let us do this one more time (just to pound it into your brain), at one
level greater generality. We imagine that some item (a durable good, or
some service) comes in one of N quality levels, ',,...,q", arranged in
ascending erder. The supply of quality n depends on the price p and is
given by an upward sloping supply function sp). Demand depends on
price p and the average quality in the market, which by the assumptions
we've made can be computed as
2m 9 s"(D)
avg = i .
C= ew
Let D(p, *'8) be this demand function, which we will assume is decreasing
in p and increasing in *'8. Hence market demand at a price p is obtained,
at least if buyers anticipate where supply will come from, as D(p, *"8(p)).
To find the slope of market demand we compute
dD _8D 9D df"3)
 +
dp Op dq dp
The first term on the right-hand side is negative. The second is a positive
term, times dq8(p)/dp, which may be positive; average quality supplied
may be increasing in price. Hence it is possible if the second term is large
enough that demand has positive slope for some levels of price. And,
therefore, it is even possible that we get the sort of picture in figure 17.1(b),
cor te
nares
-s (superior information will do something that(indicates the( quality of the
17.2. Signaling quality 629
where the only intersection between demand and supply is at zero; the
market shuts down, even though gains from trade are possible.
17.2. Signaling quality
In spite of the lemons problem, used car markets and life/health in-
surance markets and all manner of markets subject to adverse selection do
function. Why?*! Often it is because the side to the transaction that has the
. good being sold. With used cars, the seller may offer a partial warranty
or may get the car checked by an independent mechanic.? In insurance,
medical checkups are sometimes required. Another ploy in the realm of
life insurance concerns golden age insurance, which is often marketed
with the come-on that no one will be turned down. These policies often
contain an important bit of fine print: Benefits are greatly reduced for the
first two years. That is, the insurance company is betting that if the buyer
knows that he is going to die, it will probably happen quickly. The key
to such signals is that the sellers of higher quality, or buyers in the case
of insurance, to distinguish themselves from sellers of lower quality are
willing to take actions the sellers of lower quality do not find worthwhile.
One can think of adverse selection as a special case of moral hazard
- >|and (market( signals &9 a special case of(incentive(schemes. We want the
individual to self-identify as having a used car that is a lemon or a peach;
as being gravely ill or not; and so on. But there is moral hazard in such
self-identification; the seller of a used car cannot be trusted to represent
honestly the quality of the car for sale unless provided with some incentive
for doing so. The (incentive could be relatively direct; the seller will be
tossed in jail if he has egregiously misrepresented the quality of the car
sold. r it could be more indirect, as in the sort of( market signals just] .
| describe the individual could be asked to give a six-month warranty |
lif he says that the car is a peach. The point is that such an (incentive | 
! We saw one possible answer in chapter 14 ~ reputation. But in this chapter, we consider
cases where the informed party isnt able to make use of a reputation, say because this is a
one-time transaction. We could also use reputation indirectly, through recourse to a market
intermediary such as a reputable used car dealer. But that takes us to topics we will discuss
in chapter 20.
2 Sinceithe buyer can't be sure how independent this mechanic is, in the used car market
in the United States it is often the buyer who will provide the mechanic and the money for
this. But the signal is still being provided by the seller, insofar as she allows the buyers me-
chanic to investigate the car. By way of contrast, in other countries inspection companies
are so well known and credible that it is customary for the seller to provide a report from
one of them. Remember this example when we discuss trilateral governance in chapter 20.
contract (I will pay you $X if you don't give me a warranty and $Y >| curves and the direction of increasing preference as depicted.) We assume
$X if you do) gives the party with(private (information the{incentive to Pee that the indifference curve of the low-ability worker is always (nore steeply Sloped }
- (self-identify( honestly, and the moral hazard problem of sel-identification| (as in figure 17.2). That is, to compensate a worker for a given increase.
is defeated. in education requires a greater(increase in wages for a low-ability worker !
The two classic models of this in the literature are Spences (1974) + than for a high-ability worker. Both sorts of worker dislike education but
job market signaling model and Rothschild and Stiglitz's (1976) model of low-ability workers dislike education relatively more (measured in terms
an insurance market. While cast in different settings, the two seem at ! of wage compensation). This assumption is crucial for what follows be-
first to be about the same problem. But their analyses come to different ' jcause it implies that a more able worker finds it (relatively (cheaper (in
conclusions. We will use the Spence setting to illustrate their two analyses iterms of utility) to obtain a higher level of education, which then can be!
(and further variations) used to distinguish more able workers from those of lower ability. The
We imagine a population of workers, some of high innate ability, some } assumption is known informally as the single-crossing property. Utility
of low. We will use to denote the level of ability, with = 2 for high functions of the form wu;(w,e) = f(w) kigle), for f an increasing and
ability and =1 for low. The numbers of high- and low-ability workers ' concave function, g an increasing and strictly convex function, and the k;
are equal. There are also firms that will (eventually) hire the workers; , positive constants with k, < k; constitute an example. :
these firms operate in a competitive labor market and so will be making What would happen if the ability level of an employee were observ-
zero profits (when all the dust settles) out of their workers. , able? Then a high-ability worker with education level e would be paid
The key ingredient comes next: Before going to work, workers seek ; 2e, and a low-ability worker with education level would be paid .
education that enhances their productivity. Specifically, each worker ~~ Asin figurg 17,8, high- and low-ability workers will pick education levels
chooses a level of education e from some set, say [0,16], for the num- that maximize their utility, given these wages.
ber of years in school. A worker of type with education level e is Bubwe are interested here in cases where ability level isghot directly
worth precisely te to a firm. Note that for every level of education, a observable. Consider the following two stories: {job (market signaling and
more able worker is worth twice as much as a less able worker. Firms, , then worker(self-selectionfacing atmenu of (contracts. ) Co
when they hire a worker, are unable to tell whether the worker is able or . )
not. {But they do get to see the worker's c.v.,, and they thereby learn how
|
many years the worker went to school. Hence they can make wage offers | Indifference curve of
i
contingent on the number of years that the worker went to school. low-ability worker i J
What do the workers want out of all this? They want higher wages, i OY J
to be sure. But they also dislike education. And the less able dislike : a Co So
. ip By Direction of Sos
education even more than do the more able. Specifically, workers seek] ' Y increasing So
to maximize a utility function of wages and education, which we will { 2 preference J.
write as ug(w,e), where w is the wage rate, e the education level, and en f .
ee . Indifference curve of
the worker's type. We assume that wu; is strictly increasing in w, strictly
decreasing in e, and strictly concave. And we make the following very
important assumption: Take any point (e,w) and consider the two indif-
ference curves of high- and low-ability workers through that point. (Refer
to figure 17.2, noting that the monotonicity and concavity assumptions Education level
we made concerning the functions u; give us strictly convex indifference
high-ability worker
a no
3 In the problems, you will be given some leads on how these two stories are told in the Figure 17.2. Worker indifference curves in wages-education level space.
case of insurance markets. _
4 We allow any number between 0 and 16 to keep the pictures relatively simple. A treat- It is usually formulated with a bit more precision than we have done here, and you will
ment where education levels came only in discrete numbers would not be very different. be given the chance to provide a more precise formulation in the problems.
->
632 | Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
w=2e
Indifference curve of
Iow-ability worker
Wage paid
g
It
Indifference curve of
high-ability worker
Education level
.
N
5 3
Figure 17.3, The(fulllinformation equilibriun..
If ability is observable, high-ability workers will select education level &
and be paid 28;, and low-ability workers will select &; and be paid &.
Spence's story: Job market signaling
Suppose that workers (move (first in _the following sense. With noy.
guarantees except that they expect the market mechanism to work when:
the time comes, workers choose how many years to go to school. They
do so anticipating some wage function w(e) that gives wages for every
level of education. After they spend their time in school, they present
1
i
i
themselves to. a competitive labor. market, and the firms in that market
bid for their services. N
To Formally, an equilibrium in the sense of Spence consists of (a) an anticipated
wage function w(:) that gives the wages w(e) that workers anticipate will be
paid to anyone obtaining this education level e, for every e, and (b) probability
distributions m; on the set of education levels for each type of worker t = 1,2
such that the following two conditions are met:
(1) For each type t of worker and education level e, mi(e) > 0 only if ug(w(e), e)
achieves the maximum value of uy(w(e'),e) over all '.
(2) For each education level e such that mi(e) + me) > 0,
Sie) 5my(e) 9 @
We) = Fr 5m@ Bm + sme
erm
ns a
17.2. Signaling quality 633
This has the following interpretation: m(e) gives the proportion of type t
workers who select education level e in equilibrium. Then condition (1)
is a self-selection condition: Based on the wages that workers anticipate, they
only select education levels that with the corresponding wage levels maxi-
mize their utility. And condition (2) says that at education levels picked in
equilibrium the wages paid are appropriate in a competitive labor market
for a worker offering that education level. This comes about because the
two fractions on the right-hand side of (&) are the conditional probabilities
that the worker is of low and high ability, respectively, obtained by Bayes
rule. Hence the right-hand side of (&) is the conditional expected value
of a worker presenting education level e, and (it is assumed) competition
among firms pushes the worker's wage to that level.
In the definition of an equilibrium just given, we allow workers of a
given type to choose more than one level of education. But we will restrict
attention here to equilibria in which all the workers of a given type choose
the same level of education:
In the first type of equilibrium, workers of the two types are separated; this
is called a (separating (equilibrium. All the workers of type t = 1 choose an
education level e,, and all the workers of type t = 2 choose an education level
e; # e;. Firms, seeing education level e,, know that the worker is of type 1,
and pay a wage e1. And if they see education level e,, they offer a wage of 2e;,
because they correctly assume that worker is of type 2.
In the second type of equilibrium, workers all pool at a single education level;
this is called a(poolinglequilibrium. All the workers choose some education level
*, at which point wages are 1.5*,
The term(screening equilibrium is often used interchangeably with(separat-
ing equilibrium; cf. p. 478. In addition to these pooling and separating
equilibria, there are other types, which you will explore in problem 2.
If we wanted to be fancy, we would permit general probability distributions, replacing
(1) with a statement about e in the support of the distribution and turning (2) into the ap-
propriate statement about conditional probabilities. But this generality would be wasted, If
you start with a general formulation, you can prove in this setting, with strictly concave uy
that no type would ever select more than a finite number of education levels; see problem 2.
To be pedantic: .5mi(e) is the joint probability that a worker is of low ability and
he chooses education level e obtained as the product of the marginal probability that a
worker is of low ability, .5, and the conditional probability that a worker chooses education
level e given he has low ability, mi(e). Hence Smi(e) + Smale) is the marginal probabil
ity that a worker chooses education level e. And, by the rules of conditional probability,
Bmi(e)/[.5mi(e) + 5male)] is the conditional probability that a worker is of low ability given
he chooses education level e. 
634 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
/ Lamm 0(e) curve
Indifference curve of
high-ability worker
w=e
Wage paid
-
Indifference curve of
low-ability worker
g 
Education level
Figure 17.4. A(fseparating equilibrium.
In this picture and in all others to follow, the heavy dashed curve in-
dicates the workers conjectures about what wages they will receive at
every given level of education.
Return to the description of a separating equilibrium. For this to be an
equilibrium, we need that workers, anticipating all this, are content to be
separated in this fashion. That is, a worker of type 1 would rather choose
the wage-education pair (w = eye = ) than (w = 2e;,e = e,), and vice
versa for workers of type 2. Youll see just such a situation in figure(17.3. <
In this figure, note carefully thetheavy(dashed curve. This represents
_ the function w(e), workers Conjectures about the(wages they will receive)
as a function of the level of education they select. Note that this function
. must lie everywheredst or(below the indifference curves of the workers at
points that the workers select; this is the(self-selection condition. Condi-;
tion (2) for an equilibrium pins down the w(e) curve at the two levels of
education selected, as shown.
This does not restrict the curve w(e) at points e that are not selected
in equilibrium. What restrictions might we wish to place on w(e) at such
points? For now, consider the following three possibilities:
(a) No restrictions whatsoever are placed on w(e) at points e that are not
selected in equilibrium. (We require throughout that w(e) is nonnegative
for every value of e; that is, the institution of slavery is not part of our
economy.)
ns rm
ee on oem ee eee er 8 ert ee co Hr
 eae
17.2. Signaling quality 635
(b) We require that e < w(e) < 2e for all e.
(c) We require (b) and, in addition, that w(e)/e is nondecreasing.
What might motivate us to assume (b) or (c)? We reason as follows. A
worker who chooses education level e is worth either e or 2e to a firm.
The worker cannot possibly be worth more than 2e or less than e. Now
if firms are unsure of the worker's level of ability, firms cannot be certain
which of e or 2e is correct. And so, depending on their assessments
for the chances that the worker is worth e or 2e, they might be willing
to_bid anywhere between these two levels. But they would never pay
more than 2e, and the forces of competition between firms mean that
they could never get away with paying less than e. Workers anticipate
all this, so they anticipate that e < w(e) < Ze. As for (0), take this a
step further and imagine that workers conjecture that firms will assess
that a worker who chooses education level e will be of low ability with
probability a(e). Assuming firms are risk neutral (which we do) and that
they share assessments, competition amongst them would lead them to
bid wie) = ale)e + (1 ale))2e. (Note that this is just another way of
giving our justification for [b].) And now (c) can be translated as: ale) is
nonincreasing. Or firms conjectures as to the ability of a worker do not
give a higher probability for a lower-ability worker if the worker obtains
more education.
At the risk of (re)stating the obvious, let us rephrase the equilibrium
I condition (2) in these terms. We require that firms assessments given by oe)
i are confirmed at education levels that workers do select in equilibrium. (Of, in!
! symbols,
(EAN
ale) = Smile)
brie) + .5myle) '
I we imagine a stable population with new workers coming along and
| presenting themselves for employment each year, and if we imagine that
the equilibrium distribution of workers abilities and education levels is
stable, then we would be saying that firms, based on their experience,
iknow that distribution. What we do not restrict, or restrict only minimally,
are the conjectures of firms at education level choices that are not chosen
and, therefore, at which the firms have no experience.
You may be thinking that we shouldn't speak directly about the firms
conjectures concerning the ability of a worker who chooses a nonequilibrium
level of education. The function w(e) represents the workers conjectures
about the wages they will be paid. Hence, at least, we should speak of
636 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
Indifference curve of
low-ability worker 4
Wage paid
Indifference curve of
high-ability worker
ez
Education level
Figure 17.5. Another separating equilibrium.
the workers conjectures concerning the firms assessments about the ability
of a worker who chooses a nonequilibrium level of education. And then,
by having a single w(e) function, we have implicitly assumed that all the
workers have the same conjectures about the firms assessments, and this -
conjecture holds that all the firms will have the same assessments. Are these
assumptions of coincident conjectures and assessments necessary? If you are
very careful, you should be able to see that much of what we will say does
not depend on this, although we will hold to this implicit assumption to keep
the exposition simple. You may also wonder why we have not introduced
game-theoretic terminology for all of this. We will do so in the next section,
but there are reasons to put this off for a while.
Note that the function w(e) in figure 17.4.does fot satisfy (b) or (c),
although it does satisfy one somewhat obvious condition, namely that it
is nondecreasing. In figure(17:5 we give a second(separating (equilibrium |
in which w(e) does satisfy (b).
Note in figure 17.5 the point chosen by the low-ability workers, de-
noted by &. This, as drawn, is the point along the ray w = e that low
ability workers like most; notice that their indifference curve through this
point is tangent to w = e. In contrast, in figure 17.4, low-ability workers
get less utility than they would # get from (w=4&,e=28). We use &
tm
17.2. Signaling quality 637
throughout this chapter to denote this particular point of tangency, and
we have the following result:
Proposition 1. In any separating equilibrium for which the function w(e) satis-
fies (b), low-ability workers choose precisely & and get the corresponding wages.
In any equilibrium (separating or not) for which the function w(e) satisfies (b),
low-ability workers get at least the utility that they get from (w= &;,e = &,).
You should have no problems at all-seeing why this is true. Or, rather,
you should have no problems with the first part of this proposition. The
second part may be a tiny bit harder.
i Pictures of pooling equilibria are relatively easy to draw. In a pooling]
{ equilibrium, recall, we assume that all the workers choose a single edu-!
Lcation | level e*. As before, firms beliefs, seeing e*, must be confirmed.
Since we have supposed that the numbers of high- and low-ability work-
ers in the population are equal, and since (in this equilibrium) all workers
choose e*, we see that in terms of the notation above ale*) = 5, and
w(e*) = 1.5*. An equilibrium of this sort is given in figure 17.6. Note
that the function w(e) in this case satisfies (c). Note also that the func-
tion w(e) has a (kink (at the(pooling point. This is necessary; without a
kink, we couldn't have w(e) underneath both types indifference curves
and touching those curves at the pooling point.
Indifference curve of
high-ability worker
Wage paid
Indifference curve of
low-ability worker
Education level
Figure 17.6. A pooling equilibrium.
638 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
As you can see (and imagine), there are a lot of equilibria here. Is
there any reason to suspect that one is more plausible than another? We!
will get back to this question, but before doing so we look at another way
to tell the basic story of market signaling.
The story of Rothschild and Stiglitz:
Worker self-selection from a menu of contracts
In the story just told, workers choose education levels in anticipation
of offers from the firm, and (we assume) those anticipations are correct, at
least for the education levels actually selected. Let's turn this around and
suppose that the firms move first. Specifically, suppose that firms offer
to workers a number of Ycontracts of the form (w,e) before workers go |
off to school. Workers consider the menu of (contracts on offer, sign the
one they like best, and then go off to school, content in the knowledge
of what wage they will get once school is done (assuming they complete
the number of years of schooling for which they have contracted). This
story may seem a bit lame in the context of education level choices. If
you find it so, think instead of insurance markets, the context with which!
Rothschild and Stiglitz deal explicitly. Insurance companies are willing
to insure ons life in any of a number of ways, with different premiums, -
death benefits, exclusions, and sg on. A customer(shops for the(policy( best i
|suited to himself, {given both his (preferences @Ad) what is important here,
the knowledge he(lias about his prospects for a long and healthy life.
An equilibrium in the sense of Rothschild and Stiglitz consists of (a) a menu
of contracts, a set of pairs {w!, el), Ww? ),..., (w*, e)} for some finite integer
Jk band (b) a selection rule by which workers are assigned to contracts or, for
each_type t, a probability distribution mw over {1,2,...,k}, that satisfy three
conditions:
(1) Each tjpe of worker is assigned only to contracts that are best for that worker
among all the contracts in the menu. In symbols, m(j) > 0 only if us(w?, ef)
achieves the maximum of u(w? ,&') for 5 =1,...,k.
(2) Each_contract in the menu to which workers are assigned at least breaks
even on average. (Otherwise, firms offering that contract would withdraw the
contract.) In symbols, for each j =1,...,k, if m1 (F) + ma() > 0, then
wl < 5m) ef + 5m) 2d.
= 5m) + 5m) Smif) + .5md)
b We assume that the menu of contracts offered is finite mostly for expositional conve-
nience.
17.2. Signaling quality 639
(3) No contract can be created that if offered in addition to those in the menu
would make strictly positive profits for the firm offering it, assuming that workers
choose among contracts in a manner consistent with rule (1) above.
We won't try to write (3) out formally it makes a good exercise if you
are fascinated by symbol manipulation.
This change in formulation has dramatic effects. To begin the analysis,
we assert something common to the Spence formulation:
Proposition 2. In an equilibrium, any contract that is taken up by workers must
earn precisely zero expected profits per worker.
The proof of this is a little tricky. A natural argument to try runs as
follows: Suppose that (w',e) is offered, is taken by some workers, and
earns an expected profit of size per worker who took it. Then have
some firm offer (w +/2,). This new contract will attract all the workers
who previously were attracted by (w',e) and will still return a profit
of /2, contradicting condition (3) of an equilibrium. The trouble with
this argument is that the new contract may attract others besides those
who previously took (w','), and those others may render this contract
unprofitable.
Only a sketch of the correct proof will be given, with details left for
the reader to fill in. First, the argument just given works if the contract
(w',") attracts only low-ability workers. Then if (w' + /2, ) manages to
attract any high-ability workers, it is even more profitable. So the hard
case is where (w', ) attracts some high-ability workers. At this point, wait
to read through the proof of proposition 3, which shows how to break a
pooling equilibrium. The key to that argument is that it is possible to
devise a contract (w'+/2,e +8), for 6 > 0 that is more attractive to high-
ability workers than is (w',) but is less attractive to low-ability workers.
Hence if a firm offers this contract, it will attract all the high-ability workers
who previously chose (w',), leaving the low-ability workers at (w',e)
(or somewhere else). If (w',) made profits per worker, then this new
contract makes profits exceeding /2 per worker.
 And if you do try to write this out formally, you will run up against the following
question: Should we insist that the contract earn nonpositive profits for every assignment
consistent with (1), or just that it make nonpositive profits for some assignment consistent
with (1)? It won't matter to the theory which you choose, as long as you are careful about
the arguments that follow.
7 In Spences formulation, it is true by fiat.
640 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
w=2e
Indifference curve of
high-ability worker
, .
[77 2 SEER Sy x
st
w=e
Wage paid
iy ge : Indifference curve of
: low-ability worker
[a
Education level
Figure 17.7. Destroying a pooling equilibrium.
Now we give a result that distinguishes this model from that of
Spence: 
Proposition 3. It is impossible that an equilibrium is a pooling equilibrium.
The argument runs as follows: Consider figur A73, and the pooling
equilibrium depicted. Suppose the firms are offering@ menu of contracts
that causes all the workers to choose (1.5*, e*) as shown. In this figure,
the filled-in dots are the menu of contracts that we suppose are offered. We
have added a few contracts to the menu besides (1.5*, &*), although they
are irrelevant, since (in our pooling equilibrium) the contract (1.5*,e*) is
best for all types of worker.
From this position, any one of the firms can offer the contract (w, e)
that is shown as a filled-in triangle. Saying in words what the picture
shows: This is a contract that has slightly higher wages and education
levels than (1.5*, *), where the increased wages more than compensate
a high-ability worker but dont compensate a low-ability worker relative to
the pooling contract. Since this contract is added to the contracts already
in the menu, it will only attract the high-ability workers; all the low-
ability workers prefer the e* offer. But if all the high-ability workers flock
to (w',), and none of the low-ability workers do so, each worker who
chooses (w',) will be worth 2 to the firm that makes this offer. The
firm makes a profit, and we cant have an equilibrium.
ar vn ee om
17.2. Signaling quality 641
The same sort of argument can be used to establish
Proposition 4. It is impossible, in equilibrium, that any contract (w, e) is taken
by positive fractions of the high- and low-ability workers both. Or, in other words,
the only possible equilibria are separating equilibria.
The details are left to you; a picture very much like figure 17.7 is the key.
Next we establish
Proposition 5. There is a single candidate for a separating equilibrium. In this
candidate equilibrium, low-ability workers choose the contract (&1,81), where &
is defined as before, and ... (to be continued)
Why must this be so? Because if low-ability workers are separated and
are choosing any other contract, a firm could add to the menu of contracts
a contract (w = &; ,e = &) for > 0 small enough so that low-ability
workers prefer this to the contract they are choosing in the supposed equi-
librium. But then for any 6 > 0, this contract must be profitable.
Fixing &; at this value, define the education level fi to be that level
of education such that low-ability workers are indifferent between (w =
ne=2) and (w=2f,e= fy). Figure 17.8 shows this point. And let f,
solve the problem: Maximize u,(Ze, ) subject to e > f;. That is, f> is the
Indifference curve of
low-ability worker 0
w=e
Wage paid
& h
Education level
Figure 17.8. Determination of J.
642 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
i w=2
1
Indifference curve of J
high-ability worker
a 5
 gp beeen mem Zz
go @ Dy w=e
S Woo
= a.
Co
rr * Indifference curve of
i low-ability worker
Py
~ 
G ef
Education level
Figure 17.9. A separating equilibrium.
education level that high-ability workers would choose if they could have
any point aleng the ray w = 2e for e > fr-
Proposition 5, continued. ... and (in the single candidate separating equilib-
rium) high-ability workers get (w =2f5,e = 2).
Why? Because if they are separated at any other contract, some firm could
come along and offer a contract (w =2 # 6,e= fo) that for sufficiently
small would be more attractive to high-ability workers than the contract
they are taking at the supposed equilibrium. Since fa > fi, this contract
is less appealing than (w = &,e = &,) for the low-ability workers. Hence
this contract will attract precisely the high-ability workers. And thus for
any > 0, this contract is strictly profitable.
Consider figure 17.9. We have there depicted the proposed separating
equilibrium in a case where # = fi. It may be helpful to say why no firm
would try to break this equilibrium by offering a contract in a position such
as (w',') that is shown, with w' a bit less than 2 and a bit less than
fi. This contract, added to the menu, would certainly attract high-ability
workers. And every high-ability worker attracted would be profitable at
this wage. But it would also attract all the low-ability workers. And in this
population, if you attract high- and low-ability workers in proportion to
the population, you have to pay less than 1.5 of the education level they
pick to make a profit.
et ere A ne ri
17.2. Signaling quality 643
Now consider figure 17.10. This is just like figure 17.9, except that
the indifference curve of the high-ability workers through the point (w=
2h, e= 2 dips below the line w = 1.5. In this case, a firm could offer
a contract such as (w',e') as shown, below the line w = 1.5e, but still
above the high-ability worker's indifference curve. This would break the
equilibrium, because even though it attracts all the workers, high-ability
and low-, it is still profitable.
In figure 17.10, then, there can be no equilibrium at all. Any sort
of pooling is inconsistent with equilibrium. And the only possible sep-
arating equilibrium can also be broken. In contrast, although we won't
go through all the details, in situations such as figure 17.9 (or situations
where f, > fi), the candidate separating equilibrium is an equilibrium.
Summarizing all this:
Proposition 6. In the formulation of Rothschild and Stiglitz, there is at most
one equilibrium. In the candidate equilibrium, low-ability workers choose (w =
1,e = &) and high-ability workers choose the education level f such that (w=
2a, = fi) is their most preferred point along the ray w = 2e for e> fi. If the
indifference curve for high-ability workers through the point (w = 2 fne=F)
dips below the pooling line w = 1.5e, then there is no equilibrium at all. If this
indifference curve stays above (or just touches) the pooling line, then this single
candidate equilibrium is an equilibrium.
Quite a difference from Spences model, where there were many possible
equilibria!
. 1
Indifference curve of }/ Ww = 2e
high-ability worker Jf
g y w=15
a,
& r
 ~
= a w=e
Z,
Zs !
7,
Ww eA 0 .
a Indifference curve of
mmf : low-ability worker
e Education level
The stories of Riley and Wilson skimming the high-ability workers, you are at risk; the pooling contract
In many markets where signaling takes place, such as insurance, it ) that you destroy becomes unprofitable because after your addition it at-
- + |seems natural to suppose that the(uninformed parties (put a menu of foty - tracts only low-ability workers. But if it is withdrawn, all these low-ability
~ (fers on the table from which (informed parties must choose. So the t workers may flock to your contract. On the other hand, if you break a
conclusion of the Rothschild and Stiglitz analysis, namely that there may + separating equilibrium with a pooling contract, you are not at risk; be-
be no equilibrium at all, is rather troubling.? A number of authors have cause you have created a contract that attracts all the workers, you dont
suggested that the flaw in the analysis lies in the notion of equilibrium t care if other, now unused contracts are withdrawn. So, Wilson concludes,
proposed by Rothschild and Stiglitz. In particular, it is implicit in the equi- t anticipatory equilibria always exist; sometimes there is more than one; and
librium notion that if a new contract is added to the menu, nothing further pooling is possible as an equilibrium-outcome.
(concerning the menu) changes. In place of this, one might imagine that 4 How do we sort between Rothschild and Stiglitz, Riley, and Wilson?
firms already offering contracts would react in one way or another, possi- J This clearly depends on what you think are reasonable assumptions in a
bly rendering previously profitable deviations unprofitable and restoring given market concerning firms abilities to add or withdraw contracts from
particular equilibria. ' i what is offered to the public. Think in terms of an insurance market that
Two of the original treatinents of this are due to Riley (1979) and Wil- i is regulated by some regulatory authority. If you think that firms cannot
son (1977). Riley advances the notion of a reactive equilibrium, in which, withdraw contracts because (say) the regulatory authority forbids this,
to destroy a proposed equilibrium, it must be possible to add a contract to i then Rileys equilibrium concept seems the more reasonable. If you think
the menu that will be strictly profitable and that will not become strictly | that the regulatory authorities permit the firms to withdraw unprofitable
unprofitable if other firms are allowed to add still more contracts to the contracts and are very tough on adding contracts that potentially affect the
equilibria stahds up; we broke a pooling equilibrium by adding a contract Rothschild and Stiglitz, think of regulators who call for firms to register
that attracted high-ability workers only, given that the pooling contract simultaneously and independently the contracts they wish to offer, with no
remained to attract low-ability workers. There is no way to make this room to add or subtract subsequently. (Do any of these sound particularly
pool-breaking contract strictly unprofitable as long as the old pooling con- j realistic to you? If not, see the discussion in section 17.4.)
tract remains, because as long as that old pooling contract is present, only
high-ability workers would ever consider taking the new contract. But you
are much more at risk when adding a contract that attempts to break a sep-
arating equilibrium by pooling high- and low-ability workers. For in this
1
menu. In this sort of scheme, our argument for why there are no pooling | profitability of others, then Wilson's notion seems quite reasonable. As for
!
i
17.3. Signaling and game theory
If you paid attention to part III of this book, you should have no
case, still another contract can be added that siphons from your contract difficulty guessing where the preceding paragraph is taking us. We can
the high-ability workers, leaving you (the original defector) with only low- ~ fry to(sort through the idifferent(equilibrium concepts (by(sorting through |
ability workers. Hence, Riley concludes, reactive equilibria always exist, . v|details of the (market institutions. Perhaps | by specifying precise rales of
and they correspond to the single candidate separating equilibrium. the game we can see when one equilibrium notion or another is more.
Wilson, on the other hand, proposes a notion called an anticipatory relevant. :
equilibrium. In this case, to break a proposed equilibrium it must be pos-
sible to add a contract that is strictly profitable and that doesnt become Spences model in game theoretic terms
strictly unprofitable when (now) unprofitable contracts from the original It is easy to distinguish between Spence on the one hand and Roth-
menu are withdrawn. Now if you try to break a pooling equilibrium by schild and Stiglitz on the other. For Spences. story, consider the following
- (extensive form(game with(incomplete(information. A worker's abilities
2 It becomes more troubling if you consider a population of workers whose education are determined by nature and are revealed to the worker. That is, this i
levels are continuously distributed. Then nonexistence of equilibrium is the usual state of i . i : at 1s, 1s
affairs; cf. Riley (1979). _a game of incomplete information about the worker's level of ability. The
 The discussion given here is a bit rough. Consult the literature to get more precise state- worker, based on this, determines how much education to obtain. The
ments of these results. - level of (education obtained (but not the worker's abilities, is(observed by =
646 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
a number of firms, who then bid_in Bertrand fashion for the worker's
services. 
The Nash equilibria of this game are precisely the equilibria of Spence
if we do not add any restrictions to w(e) beyond the basic (equilibrium) re-
striction that w(e) must be correct for levels of education that are chosen
in equilibrium by the worker. Firms responses to other choices of e are
out-of-equilibrium responses, since the worker wasnt supposed to pick
those levels of e, and (as you will recall) the Nash equilibrium criterion
doesnt restrict out-of-equilibrium responses. We restrict those responses
by refining the Nash concept. Subgame perfection isnt much use in this
case; (this (game of(incomplete information has aol proper{subgames. But! eo
require that the equilibrium is sequential, then we get precisely restric-
tion (b) on the w(e) function; at every level of education, including those
that are out-of-equilibrium, each firm must have out-of-equilibrium beliefs
ale) that the worker is low ability, and must bid accordingly. And re-
strictions such as (c) that a(e)/e must be nonincreasing are straightforward
restrictions on beliefs; restriction (0), for example, says that the probability
assessed by a firm that a worker is of high ability is nondecreasing in the
level of edueation the worker chooses.
_, |the/ notion of (se uential equilibrium is quite(hel ful. For example, if we <
|the{ notion of sequential equ is quite help p
In fact, high-powered restrictions on out-of-equilibrium beliefs are very
powerful in this sort of application. Let us pose here three increasingly stiffer
restrictions, and then see where they lead:
(1) The equilibrium should be sequential.
(2) Suppose a type t of worker and education levels e and ' are such that u:(e, ) >
u:(2e!,). Then in any Nash equilibrium, it must be possible to sustain the equi-
librium outcome with beliefs that put probability zero on education level ' being
selected by type 1.
(3) Fix a sequential equilibrium, and let wu} be the equilibrium level of utility achieved
in this equilibrium by a worker of type t. Suppose that for some type t and education
level , us(2,') < ul. Then it must be possible to sustain the given equilibrium
outcome with beliefs that put probability zero on education level ' being selected by
type 1.
 By having the firms bid in Bertrand fashion, we are guaranteed that in any equilibrium
the worker will be paid his conditional expected value, conditional on the level of education
he selects. This is true in any Nash equilibrium for education levels that are selected with
positive probability in the equilibrium, and it is true in any sequential equilibrium for any
education level at all, where we compute conditional expected values using the firms beliefs.
f The fact that the firms all have the same out-of-equilibrium beliefs derives from the con-
sistency requirement of a sequential equilibrium. If we dropped this for something weaker,
the answers would not change much, but the analysis would be a bit trickier.
er + ere ns penn rn ne 7 co
ee ere rim seer rs
17.3. Signaling and game theory 647
Wage paid Wage paid
Wage paid !
Education level
Education level Education level
Case 1a Case 1b Case 2
Figure 17.11. Three cases for market signaling.
Requirement (1) is entirely straightforward. The motivation behind (2) runs
as follows: Fix t, e, and as postulated. In any sequential equilibrium a
type t worker is guaranteed utility level at least u:{e, ) if he picks education
level e. If he picks , the best he could conceivably do is u:(2,). So
if he anticipates sequentially rational responses by employers at all levels
of education, he has no business whatsoever in picking education level ';
he is guaranteed a better outcome if he picks e. Employers should be able
to figure this out and, therefore, assess probability zero that the choice of
education level ' comes from . Requirement (2) is that the equilibrium can
be sustained with beliefs so restricted.
Requirement (3) takes (2) another step. There the test is, Is the best that
type can do if he chooses worse than what he gets in equilibrium? If so,
requirement (3) is that employers should be able to assess probability zero
that comes from 1.
Note well: Requirement (2) is something like elimination of dominated
strategies, where we require that a strategy be dominated by another only
at sequentially rational responses by firms. Requirement (3) is stronger; it is
of the category of elimination of strategies that are equilibrium dominated (cf.
subsection 12.7.4). Taking the extra step from (2) to (3) is cohtroversial; see
the brief discussion and references given in chapter 12.
What are the consequences of these requirements? Recall from our dis-
cussion above that & is the level of education that maximizes u; along the
ray w =e; J; is the level of education such that u1(8,,&) = w@h, Fi); and fi
is the education level most preferred by the type two workers along the ray
w=2e for e > hi. (See figure 17.8.) We distinguish between two cases: In
case 1 the high-ability workers indifference curve through (w = 2h,e = fa)
stays above the pooling line w = 1.5; and in case 2 the high-ability worker's
indifference curve through this point passes below the pooling line. Case 1
can be divided into two subcases: Case 1a, where }. > hi; and case 1b, where
J. = Fi. In figure 17.11, we depict all three cases for purposes of comparison.
Proposition 7. For market signaling formulated as a game in which workers choose
education levels and then firms bid in Bertrand-like fashion:
648
Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
(a) If we insist on our equilibrium being sequential (requirement [1]), then in any
separating equilibrium the low-ability workers select education level &,. More gen-
erally, in any sequential equilibrium, low-ability workers obtain utility at least equal
to uy(1, 1).
(b) If we insist in addition that requirement (2) is met, then the only possible sepa-
rating equilibrium has high-ability workers choosing education level J,. In general,
in any sequential equilibrium that meets requirement (2), high-ability workers must
obtain utility at least equal to w,(2},, J). And in case 1, the separating equilibrium
is the only possible sequential equilibrium that meets requirement (2), separating or
not.
(c) The only sequential equilibrium that meets requirement (3) is the separating equi-
librium in which low-ability workers choose & and high-ability workers choose J.
Let us sketch the proof. If the equilibrium is sequential, then wages in
response to any education level e cannot be less than e or more than 2e.
Hence if low-ability workers choose &;, they are assured of utility u1(;, 2).
This implies (a) immediately.
For part (b), consider any education level > J. By the definition of
Fi, wiln, 81) > ua(2', '). Hence if requirement (2) is imposed, we must be
able to sustain the equilibrium with beliefs that education levels ' > } are
certainly from high-ability workers, which means they command wages 2'.
Hence for any ' > &, a high-ability worker is sure to get utility u,(2/, ').
In any equilibrium, a high-ability worker need never accept utility less than
sup{uz(2, ') : ' > Ji}, which implies that he must get utility at least equal
to uy(2J;, f2). This is the second part of (b). (You may need to think a bit
about this step.) In any separating equilibrium, a high-ability worker can't
separate at a level of education less than f; (Why not?), and so we have the
first part of (b).
The third part of (b) is the hardest and is left to the virtuous reader
with the following hint: We know that at any quilibrium outcome, low-
ability workers sit on an indifference curve on or above their curve through
(81,&). Consider separately the case where they sit along the indifference
curve, through (2,8) (in which case apply the second part of [b]) and the
case where they sit above this curve, in which case (we assert and you must
show) they must all be part of a single pool, which leads to a contradic-
tion.
As for (0), the key is to show that any pooling at all in equilibrium will
not meet requirement (3). Consider figure 17.12 and the point shown with
the dot. Imagine that both high- and low-ability workers pooled at that point.
Then, in the equilibrium, low-ability workers must obtain the utility level that
parameterizes the indifference curve through that point. Consider education
levels between the points and , shown in the figure. At any education
level g > , the low-ability worker cannot do better than he does at his
equilibrium level of utility, even if wages 2g are paid. So by requirement
(3), we must be able to sustain this equilibrium with beliefs that attribute no
chance to education levels g > coming from low-ability workers. Hence
wages 2g will be paid for such education levels. And then a high-ability
-
oe
er lh, ri a rm re ots eat
17.3. Signaling and game theory 649
Indifference curve ;
Wage paid of low-ability worker ;
Indifference curve
of high-ability worker
gm aN,
a,
om |
z
I~
Education level
Figure 17.12. Breaking a pooling equilibrium with requirement (3).
worker would rather choose some such g that is less than , than stick to the
supposed pool. Done.
Rothschild and Stiglitz and game theory
Rothschild and Stiglitz, on the other hand, can be understood as an
analysis of the following alternative extensive form game. Firms simulta-
neously and independently name contracts (in wage-education space, sl
our example) that they are willing to honor. Then the worker responds
by taking one of the contracts (or refusing them all). The equilibria of
Rothschild and Stiglitz correspond to pure strategy, subgame perfect Nash
equilibria of this game. In particular, when there are no Rothschild and
Stiglitz equilibria, this game has no pure strategy, subgame perfect Nash
equilibria. 9
Further variations
For Riley and for Wilson, we might imagine game forms of the fol-
lowing sorts. For Riley, firms simultaneously and independently propose
? By invoking subgame perfection, we can and hereafter do assume that the worker
chooses the contract that he likes best from those that are offered. We can use subgame
perfection here because Nature's move can be put in after the firms offer their contracts, and
at that point Nature's move starts a proper subgame. 
g The game always admits Nash equilibria, in mixed strategies if there are no pure strat-
egy equilibria. (The existence result behind this claim is not trivial.) Whether one believes
that the mixed strategy equilibria have any particular relevance is another matter.
650 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling 17.4. Bibliographic notes and discussion 651
contracts. The set of contracts offered are made public. Then firms are Second, these problems may be ameliorated through( market (signal- +
given the opportunity to add contracts. If anyone adds a contract, firms , ing or(self-selection (by the side having the (private (information. If the *
are given a further opportunity to add, and so on, until no firm adds any informed side takes the active role as in Spences analysis, this is known
contracts. And then workers choose their preferred contracts. (What if . as market(signaling. If the side without information proposes a menu of
firms add contracts perpetually? I will leave this question hanging for contracts among which the informed side selects, this is conventionally
now.) For Wilson, imagine that firms simultaneously and independently + called market (screening. The instrument used to(send this(signal should | +
propose contracts. These contracts are made public. And then firms are have the property that it is(relatively(cheaper(for {higher( quality parties |
allowed to remove contracts from the offer set. After one or more rounds . to/convey; i.e., something analogous to the single-crossing property should
of removals, workers choose. hold. (Higher (quality parties are usually adversely(affected(by. the pres- +
The game form proposed for Riley is incompletely specified, because ence of (lower quality parties; either the higher quality parties are(pooled _
we haven't said how the game ends if firms keep adding contracts. And, in 1 intwith lower quality parties, to their detriment, 5 they (must(invest in
any case, this game form admits too many Nash equilibria. Consider, for x, lsignals (beyond the(point that they would if there were no informational
example, an equilibrium where firms initially offer to pay workers much asymmetry to distinguish themselves from their lower quality peers. (I
less than they are worth. We would imagine a single firm breaking this put usually in quotes here because this result must be made precise. It
equilibrium by offering slightly better terms and getting all the workers. is a substantial challenge, but you might wish to try your hand at turning
But now firms can respond, and they might be supposed to respond in this vague assertion into a precise result.)
a way that leaves all the firms making zero profits. In which case no The range of applications for this sort of signaling or screening is
firm would have a positive incentive to deviate from the first, positive quite large. Besides (education as a(signal (Spence, 1974) and (signaling in
profits situation. In a sense, we have implicit collusion among the firms, insurance (Rothschild and, Stiglitz, 1976), a partial list of applications is:
supported by supergamelike threats of reaction. (On this point and others - 1a manufacturer offers (warranties as a signal that the goods in question
concerning this game form and its relation to Riley's reactive equilibrium, are of high quality (Grossman, 1981); a plaintiff (demands a (high( pretrial 
see Engers and Fernandez [1987].) (settlement as a(signal that her case is particularly strong (Reinganim and
We leave it to you to connect the game form advanced for Wilson's Wilde, 1986; Sobel, forthcoming); a bargainer, to signal relativelbargaining
equilibrium notion to that notion; you will (clearly) have to study Wilson's . 1 strength, (rejects the other side's (offer (Rubinstein, 1985) @n(delays @mak- |
paper first.
ing his{ own offer (Admati and Perry, 1987); and a. monopolist, to signal :
~~ llow [costs and so to(forestall(entry by potential rivals, charges a dow(price
before entry occurs (Milgrom and Roberts, 1982). You may recall this
last application from chapter 13. Lest you think you've seen the whole
story, there is much more to entry deterrence as signaling than the sim-
{ple analysis in chapter 13 conveys. In particular, Milgrom and Roberts
show how the incumbent monopolist could engage in entry deterring
pricing that is completely ineffective in deterring entry. You may also
To close this discussion, we mention yet another game form that with
high=powered refinements of Nash equilibrium leads to a strong result. Imag-
ine a three-stage game constructed as follows. Firms make offers, just as in
Rothschild and Stiglitz. Workers choose their education levels and queue for
jobs at the firms whose offers they wish to take. But then firms can renege;
having seen which other contracts were offered and which choices were made,
firms can decide not to honor offers they made initially. Hellwig (1986) stud-
jes this game form and obtains results that can be paraphrased roughly as: If
one looks for stable equilibrium outcomes in the sense of Kohlberg and Mertens
(1986), then Wilson-style equilibria are selected.
17.4. Bibliographic notes and discussion
| Several messages can be obtained from the preceding analyses. First,
lemons problems can exist in markets where one party to a transaction
_ has available information that a second party lacks.
recognize the beer-quiche example of chapter 13 as another example of
signaling.
The relationships between the early models of market signaling and
game theory have been developed only recently. Stiglitz and Weiss (forth-
coming) should be consulted concerning the basic differences between sig-
naling and screening models. Work on signaling models (i.e., on Spence-
style models) stressing restrictions on out-of-equilibrium beliefs can be
found in Banks and Sobel (1987), Cho and Kreps (1987), and Cho and So-
bel (1988) among others. Less work has been done on connecting screening
652 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
models to game theory, although Engers and Fernandez (1987) and Hell-
wig (1986) can be consulted for some initial work.
The topic of market signaling fans out in many directions from the
very simple and basic model that has been discussed here. In the first
place, one might think of looking at models with more than two types of
employee. This sort of extension is relatively straightforward, and most
of the references given above do this. More interesting are applications!
17.4. Bibliographic notes and discussion 653
Ben-Porath, E., and E. Dekel. 1989. Coordination and the Potential for
Self-Sacrifice. University of California at Berkeley. Mimeo.
Cho, Ik, and D. Kreps. 1987. Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102:179-221.
Cho, I'k., and J. Sobel. 1988. Strategic Stability and Uniqueness in Sig-
naling Games. University of Chicago. Mimeo..
Crawford, V., and J. Sobel. 1982. Strategic Information Transmission.
= where({more(than (one(signal is available (see Engers [1987] for screening
' models; and see Cho and Sobel [1988] for signaling models), or where the |
 quality being(signaled is(multidimensional (Quinzii and Rochet, 1985),
 OP where signals are(noisyp that the(act of Gignaling by(itself is a(superior -
(signal (Hillas, 1987). .
Econometrica 50:1431-51.
Engers, M. 1987. Signaling with Many Signals. Econometrica 55:663-74.
Engers, M., and L. Fernandez. 1987. Market Equilibrium with Hidden
Knowledge and Self-selection. Econometrica 55:425-40.
An important variation that we have not touched upon concerns sig-
| naling models where the(signals are(costless to send. That is, participants
can engage in {cheap (talk things costless to say, but not at all incon-
sequential to the equilibria that can be attained. See Crawford and Sobel
(1982) and Farrell (1988) on this topic. And throughout this chapter we
have been concerned with the signaling of private information. One can
also analyze the signaling of previously taken actions, or even the signal-
ing of actions intended in the future. (See, for example, Wolinsky [1983]
or Ben-Porath and Dekel [1989].)
An issue lss theoretical and more practical concerns the impact
of repeated play in the oligopolistic sense on equilibria in the context of
screening. That is, if we imagine insurance companies that offer potential
clients a menu of contracts, and we think that these companies might en-
gage in some form of implicit collusion, then the discussion of Rothschild
and Stiglitz versus Riley versus Wilson might be turned on its head. Per-
haps the companies collude and offer a menu of contracts that is best for
them as a cartel, held together by a threat of reversion to cut-throat compe-
tition. This leads one to ask, If the insurance business is not competitive
but instead is a monopoly (or a cartel), what menu of contracts will be
offered? (And if the insurance business is regulated, what then?) With
this as a lead-in we move on to chapter 18.
References
Admati, A., and M. Perry. 1987. Strategic Delay in Bargaining. Review
of Economic Studies 54:345-64.
Akerlof, G. 1970. The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the
Market Mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics 89:488-500.
Banks, J, and J. Sobel. 1987. Equilibrium Selection in Signaling Games.
Econometrica 55:647-62.
Farrell, J. 1988. Meaning and Credibility in Cheap-talk Games. in Math-
ematical Models in Economics, M. Dempster, ed. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Grossman, S. 1981. The Role of Warranties and Private Disclosure about
Product Quality. Journal of Law and Economics 24:461-83.
Hellwig, M. 1986. Some Recent Developments in the Theory of Competi-
tion in Markets with Adverse Selection. University of Bonn. Mimeo.
Hillas, J. 1987. Contributions to the Theory of Market Screening. Ph.D. diss.,
Stanford University.
Kohlberg, E., and J.-E Mertens. 1986. On the Strategic Stability of Equi-
libria. Econometrica 54:1003-38.
Milgrom, P,, and J. Roberts. 1982. Limit Pricing and Entry under Incom-
plete Information: An Equilibrium Analysis. Econometrica 50:443-59.
Quinzii, M.,, and J.-C. Rochet. 1985. Multidimensional Signalling. Journal
of Mathematical Economics 14:261-84.
Reinganum, J., and L. Wilde. 1986. Settlement, Litigation, and the Allo-
cation of Litigation Costs. Rand Journal of Economics 17:557-66.
Riley, J. 1979. Informational Equilibrium. Econometrica 47:331-59.
Rothschild, M., and J. Stiglitz. 1976. Equilibrium in Competitive Insur-
ance Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 80:629-49.
Rubinstein, A. 1985. A Bargaining Model with Incomplete Information
about Time Preferences. Econometrica 53:1151-72.
Sobel, J. Forthcoming. An Analysis of Discovery Rules. Law and Contem-
porary Problems.
Spence, A. M. 1974. Market Signaling. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
654 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
Stiglitz, J., and A. Weiss. Forthcoming. Sorting Out the Differences Be-
tween Screening and Signaling Models. In Oxford Essays in Mathe-
matical Economics, M. Bachrach, ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, C. 1977. A Model of Insurance Markets with Incomplete Infor-
mation. Journal of Economic Theory 16:167-207.
Wolinsky, A. 1983. Prices as Signals of Product Quality. Review of Eco-
nomic Studies 50:647-58.
17.5. Problems
a 1. Recall the lemons problem at the start of the chapter. Some used
cars are peaches, worth $3,000 to buyers and $2,500 to sellers, and some
are lemons, worth $2,000 fo buyers and $1,000 to sellers. There is a fixed
supply of cars and unlimited demand. Suppose there are twice as many
peaches as lemons. Assume buyers cant tell the quality of a given car,
while sellers can. What do the supply and demand curves look like? In the
text, we asserted that markets clear at $2,666.67. Are there other market
clearing prices?
a 2. Consider the model of job market signaling explored in section 17.2.
More specifically, consider the mode of analysis that is attributed to Spence,
where workers choose education levels in anticipation of the wages they
will receive. We explored in section 17.2 both separating and pooling
equilibria, where we assumed that each type of worker chooses one and
only one level of education in equilibrium. :
(a) Are there any separating equilibrium where one type (or both) chooses
more than one level of education? By a separating equilibrium we mean
that if one type chooses a given education level with positive probability,
then the other type does not.
(b) Is there any pooling equilibrium where both types choose more than
one level of education? By a pooling equilibrium we mean that every
education level chosen by one type with positive probability is chosen by
the other type with positive probability.
(0) A hybrid equilibrium is one in which some education levels are chosen
by one type only and others are chosen by both types. Are there any
hybrid equilibria? If so, how many different types of them can you
construct?
(d) What is the maximum number of education levels that a low-ability
worker can choose with positive probability in any equilibrium? What is
17.5. Problems 655
the maximum number of education levels that a high-ability worker can
choose with positive probability in any equilibrium? Justify your answers.
au 3. (a) Complete the proof of proposition 2.
(b) Prove proposition 4.
4. (a) Consider the model of job market signaling explored in section 17.2,
but with one modification: Education is completely worthless in terms of
increasing worker productivity. That is, a low-ability worker is worth
v; to a firm and a high-ability worker is worth v;, regardless of how
much education either has. We assume that v; < v;. Otherwise, things
are as in section 17.2; workers like higher wages and dislike education,
their indifference curves have the single-crossing property, and so on.
Recount the conclusions of Spence and then of Rothschild and Stiglitz in
this modified formulation.
(b) In the modified formulation, it is clear that any education obtained
is socially wasteful; it doesnt improve productivity and it lessens the
utility of the worker. Put another way, if workers obtain any education
at all in equilibrium, they are clearly being overeducated from the point
of view of enhanced productivity by society. Presumably you showed in
part (a), therefore, that equilibria in this setting can result in too much
education, and separating equilibria must do so. In the original setting of
section 17.2 do similar conclusions apply? Is it the case that there is never,
in equilibrium, too little education? In other words, comment on the
following assertion: The model of education as a signal due to Spence
and to Rothschild and Stiglitz shows that people overinvest in education,
when education is used to signal ability.
a5. Recall that we gave a very imprecise formulation of the single-crossing
property. Suppose that the utility functions us(w, e) are concave, MoONo-
tonic in the right directions, and have derivatives of all orders. Can you
give a more precise formalization of the single-crossing property that uses
appropriate partial derivatives of the u;?
m 6. A quite abstract formulation of the single-crossing property can be
given for the following setting: The worker is one of a finite number of
types, indexed by t=1,2,..., T. The worker can choose education levels
 from some interval, say [0, 00), and firms can pay wages w drawn from
some interval, say [0,00). We let us(w,e) denote the utility obtained by
a worker of type from wages w and education level e. Then if, for
some type of worker t =1,2,...,T, usw, e) > uw, ) for e > , then
656 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
for all t =+1,+2,...,T, uy(w,e) > u(w',e). In words, if a type t
prefers (weakly) the package (w,e) to (w,e), and the preferred package
has higher education, then all types with higher index strictly prefer the
package (w,e).
Suppose we have a formulation of job market signaling as in Spences
story with finitely many types of workers as in the preceding paragraph.
Suppose that we find an equilibrium. Assume that in this equilibrium
workers conjecture that for each education level they might select, the
wage that they will receive is nonrandom. (You saw no examples with
random wages, so this last line may confuse you. If so, ignore it.) Assume
the formulation of single-crossing just given and prove the following: If
a type t worker obtains education level e with positive probability in the
equilibrium, and a type obtains e, then > implies e > e.
7. Consider the following game form representation of worker selection
from a menu of contracts. The number of firms is finite. (Two will be
enough.) Firms simultaneously and independently name contracts (pairs
(w,e)); with each firm limited to a finite number of contracts. (If you
wish, assume each firm can name no more than four contracts.) The con-
tracts tentatively offered are announced, and then firms simultaneously
and indeperidently decide whether they wish to withdraw some of the
contracts they offered initially. The new set of tentatively offered contracts
is announced, and. if any contracts were removed, firms are again given .
the opportunity to remove contracts. And so on, until either no contracts
are left or, in a given round, no contracts are removed. (Since there are
finitely many firms and finitely many contracts, this process must termi-
nate.) Workers then self-select from among the contracts (if any) that are
left. Otherwise, things are just as in the models of this chapter.
What can you say about the subgame perfect equilibria of this game? Can
you give a precise characterization? If not, can you give partial charac-
terizations? Can you describe at least one equilibrium? (There are many
proper subgames here, and you may find things easier if you look for
Nash equilibria where workers play sequentially rational strategies. That
is, dont worry about subgame perfection for the firms.)
a 8. Besides education as a signal, the other classic application of these
ideas is the insurance market. The following simple story is usually
told. Imagine an individual who is subject to a random loss. Specifically,
the individual may have , with which to consume, and she may have
only , < Y,. This individual is strictly risk averse, with von Neumann-
Morgenstern utility function U defined on the amounts of money she has
a
ce ee cree
cee nt
17.5. Problems 657
to consume. There is a probability 7; that the individual will have income
, only (and a probability 1 2; that she will have income Yi), where the
subscript 7 stands for either H or L, mnemonics for high and low risk. We
have my > a. The individual knows whether she is a high- or low-risk
individual.
Several insurance companies offer insurance against the bad outcome for
this consumer. An insurance contract is very simple: It specifies amounts
yi and y, that the individual is left with if she would otherwise be con-
suming Y; or . That is, you can think of w= Y, ~ P, where P is
the insurance premium, and Ye = ,-P+B, where B is a benefit paid
in case the individual would otherwise be left with only ,. The insur-
ance companies are competitive and risk neutral. This implies that con-
tracts that are offered and taken in equilibrium on average break even,
or m(, yw) + (1 a(Y y1) = 0, where a is the chance that the con~
sumer would otherwise be left with ;. The insurance companies do not
know what type the consumer is, but have equilibrium conjectures based
on the type of contract that the consumer proposes or takes. Insurance
firms begin with the prior assessment that the consumer is high risk with
probability 1/2.
Adapt first Spence and then Rothschild and Stiglitz to this setting.
The key is to get the right picture, and we will give you some assistance
here. Think of the commodity space (replacing (w, e) space) as the space
of pairs (y:, yo) where y; is the amount of money the consumer has to use
in the contingency where she would otherwise have % and y is her
wealth in the contingency where she would otherwise have ). Begin by
locating the consumers endowment (%4,). Then draw in indifference
curves for the consumer in this space. Note carefully, the indifference
curves are different if the consumer is high-risk or low-. Itis useful to
compute the slope of the consumers indifference curve at a point (y;, yo)
where y = yo. Finally, find the locus of zero-profit contracts (y,, y2) for the
insurance firm if it knows that it is dealing with a high-risk client, with
a low-risk client, and with a client who is high-risk with probability 1/2.
(Our offer of this assistance is not entirely altruistic. If you get stuck, or
you succumb to laziness, the answer can be found at the start of the next
chapter.)
a9. In a particular population, everyone runs the risk of losing $1,000
randomly. Each persons random event (which determines whether the
person loses the $1,000 or not) is independent of everyone elses, and
the chance that any single individual will lose the $1,000 depends on the
658 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
individual; 90% of the population will lose the $1,000 with probability .1,
while the other 10% will lose the $1,000 with probability .6. Each individ-
wal knows her own probability of loss, but no one knows the probability
of loss of anyone else. Everyone in this population has the same von
Neumann-Morgenstern utility function for this particular gamble, (either
lose $1,000 or lose $0), given by ux) =1- e~** where z is the net of this
gamble. :
A regulated insurance company stands ready to offer insurance for this
gamble. If an individual pays a premium P, then the individual is insured
against the loss of $1,000. In terms of the net, the individual trades a
gamble where the two possible prizes are z = 0 and z = 1,000 for a
sure thing where x = P. Because this insurance company is regulated,
it must set the premium so that its expected net profit is zero.
(a) If A = .002, is there a pooling equilibrium for this economy? If a=
.0005, is there a pooling equilibrium? For what values of X is there a
pooling equilibrium? (Answer the last question only if you have access
to a computer or a programmable calculator) As part of your answer to
this, you myst say what constitutes a pooling equilibrium.
 Suppose A = 001, and individuals can undergo an examination that
with some chance of error identifies whether the individual has a chance
of .1 of losing the $1,000 or a chance of .6. Specifically, this exam has two
outcomes: H (for high risk) and L. If the individual is the sort who will
lose the $1,000 with probability .1, then this test gives the outcome L with
probability p and the outcome H with probability 1p. If the individual
will lose the $1,000 with probability 6 then the outcomes are H with prob-
ability p and L with probability 1p. It costs $10 to administer this test.
The regulatory body says that the insurance company must charge any
consumer who wants the test a nonrefundable $10 (consumers may only
take the test once), and the company must then break even on each and
every contract that it offers. (That is, one contract may not be allowed to
cross-subsidize another.) The insurance company may make the premium
dependent on the the results of the test if taken. Will this economy admit
a screening equilibrium? What is the nature of that equilibrium? For what
values of p will such an equilibrium exist?
Note: In both halves of this problem, do not assume competition among
insurance companies. The single insurance company is subject to regula-
tion, as noted above. If you want to think about it, you might consider
what would happen if there was a competitive insurance industry.
 er ere rel
17.5. Problems 659
= 10. Return to section 13.2 and the story of entry deterrence told there. If
you didnt understand the equilibria that were described then, you should
go back to them now. (Can you now find all the equilibria?)
In the game theoretic analysis of the Spence model given here, we saw
that pooling equilibria are destroyed if we employ equilibrium dominance
criteria. This is not true in the pooling equilibrium we sketched in section
13.2. Why not? (Hint: When you summarize your answer, begin with
the following line: In the model of this chapter, if there is a pool, the
high-ability worker suffers for it. But....)
un 11. We have now discussed problems of adverse selection and problems of moral
hazard. In this problem, you may try your hand at a situation with both at the
same time. If you find this problem too hard, wait until the end of the next
chapter, when you should find it very easy. Consider a situation just like the
salesman problem in section 16.2, with one additional fillip. Specifically,
the salesman will be of either high or low ability. To be exact: You are
going to hire a salesman to try to make a particular sale for you. You are
risk neutral in all this. He is risk averse, with von Neumann-Morgenstern
utility function +/ a, where is the amount you pay him, and a is an
index of the level of effort he exerts. He is either of good ability or of bad
ability, each with probability .5. In parts (a) and (b) you will know his
level of ability; in later parts you will not. He will exert either a high level
of effort or a low, and you will be unable to observe which. (Note: Good
and bad pertain to ability, and high and low pertain to effort.) Regardless
of his level of ability, he has reservation utility level 5. And if he puts in
a high level of effort, a in his utility function is 1; a = 0 for a low level of
effort.
He either will make the sale or he won't. The sale, gross of your payment
to him, will net you $100 if he makes it. The chances that he makes the sale
depend both on his level of ability and on his level of effort. Specifically:
If he is good and gives high effort, he makes the sale with probability .9.
If he is good and gives low effort, he makes the sale with probability .6.
If he is bad and gives high effort, he makes the sale with probability .5.
If he is bad and gives low effort, he makes the sale with probability .3.
(This is a world in which ability counts more than effort.)
Although it doesnt make much sense in the context I have outlined, as-
sume that you are only allowed to deal with one salesman. You may offer
660 Chapter seventeen: Adverse selection and market signaling
him a contract, which he will either accept or reject; if he rejects, you net
zero. Any time that the salesman is indifferent, he will elect the option that
is more favorable to you. (That is, you dont have to worry about ties.)
(a) Suppose you are able to observe his ability, and you find that the
salesman you are dealing with has bad ability. What, from your point of
view, is the optimal contract to offer him? Will he give high or low effort
under this contract? What will be your profits?
(b) Suppose you are able to observe his ability, and you find that the
salesman you are dealing with has good ability. What, from your point
of view, is the optimal contract to offer to him? Will he give high or low
effort under this contract? What will be your profits?
(c) Now suppose that you are unable to observe the ability of the salesman
you are dealing with. If you offer him a choice from the contracts you
identified in parts (a) and (b), what will be the outcome for you? Why is
this? Be very clear and explicit as to what you expect to happen in this
case,
(d) You are unable to observe the ability of the salesman that you are
dealing with, and you may either offer him a pair of contracts from which
he can choose, or a single contract, that he may elect to take or not. (If
you offer a pair of contracts, he can refuse employment altogether as well,
although remember that when he is indifferent, he is presumed to do what
is in your interests.) I want you to produce an offer to him that does better
than offering him the pair of contracts from parts (a) and (b). Say what
the contract(s) is (are), and what will be the outcome of your offer. You
should produce the best contract(s) you can ideally, you should devise
the optimal contract(s) to offer him, and you should prove that this is the
optimal offering.
m 12. At the start of this chapter we used Gresham's law to motivate
Akerlofs lemons model and problems of adverse selection. But this mo-
tivation is not entirely appropriate, at least for the way we described Gre-
shams law. Why not? How can you make Gresham's law appropriate?
(For the second question, begin your answer with Suppose some of the
| people in this economy are pathologically honest. ...)
chapter eighteen
The revelation principle
and mechanism design
In chapter 16, we saw how to design optimal incentive contracts for a
principal who wishes to get a single agent to take some action. We hinted
there, both in the text and in the problems, at techniques for the design of
optimal contracts when the agent possesses private information and when
there are multiple agents. :
In this chapter, we look at a grab bag of situations in which these
techniques are employed. The specific applications that we will examine,
{insurance contracts when_there is (adverse'selection (and, more generally,
ences for the provision of a public good, are all interesting in their own
right, and we carry through the first level of analysis for all. But the point
of this chapter is the general mode of analysis that is employed and, in
particular, the progression from contracts designed for a single party to
the revelation principle and contracts and mechanisms designed for many
parties.
18.1. Optimal contracts designed for a single party
At the end of the last chapter, we asked what would happen in an
insurance setting with adverse selection if the insurance industry instead
of being competitive is either a monopoly, or-is cartelized so effectively
that it acts like a monopoly. In chapter 8 (problem 4), we posed the prob-
lem of finding an optimal nonlinear pricing scheme in the context of a
manufacturing monopolist selling to retail monopolists. In this section we
see how to solve these two problems.
Profit-maximizing insurance contracts with adverse selection
To begin, we develop a context within which the question of profit-
maximizing insurance can be studied. Imagine an individual who will
! This analysis is taken from Stiglitz (1977).
- optimal nonlinear pricing), (optimal( procurement, and elicitation of prefer-| 
i
cy
662 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
receive an uncertain amount of money with which to consume. Specifi-
ically, the individual may receive the amount ;, or she may receive only
Y, < ;. Which of these two prevails is determined at a later date. This in-
dividual is strictly risk averse, with strictly increasing and strictly concave
von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function U defined on the amounts of
money she has to consume. There is a probability m; that the individual
will have endowment Y; only and a probability 1 =m; that she will have
endowment Y;, where the subscript stands for either H or L, mnemon-
ics for high and low risk. We assume my > 7. The individual knows
whether she is a high- or low-risk individual.
j (Because she is subject to_endowment(tisk and she is(risk(averse,
this consumer might (seek to (insure herself(against allow(level of endow-! <
_, ment. In essence, she will (give(up (some of her (endowment in the(high- <
.endowment state of nature dnfreturny/ for more in the(low-endowment state. ~
Suppose there is a single insurance company with which the consumer can
deal. An insurance contract between the insurance company and the con-
sumer specifies two numbers, 7; and y,, where y; is the total resources
left to the consumer if her endowment is Y%, for k = 1,2. You can think
(of 3, =Y; P, where P is the(insurance/ premium, and g =Y; P+ B.}
1 where B ig a benefit paid if the individual would otherwise be left with |
only Y;. The insurance company, then, will have profits Y; 3 in the,
high-endowment state and Y, 1, in the low-endowment state; we put
profits in quotes because one or the other of these quantities will pre- .
sumably be negative. (In fact, it is reasonable to presume that Y> 1}
will be negative; the insurance company pays out in the low-endowment(
state.) The insurance company does mot know (whether the consumer is:
high @r low risk and begins with the( prior assessment that the consumer
is (high (risk with (probability p. (What sort of(contract(s) will the insur-f <
, ance company offer to this consumer in order to make the largest possible]
| expected profit?
It may help to(draw some(pictures of thissituation. The (commodity
_lspace for the consumer is the set of all pairs (11,72), with the interpreta!
tion that y; is the amount the consumer has to spend in the state of nature
where she would (without the benefit of insurance) consume Y;, and 3;
is the amount she has to spend in the state of nature where her initial
.. endowment is Y;. We can draw(indifference( curves for the consumer in
(1,70) space; these are curves of the form (1 m)U(y) + mUy) = k for:
constant k where mr; is the consumer's probability of having a low level of
endowment. In figure 18.1) we draw the indifference curve of a high-risk
consumer through the endowment point (Y1, Ya).
etn
rene pees las re sire 1s tl
eve
18.1. Optimal contracts designed for a single party 663
2
JE
Slope = (1-1) /ny
_.--- Initial endowment
Ltr lo
7 wea
gtou
Figure 18.1. A high-risk consumer's indifference curve.
Fix the constant k, and think of the curve as determining y, as a 
function of 4. That is, define a function 1,(y;) by the implicit relation }
=
(A = m)U@) + mUly (yn) = k.
Letting V be the inverse of U, this is
m5
wy) =V [Frit a- ml)
(We should be worried whether [k (1 7)U(y)]/7; is in the domain of
V, but we'll simply proceed on the assumption that it is, and we leave it
to you to clean up the details.) Hence ,
dy _ (k= A-m)U) (1m
av (EEE) (ve, o
mi
dy : Tm\ a
We vw ) vw for nev (20m)
i, mw;
This looks like (and is) a mess, but from it we can(harvest(two (facts that
. are useful in drawing pictures.
664 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
Ya LiF
op een Indifference curve
of a low-risk consumer
Indifference curve of
a high-risk consumer - ee
Figure 18.2. A pair of indifference curves, one for each type.
(1) If (sn) = 1, then the slope of the indifference curve through (y1,v,) equals
(1 7) /m;. (This follows because V'(U(z)) = 1/U"(x).)
Consider (superimposing|indifference( curves of the consumer for the two
cases where the consumer is high and low risk. In particular, consider the
indifference curves of the consumer through some point (3,4). (2) The
|indifference curve of the(low-risk consumer. is(steeper than that of the high-risk
consumer. Put differently, if we start from a point (y1,%,) and decrease y;_
jby a little bit, it takes a smaller increase in y, to compensate the high- .
risk consumer than to compensate the low-risk consumer. The(intuition!<-
"for this should be clear; the high-risk consumer has a greater chance of
having the low-endowment state prevail, hence additional income in that |
state is worth more to her. We also see this algebraically, since the slopes
are the same except for the scale factors (1 ;)/m;; this factor is lower for
the high-risk consumer than for the low-risk.
Indeed, we have something stronger, namely that the ratio of the
slopes of the indifference curves through any point is independent of
:the point. But we won't need this stronger result. All we need is the
single-crossing condition for any pair of indifference curves, one for a
high-risk consumer and one for a low-, with the crossing as shown in
figure 18.2.
Consider next(iso-expected (profit lines for the firm. Suppose the firm
sells a contract to the consumer that leaves the consumer at the point
(1,9). The firm is left with profits ; y; in the high-endowment state
and Y; y; in the low-endowment state, hence the firm's expected profits
are (1 m)(Y; 1) +7w(Yz y,), where = is the firm's overall assessment as
om fmm
ee
183
18.1. Optimal contracts designed for a single party 665
to how likely it is that the consumer will have a low level of endowment.
Iso-expected profit lines for the firm are given by
Am =p) + 7(Y ga) = &'
for some constant , and a bit of algebra shows that the slope of these
(viewed with y, on the ordinate and 1 on the abscissa) is (1 7) J.
Suppose that the firm knows it is dealing with a high-risk consumer,
50 1t assesses m = my. (What (contract does it wish to offer to the consumer
In (order to(maximize its expected (profits? The picture is as in figure
3. The consumer isift(going to Isettle for any(contract that leaves her
{worseloff than at her endowment point.(Sp the firm is (constrained toloffer ~
- her a(contract dn the(shaded area, if it wishes to do business, Its highest
expected profits are at the point a along her indifference curve where y, = Yi.
(We have discovered yet again the fact, first discovered in chapter 5, that
efficient risk sharing between a risk-averse and a risk-neutral party shifts!
| all the risk onto the risk-neutral party.) CF
Similarly, if the firm knows it is dealing with a low-risk consumer, it
offers the contract with y, = 3, along the low-risk consumer's indifference
Direction of increasing
utility for
the consumer
Iso-profit line for - High-risk consumer's
the insurance indifference curve
company ------- -
Initial endowment
Optimal contract i re
for the insurance | 7
Ae 1
company to offer, + # 4 71
the consumer ---+~ Direction of increasing
profits for the insurance
company
Figure 18.3. The optimal contract to offer a high-risk consumer.
666 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanist design
| curve through the endowment point. Since the low-risk consumer has|
indifference curves that are more steeply sloped, this will be at a point that!
is higher up the line 3, = gx than is the point for high-risk consumers.
1 (Put differently, this is because the low-risk consumer is less willing to buy}
expensive insurance.)
Either from the picture or algebraically, it is straightforward to prove
the following further result:
Lemma. Suppose the firm offers a contract (yu, y,) that is accepted by some type
of consumer. If we change that contract in a way that keeps the utility of this type
of consumer constant and we move in the direction of full insurance, 1h = Ya, then
the expected profits of the insurance firm (from this type of consumer accepting
the contract) increase.
In other words, in figure 18.3, not only is the highest level of expected
profits for the firm along the high-risk consumer's indifference curve to
be found along the line 3; = 32, but expected profits are increasing on each
side as the contract is moved along this indifference curve towards this
line.
Allthis, it should be noted, has been done with the implicit assumption
that the firm can make a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the consumer. The firm
offers to trade some pair (y1 v2) for the consumers initial endowment or,
equivalently, the firm says that it will charge a premium Y; y; in exchange
for a guarantee that the consumer will have 3: to consume when times are
tough. It is possible, though, that the insurance company cannot make offers
of this sort; perhaps it must name a premium P and a low-endowment state
payout B, and the consumer can choose how much of this insurance to buy.
We leave it to you to discover how this would change the story we are telling.
We will continue under the hypothesis that the firm is able to make take-it-
or-leave-it offers.
We come back to the question with which we began. The insurance
company can't tell whether the consumer is high risk or low. What should
it do in this case? It clearly won't do to offer the optimal contracts for the
two types of consumer and expect the consumer to select the one that is
right for her. If the rm does this, the consumer, whether high risk or
low, is going to choose the contract optimally designed for the low-risk
consumer, since this gives a higher level of income i both states. The
insurance firm could offer the optimal contract for the high-risk consumer
alone, but then the low-risk consumer will refuse to buy.
Or consider the scheme depicted in figure 18.4. We have in mind
that the firm offers the two contracts shown as the heavy dot and square
-
[OR
18.1. Optimal contracts designed for a single party 667
Ya
SY ER
J
J .
4. Low-risk consumer
indifference curve
oo Contract for
low-risk consumer
High-risk consumer v
indifference curve ---~
Contract for
high-risk consumer ==" %
Yr bree 3
_.. Initial endowment
~ : Y; y 1
Figure 18.4. A possible pair of contracts.
and allows the consumer to pick one. The contract depicted by a dot rep-
resents complete insurance; the square represents only partial msurance
We have also drawn in the indifference curves of the high-risk consumer
through the dot and low-risk consumer through the square. From this
you can see that given a choice between the dot, the square, or no con-
tract at all (the open circle) the high-risk consumer will choose the dot
and the low-risk consumer will choose the square. In this arrangement,
the firm provides complete insurance to the high-risk consumer, although
on somewhat better terms for the consumer than if the firm Knew it was
dealing with the high-risk consumer. It provides partial insurance for the
ow risk consumer as well. Perhaps some scheme of this sort is optimal
We can solve the firm's problem analytically as follows. We imag-
ine that the firm offers two contracts, (yi, 45) and (y},%5). The contract
(y, 2) is intended for the high-risk consumer and the contract (y7,%}) for
the low-. If we assume that the consumer chooses the contract intended
for her, the firm's expected profits are
pl(1 = m)(7 oD) + mY yD] + (1 pI md; 91) + (Ya 33).
This is what the firm seeks to maximize. But we have to make sure that
the consumer picks the contract that is intended for her. There are four
constraints to add: The high-risk consumer must prefer (y},33") to her en-
dowment (;,Y;). The high-risk consumer must prefer (5) to (4,32)
The low-risk consumer must prefer (y-,7}) to her endowment V7).
668 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
And the low-risk consumer must prefer (y1, 35) to (yi), 35). In order, these
four constraints are:
a1- TU (gE) + maU (Eh) > (1 m)UY) + wgU(Y2); (PH)
(1 m)U ED) + mU ED) > (1 md Uh) + maU (yh); (IH)
A m)U@D +m UGE) > A m)UR) +m U Ya); (PL)
(1 m)U@EH) +m UE) > 0 m)U ED) + m UGE). (IL)
The names given to the four constraints are mmemonics for: The Partic-
ipation constraint for the High-risk type; the Incentive constraint for the
High-risk type; and similar names for the Low-risk types.
So we have the problem: Choose the four variables yf, yf, 4&, and
y; to maximize the objective function shown, subject to these four con-
straints. 
You may be a bit queasy about this formulation on three grounds.
The first two are: We seem to be assuming that the firm offers different
contracts for the two types of consumer. Why cant the firm choose to pool
the two types by offering a single contract? And we seem to be assuming
that the firm serves both types. Is it possible that the firm will wish to
offer a contract that only one type and not the other will accept, leaving
the other type uninsured? The formulation given allows for each of these
two possibilities. We have not precluded finding a solution where yi = yi
and yi! = yy. If this turns out to be the solution, the two types are pooled.
And we haven't precluded finding a solution where (yf, 45) = (13,3) or
where (37,75) = (1,Y2). In the first of these cases, the firm is offering
the high-risk consumer her original endowment, which is equivalent to
leaving this type to fend for herself. If we find a solution where the
second case prevails, it is the low-risk consumer who is not being given
any insurance at all.?
The third reason for unease is more substantial. We have blithely
assumed that the optimal mechanism for the insurance firm to use is to
offer the consumer a menu of two contracts, one intended for the consumer
if she is low risk, and one intended for her if she is high risk. Perhaps some
more complex scheme for marketing insurance will make more profits for
the firm.
If the consumer anticipates all the things the firm will do in marketing
insurance, and if she responds to these things rationally, then our menu of
two contracts is without loss of generality. The argument runs as follows:
2 See the remarks in the next subsection on mixed moral hazard and adverse selection
problems for another way to do this.
18.1. Optimal contracts designed for a single party 669
Whatever scheme the insurance company plans to adopt, it will end with
the consumer taking some contract or another. A contract will be taken by
the low-risk consumer, and a contract will be taken by the high. These
contracts could be the same, they could be different, and either or both
could be the endowment point. Now for the crux of the argument. If
the consumer anticipates all this, she must prefer the low-risk contract to
the high-risk contract if she is low risk and she must prefer the high-risk
contract to the low-risk contract if she is high risk. The reason is that if
she is, say, high risk, and she prefers.the low-risk contract to the high-risk
contract, she could obtain the low-risk contract simply by mimicking the
actions that she would take if she were low risk. The insurance company
cant tell the difference. Moreover, the contract that she winds up with
must be as good as the endowment point for her, as long as she retains
the right to say no. So any marketing scheme, however complex, comes
down to the final contracts that the consumer might have, and the firm
can do no better than to offer the menu of these contracts at the outset
and let the consumer choose.
We stress the proviso that the consumer must rationally anticipate the
marketing scheme the firm will employ. The firm might do better than to
offer a menu if the consumer does not anticipate all the things the firm
will do along the way through some scheme. The consumer might not
anticipate that certain options will be made available to her if she makes
certain choices early on; we will return to this in a couple of subsections
when we discuss the credibility problem facing the insurance firm at the
optimal contract. The consumer might be misled into thinking that certain
options will be offered to her that will not appear, and so on. Without
meaning to cast aspersions at the honorable profession of marketing, it
sometimes seems that marketing schemes are devised to confound the
consumer. A confoundable consumer might be confounded by a complex market-
ing mechanism and not by a simple choice from a menu. Insofar as this is so,
the maximization problem above may not find the optimal scheme for the
insurance company. But we assume as part of the basis for this form (and
most other forms) of economic analysis that consumers are not confound-
able. The consumer can work through the choices she will be offered, and
she responds optimally. Given this, the two-choice menu scheme (one for
 We should be careful here. Perhaps the marketing mechanism employed by the insur-
ance company will result in a random assignment of contracts to the consumer; the consumer,
if she is high risk, gets contract A with some probability, contract B with some other, and
s0 on. We will ignore mechanisms with random outcomes here, for the reason that they are
never optimal in this setting, but a more careful analysis would allow for them and then
derive the fact that they are never optimal.
670 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
each of the two types of consumer) will give the optimal scheme for the
insurance firm.
Having settled the relevance of the constrained optimization problem
given, we could dive into the problem algebraically, looking at first-order
equations and complementary slackness conditions. Instead, we will argue
graphically.
But before moving to graphical analysis, a remark is in order about trying
algebra. The problem is a bit easier to analyze if we first make a change of
variables. Let the decision variables be u} = Ul) and % = Uy), for
k = 1,2. Then the objective function becomes
pl mY; Vi) + mts Vd)
+(1 pI = mW Vi) + ms Vl,
where V is the inverse of U. Note that if U is concave, V is convex, s0
V is concave, and we will be seeking to maximize a concave function of
our variables. And the four constraints become linear; for example, (IH)
becomes
(1- Tul + Ta > Pn + TEU.
Note that since, with this change of variables, the objective function (to be
maximized) is concave and the constraints are linear, we know that solu-
tion of the first-order and complementary slackness conditions (together with
feasibility) are necessary and sufficient for a solution. The main advan-
tage of this change of variables, though, is that the algebra is usually sim-
pler. In particular, if you are diligent, you may wish to replicate the graph-
ical analysis to follow algebraically, using the first-order and complemen-
tary slackness conditions. Having linear constraints will be a blessing in this
activity. .
Proposition 1. At the solution of this problem, the constraints (PL) and (IH)
will be binding, and the high-risk contract will be a full-insurance contract; ie.,
y=.
The proof of this result will be given in a number of steps. Throughout,
we imagine that {(%,15), (41, 92)} is a solution of the problem. Whenever
we draw pictures, we use an open circle for the endowment point, a filled
in circle for (Fv), and a filled in square for (rE, 18).
Step 1. Consider figure 18.5(a). We have drawn there the low-risk contract
(4t, 9%), and through this point we have drawn in indifference curves for
the high- and low-risk types of consumer. The high-risk contract (y', 35")
lies within the shaded wedge.
+
18.1. Optimal contracts designed for a single party 671
_.-- Indifference curve 102
of a high-risk consumer
2;
~~ Indifference curve
of a low-risk consumer
.- Low-risk contract
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 18.5, part 1. Graphical analysis of profit-maximizing insurance.
In (a), we show the wedge relative to (yf, yr) within which Wt, oth
must lie. In (b) we show the region in which (;,Y;) must lie relative
to (uF, 45) and WF, yf). In () moving (45) to the point (13,72)
improves expected profits while maintaining feasibility; in (d) the same
is true for (yt, vb).
3
This follows immediately from the constraints (IH) and (IL). To sat-
isfy (IED), (y,73) must lie on or above the high-risk indifference curve
through (yt, 35). To satisfy (IL), G7, yE) must lie on or below the low-risk
indifference curve through (yt, 75). The intersection of these two regions
defines the wedge.
Step 2. The constraint (PL) binds. In particular, (1, Ys) must lie along the
low-risk indifference curve through (yt, v5) to the right of (Jf, uk).
To see this, consider figure 18.5(b). We have drawn there aku),
(, 440), and indifference curves for both types through (Fk, 95) and for
the high-risk type through (y, 35). We note first that (1, Y;) must lie in
the shaded region of 18.5(b) in order to satisfy (PH) and (PL). Also, it is
672 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
(e) oN
&
-
Figure 18.5, part 2. Graphical analysis of profit-maximizing insurance.
Thus (1,72) must lie as shown in (e). But in (e) there is the problem that
(IH) doesnt bind, and movement of (y, 4) in the direction indicated
improves profits. In (f) is a situation where (y-, 95) involves overinsur-
ance, in which case movement in the direction indicated improves prof-
its. And in (g), the portion of the high-risk indifference curve through
wh, yi) lying to the left of (37,45) is feasible, and full insurance is the
point that maximizes expected profits.
impossible that both (PL) and (PH) are slack, for if this were the case, we
could lower the payments made in the two contracts somewhat without
affecting feasibility (taking care so that (IH) and (IL) continue to hold),
which would certainly increase the firm's expected profits. Hence (}, 3)
must lie along the boundary between the shaded and unshaded regions
in figure 18.5(b).
Suppose (V3, Yz) lies to the left of (yf, 1"), necessarily along the high-
tisk indifference curve through (2,45), as in figure 18.5(c). Then all the
 re ee +
mr
eet cm
rer
18.1. Optimal contracts designed for a single party 673
constraints continue to be satisfied if we move (y, y) to the point (1,Y3),
and profits increase because Y; > Y;.
Suppose (Y;,Y;) lies at or to the right of WH, 4]) and to the left of
@1, 95). One case is shown in figure 18.5(d). We claim that if we move
(1, 33) to the point (;,Y;), expected profits increase and all the constraints
continue to be satisfied. To see that expected profits increase, note that
this shift involves movement along the low-risk indifference curve in the
direction of full insurance (since ; > Y;) and (in the case depicted) a
lowering of both payments. You can see by inspection that the constraints
all continue to hold.
Hence (3,Y,) must lie along the low-risk indifference curve through
(ur, 9%) to the right of (y&, yk).
Step 3. The constraint (IH) must bind. By steps 1 and 2, the picture must be
as in figure 18.5(e). But if (IH) doesnt bind, as is depicted in figure 18.5(e),
then movement of (yf, 4%") in any direction down and to the left, staying
within the wedge, doesn't compromise feasibility and improves expected
profits. The key is the positioning of (;,Y;), which implies that as long
as (y', 33) stays within the wedge, (PH) is maintained.
Step 4. The contract (y},y%) does not involve overinsurance; that is, yr =k.
To see this, consider figure 18.5(f), where a situation of overinsurance is
depicted. If (37,33) is moved along the low-risk indifference curve in the
direction of the arrow, towards full insurance, feasibility is maintained (the
constraints on y are actually loosened), and expected profits increase by
the lemma.
Step 5. The contract (yi', 3") involves full insurance. By steps 1 through 4, the
picture must be as in figure 18.5(g), where (yF, 32) lies along the high-risk
indifference curve to the left of (y*, 3%) and the full-insurance line lies on
or to the left of (y};,3}). All points along the high-risk indifference curve
to the left of (yf, y}) maintain feasibility and, by the lemma, we know that
full insurance maximizes expected profits along this curve.
From the proposition, we see that the problem is essentially one di-
mensional. Consider figure 18.6. The high-risk contract @E, 45) must
involve full insurance and must lie between the high-risk and low-risk
indifference curves through the endowment. Once the location of Wh
is selected, we know that (IH) and (PL) must be binding, so the location
of (yr,y%) is forced to be at the intersection of the high-risk indifference
curve through (y, yi!) and the low-risk indifference curve through (V3, Y3).
When we put (4, 9}") at the first-best location for a high-risk consumer,
we are forced to put (yt, ul) = (13, Ya). Essentially, this involves first-
674 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
Y2
LYE
J
~ _.-- Low-risk consumer
indifference curve
_.-- Contract for
~ low-risk consumer
High-risk consumer }--
indifference curves *+4---"
Contract for -
high-risk consumer 
Vp poompfommemmemmenne ee Initial endowment
~ Y; Yh
fo i+ Figure 18.6. The picture for profit-maximizing insurance.
best insurance for a high-risk consumer and no insurance for a low-risk
consumer. When we put (34,44) at the first-best location for a low-risk
consumer, (y, 7%) = (i, 5) is forced. This corresponds to full insurance
for both types, at terms that are best (from the perspective of the firm)
for low-risk types. Otherwise, we get full insurance for high-risk types
and partial insurance for low-risk types. Note that the only possibility of
pooling is at (yy, 2h) = (yi, yi) and both equal to the first-best contract for
low-risk types. .
Now think of varying p parametrically, beginning with p=1 (the con-
sumer is sure to be the high-risk type) and decreasing p to zero. When
p=1, it is clear that the optimum is to provide first-best insurance for the
high-risk consumer. When p=0, itis clear that the optimum is to provide
first-best insurance for the low-risk consumer. It can be shown that as p
decreases, the contract (33,55) moves up the full-insurance line. So all
that remains to be answered is the question, For p (0,1) (that is, there is
strictly positive probability that the consumer is either type), can we get
one of the corner solutions, or do we necessarily get one of the interior
solutions? This question is of particular interest for the case p near 0. As
we noted above, in this context we will have a pooling contract only at
terms that involve complete insurance at the first-best contract for the low-
risk types. If we knew that, forany p > 0, this is not the profit-maximizing
contract (ie, it is optimal only for p = 0), we would know that pooling
does not occur. With this as a teaser, the analysis is left to you.
Variations, extensions, and complications
Besides being of independent interest, the analysis just completed
illustrates how to formulate the problem of designing an optimal contract
--
[E
ee +r irl om
et mers eel eee AA
18.1. Optimal contracts designed for a single party 675
for a single party in a situation where the party has private information.
The party is presented with a menu of options, one option for every pos-
sible piece of private information that the party might possess, where the
items on the menu are constrained so that for each piece of private in-
formation the party self-selects the item on the menu that is intended for
her Tn the literature, you will find reference to various types of party,
as in the low-risk type or the high-risk type; each piece of private
information that the party might possess corresponds to a different type.
In the analysis above, the criterion maximized was profit of the in-
surance company. But one needn't restrict to profits. If we think of the
insurance company as being regulated, then the regulatory body might
wish to maximize some sort of weighted sum of the consumers expected
utilities. Or, taking shareholders into account, we might consider maxi-
mizing some criterion that puts positive weight on the firm's profits. (If
the firm is regulated so that it must achieve some minimal return on its
capital, we could include that as a constraint.)
Another variation concerns problems that combine moral hazard with
adverse selection. Suppose the party for whom the contract is to be de-
signed must take an action that affects the welfare of the party designing
the contract. Suppose this action is taken under circumstances of moral
hazard; i.e., the contract cannot (enforceably) specify what action the party
will take. For example, in life insurance, the insuree might take better or
worse care of herself, affecting the odds of early demise, and the insurance
company cannot enforceably include in an insurance policy rules about
the insurees diet or exercise regime. The insurance company would then
wish to design a menu contract that not only caused the insuree to iden-
tify herself on the basis of her health, but that also provided her with an
incentive to take care of herself. A combination of techniques from this
chapter and chapter 16 can be employed. Suppose there are T' types of
consumer, indexed by = 1,...,T, and each type of consumer can take
any action ao from some finite set A. Imagine some selection of one ac-
tion for each type, a function a: {1,...,T} A. We can ask, Can the
firm design a menu of contracts, i,...,cr, such that a consumer of type
+ will select contract ; and then choose action al)? If so, what is the
optimal (say, profit-maximizing) menu of contracts that implements in
this sense? This is a more complex problem only in that there are more
constraints. For each type t, we have one constraint less than there are
pairs (a) {1,...,T} x A. If the individual is of type t, she must pre-
fer to choose the contract option ; and take action off) to choosing any
other cy and taking action a, for any t' #t or a # at). Problem 11 of
the previous chapter is attacked in this manner.
In essence, we did something along these lines in the example of this
section. The actions available to the insuree were to choose a contract or
to refuse all the contracts offered, and the (PH) and (PL) constraints were
there to ensure that the agent took the desired action, namely signing a
contract. (The option of choosing a contract but then not signing leaves
the consumer at her endowment point.) We noted that we could mimic
the option of not signing by including a contract that specified that the
consumer would remain at her endowment; alternatively, we could use
a structure of the sort just described, where we would find in tum the
optimal expected profits given that both types sign, that the high-risk
signs but not the low, that the low-risk signs but not the high, and that
neither sign.
As we noted in the specific case of insurance contracts, our formula-
tion assumes that the party designing the contract can make a take-it-or-
leave-it offer t6 the second party. Because of the possibility of resale or
purchase from multiple vendors, the seller of a particular good or service
may be unable to make this sort of offer.
For example, imagine that insurance companies are very effectively
cartelized (thus motivating our attention to profit-maximizing contracts).
Imagine that,the equilibrium has the low-risk consumer obtaining only
partial insurance. We might then imagine that the high-risk consumer
purchases partial insurance from & number of different firms, getting terms
better than those she can get by buying complete insurance from one firm.
(This is a good exercise for graphical analysis. Consider figure 18.6. If
insurance policies are written to specify a premium and a payment in
the low-endowment state, and the high-risk consumer buys two insurance
policies of the sort intended for the low-risk consumer, what will be her
levels of consumption? How does she feel about this combination vis a vis
the full insurance contract that is intended for her? How do the insurance
companies feel about this?) If the consumer can do this, it will wreak
havoc with the insurance firms supposedly profit-maximizing contracts.
So insurance companies might put into their policies clauses about not
being able to insure the same risk with two different carriers.
In general, these sorts of considerations can restrict the menus that a
firm can offer. Analysis along the lines we have indicated is possible, but
it is often harder.
A final generalization, and one that is immensely complicated, in-
volves contract design by an informed party. Imagine a situation in which
31f you know about the insurance business and, in particular, moral hazard problems
associated with full or even overinsurance, you will see another reason for insurance com-
panies to write such clauses into their policies.
etm sr, A rere it em ee oe
-
Pm eb serosa
18.1. Optimal contracts designed for a single party 677
a government agency wishes to procure some items from a manufacturer.
The government agency may not know the cost structure facing the firm
as well as the firm does, and so it may design a menu of contracts from
which the firm is to choose. If the firm is a higher cost firm, it chooses a
contract with a greater amount of cost sharing, say, while a lower cost firm
might choose a contract with less cost sharing but a higher unit price. It is
easy to imagine, in this case, that the government possesses information
not held by the firm, say about the engineering costs that the particu-
lar item entails. Depending on what the government knows, the menu of
contracts that would be optimal for the government to offer might change.
But then the firm, seeing what menu it is offered, might learn something
about what the government knows. In designing the menu of options to
offer the firm, the government must decide how inscrutable it should
be. This involves thinking through what inferences the firm will make
as a function of the menu of options the firm is offered, and: how those
inferences will affect what options the firm chooses given its own private
information.
This variation on the basic puzzle falls under the rubric of mechanism
design by an informed principal. Itis a good deal more complicated than
what we have described above, and we leave it to you to read about in
the literature.
The problem of credibility
One complication of (or caveat to) the basic story given above should
be noted especially well. Suppose that in our example the insurance com-
pany offers two contracts, one with complete insurance intended for the
consumer if she is high risk and one with partial insurance intended for
her if she is low risk. Suppose she takes the low-risk insurance contract.
Since this is a partial insurance contract, there remain gains from trade
between the insurance company and the insuree. Why doesnt the insur-
ance company turn around and offer a full-insurance contract that makes
higher expected profits for it and leaves the consumer no worse off?
The answer is immediate. If the insuree anticipates that this is what
the insurance company will do, the insuree, whether high-risk or low-, will
choose the contract designed for the low-risk consumer, in anticipation of
a further offer of a complete insurance contract (necessarily at better terms
than the high-risk consumer is initially offered). The insurance company
would do a good deal worse than with the original separating contracts.
While immediate, this answer is also a bit too glib on two grounds.
First, it assumes that the consumer anticipates the further offering of full
insurance if she elects the partial insurance intended for a low-risk
678 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
consumer. If the consumer doesn't anticipate that this offer will be made
(or, as much to the point, if the firm believes that the consumer won't
anticipate this), then the company will expect to have higher profits if it
offers insurance in this two-stage manner. You should recall at this point
the previous discussion about why it is that our formulation of the firm's
problem, where the firm offers a single menu of contracts, may not give
us the profit-maximizing marketing scheme for the firm to use. In par-
ticular, for a consumer who might not see all the options coming to her
in a multistage scheme, our formulation would not necessarily find the
profit-maximizing marketing scheme.
In addition, (and the main point of this subsection), even if the con-
sumer does foresee all the options that will be made available (as a function
of her earlier choices), we have to wonder whether the firm can constrain
itself from offering full insurance fo a customer who chooses partial in-
surance from one of our supposedly optimal menu contracts. Ex post, if
partial insurance is selected, the firm knows that the consumer is low risk.
Tt knows that it can make more profits by making a further offer. But it
is supposed to have the ability to refrain from acting on this information.
If it cannot commit not to act on this information, and if the consumer
anticipates this, then the consumer anticipates a further offer if she takes
the low-risk partial insurance contract. And the firm, anticipating ex ante
that it will act in this way (that Is, anticipating its inability to refrain later
from a further offer), will not wish to try to separate the consumer types.
(But see the small type following.)
We dont mean to suggest by this that the analysis given before is
wrong. We simply wish to stress that our analysis depends on the firm's
ability to make and stick with a particular set of offers. One reason why
the firm may have this ability is that it may be involved in this sort of
situation repeatedly, so it has a reputation to protect.
Alternatively, we may wish to consider what happens in optimal contract
design where the party designing the contract cannot forebear from renegoti-
ating the contract ex post, after the party with private information has taken
some action or made some selection. The analysis of this is tricky, because
if precise assumptions are made about opportunities to renegotiate contracts,
then one can be led to the conclusion that the insurance firm will offer the
optimal separating menu at the last possible instant, just before the time at
which the consumers endowment is realized and after all opportunities for
renegotiation have passed. This can be complicated in one of two ways: First,
4 Or, in the spixit of our discussion in chapter 9, it may offer to consumers most favored
policyholder contracts, where any offer made to any policyholder must be made available
to all others. (This is relegated to a footnote because it gets a bit ahead of the story, to the next
subsection where we discuss an insurance firm insuring many consumers simultaneously.)
>
JERE
eee tomes eraser rs airs We rl
rma
18.1. Optimal contracts designed for a single party 679
there may be no last instant at all. This, for example, could come about
if the time at which the risk is realized (or not) is random; a loss may be
incurred at any moment, but if it doesnt happen now, it may happen later.
(If it makes sense to you, consider a formulation where the time at which the
consumer sustains a loss is random, with positive probability that the time
never comes {the loss is never sustained], and conditional on a loss occurring,
the time is exponentially distributed.) Second, we could consider a situation
in which the loss situation is repeated. The consumer is either high or low
risk in each of several periods (i.e., her type doesnt change), but conditional
on her type, she stands to suffer a loss in income in each period indepen-
denfly of losses in other periods. For analysis (in a different context) along
the second line, see Laffont and Tirole (1988).
Contracts designed for noninteracting parties:
Optimal nonlinear prices
In the example, we were careful to speak of the (single) consumer,
stressing the idea that this story was about the design of a contract for a
single consumer whose type was unknown to the insurance company. Of
course, insurance companies deal not with a single individual but with
many individuals of varying types. So we can suppose the insurance
company is extending insurance to many consumers, each of whom is
subject to endowment risk of the sort we indicated. What sort of contracts
should the firm offer in this case to maximize its expected profits?
To answer this question we need to ask two more. Can the firm tell
which of the consumers is high risk and which is low? And, if it can, is
it able to act on that information in the sense that it can offer a different
contract or menu of contracts to each individual according to the individ-
ual's type? If the answers to both questions are yes, then the solution
is just as in chapter 9: Offer a first-best (profit-maximizing) contract for
each individual to each individual on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. But if the
answer to either question is no, either because (say, on legal grounds) the
insurance company is barred from discriminating in its offers or because
it cant tell the characteristics of the individual, then the sort of analysis
performed above becomes appropriate.
An important caveat should be made here. In the case of insurance,
it seems reasonable to imagine that the choice of a contract from a menu
by one insuree is unaffected by choices made by other insurees. This is
5 Actually, this is not so reasonable if there is risk that the insurance company will de-
fault on its obligations. Buying earthquake insurance from a firm that has a large amount of
money at risk in the event of an earthquake may be somewhat less desirable than buying the
same insurance from a company that does not have a large stake in this particular segment
of the business. )
680 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
crucial to our mode of analysis. As we analyze what choice one consumer
will make from a given menu, we dont want to be forced to consider
the choices others are making. This isn't to say that the objective function
must be constructed separately for each individual consumer; perhaps it
can be (if, for example, the firm wishes to maximize the sum of its expected
profits), and then the analysis will be identical to that of the first subsection
of this section. But even if the firm's objective function has as argument
the entire array of consumer choices (which it would, for example, if the
firm had a nonlinear cost structure for the provision of insurance), as long
as the self-selection constraints can be constructed individually, the basic
techniques used in this section can be applied.
We can imagine other applications, in contrast, where the choices and
actions made by one contractee affect how others in a similar position will
fare. We move to such applications in the next section.
But before doing so, we note that the style of analysis in this section
is precisely what we want for standard problems of optimal nonlinear
pricing. Recall the example of chapter 9: A manufacturing monopolist is
selling wholesale to retail monopolists. Different retail monopolists face
different demand curves, and so, ideally, the manufacturer would like to
make different take-it-or-leave-it offers to the retailers. But if the monop-
olist is constrained by law from doing this, or if the monopolist is unable
to do this because she is unable to tell which demand curve faces a par-
ticular retailer, then the methods employed here would be used. For each
type of retailer, where type corresponds to the demand curve the re-
tailer faces, the monopolist designs a specific contract. These contracts are
constrained so that each type of retailer prefers the contract designed for
him to the contracts intended for other types. Subject to those constraints,
the manufacturer designs a profit-maximizing menu and lets the retailers
self-identify. In case you didnt do problem 4 of chapter 9 before, you get
another chance here; it is repeated as problem 1.
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties
Things get more interesting when we try to design optimal contracts
for parties whose actions and choices interact. The examples that appear
in the literature tend to involve a lot of mathematics. The mathematics
isnt (usually) especially deep or complex, but it can get in the way of
understanding the basic issues. So we will only go through the analysis
of a toy problem that illustrates many of the important conceptual issues,
leaving you to read elsewhere about more realistic applications.
rnp re =
nr + en
ee
[EUS 
rr lee sees kes + iron
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 681
A toy problem
Imagine that some party must procure one hundred units of a partic-
ular item. We will call this party the government, and you may think of
a government that is seeking to procure one hundred jet fighter planes (al-
though we will work with a formulation that assumes these hundred units
are perfectly divisible). Two firms could supply these units. We index the
firms by i = 1,2. Each firm has a simple linear cost structure constant
marginal cost ; and no fixed costs. But, and this is the complicating fea-
ture, the value of ; for each 4 can be either 1 or 2, each equally likely. The
values of ; and , are statistically independent. While each firm i knows
its own cost, neither the government nor the other firm knows the costs of
the firm 4. Instead, both the government and the other firm believe that
c; is either 1 or 2 with probability 1/2 apiece.
We assume throughout that the government is able to propose con-
tracts to the two firms to which they must respond on a take-it-or-leave-it
basis. And we assume that they will respond favorably whenever it is
(weakly) in their interest to do so.
cy (Th the government (knew the costs of the two firms, its procurement
- 2
|
problem would be easily solved. It would propose to buy from either firm
if they have the same unit costs (or split its order between them) and to
buy from the lower-cost firm if one firm has unit cost 1 and the other has
cost 2. Since the government makes take-it-or-leave-it offers, it need never,
pay more than the unit costs of the firm, which means that it pays 100 |
(with probability three-quarters and 200 with probability one-quarter, for |
an expected cost of 125.
But since the government doestt(know the(unit (costs of the firm, |
it cant do this. Suppose it tries the following (scheme: The firms are
Cs (asked (voluntarily to(reveal their (costs, If both firms name the same cost,
the government will split the order between the two, paying the named
cost. If one firm names lower costs, the government will buy from the
firm naming the lower cost, at that cost. In response to this, if firms are
restricted to naming either 1 or 2 as their cost, they will name 2 regardless
of what their cost is. When a firm's cost is 2, there is no point to naming
a cost of 1; this will result in a loss of either 50 (if the other firm names a
cost of 1)-or 100 (if the other firm names 2). And when the firm's cost is 1,
it makes zero profits if it says its costs are 1 while, if it names 2 and the
other firm names 2 (which the other firm is bound to do with probability
at least 1/2), then the first firm makes 50. So both firms will name 2 for
sure, and the government's costs will be 200.
Clearly, the government needs to provide firms with an(incentive (for| +
 {revealing that their (cost is 1 when it is(1. Consider the | scheme: If both|
he
682 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
firms name 2, the order is(split and the government pays 2 per unit. If
(both name 1, the order is(split and the government pays(z > 1 per unit. <
If one names 1 and the other names 2, the order goes to the firm that
be inorder to get the firms to(reveal(truthfully their costs? Assume that '
firm 1 believes that firm 2 will truthfully reveal its costs. (Assume z,y <2
so this is valid.) Then if firm 1's costs ate 1, it can name 2 and have profits
of 50 with probability 1/2. Or it can name 1 and have profits of 50(z -D
with probability 1/2 Gf the other firm's costs are 1) and 100(y 1) with
probability 1/2 (if the other firm's costs are 2). Assuming the firms try to
maximize their expected profits, firm 1 truthfully reveals a cost of 1 if
250 1+ 2100 1)> 25.
Or, rather, it is a Nash equilibrium between the two firms to truthfully
reveal their costs in this case. Let us proceed under the assumption that
firms truthfully reveal their costs. Then the government's expected costs
are
1 1 1
10005 = + 5Y + 72k
That is, with probability 1/4, the government pays & per unit, with prob-
ability 1/2, it pays y per unit, and with probability 1/4, it pays 2 per unit.
The truth-inducing constraint can be written 25z+50y 2 100, and the gov-
ernments objective function is to minimize 25z + 50y +50, so it is evident
that any selection of z and y that satisfies the constraint with equality
gives minimum expected cost to the government, and that expected cost
is 150.
Suppose the government chooses z =2 and y = 1. Is truth-telling the
only Nash equilibrium? Suppose firm 2 reports costs of 2 regardless of
what its costs are. If firm 1 reports costs of 2 when its costs are in fact 1,
then it is sure to make 50. (It gets half the order for sure, and it is paid 2
per unit when its costs are 1.) If it reports costs of 1 when its costs are 1,
it gets the entire order but makes nothing. (It has reported 1, its rival has
reported 2, and so it is paid precisely its costs.) Of course, when its costs
are 2 it will name 2 as its costs. Hence if firm 2 always reports costs of 2,
then it is a best response for firm 1 always to report costs of 2. Itis a
Nash equilibrium for both firms always to report costs of 2, and at this
Nash equilibrium, each firm has expected profits of 25. By comparison,
at the Nash equilibrium where both firms always tell the truth, each has
named 1, and the government pays (y > 1 per unit. What must{z and(y| <
rr ee
ad
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 683
expected profits of 12.5. If we believe that firms will find their way to
Nash equilibria that are better for both of them, thenz=2and y=1
doesnt seem so good. At least, the goverment is risking the possibility
that the firms find a Nash equilibrium that is better for both of them and
worse for the government.
To avoid this, we clearly want to make y as large as possible. So con-
sider setting = 0 and y = 2. (It is assumed that z and y are constrained
to be nonnegative. Note that z = 0 is bad enough; the firms are told by
the government that if each reports low costs, each gets to provide half
the order for free.) If =0 and y = 2, and if firm 2 always reports costs of
2, then firm 1, when its costs are 1, nets 50 for sure by reporting costs of
2, and 100 for sure by reporting costs of 1. Hence we would not have the
problem of an equilibrium where both firms report 2 regardless of their
costs. But now something worse comes along. Suppose one firm adopts
the strategy of always reporting that its costs are 1. The other firm, in re-
sponse, can never do better than to report costs of 2; if it reports costs of 1,
it will have to produce half the output and it will be paid nothing. And if
the second firm always reports costs of 2, then among the first firm's best
responses is always to report costs of 1; this gives it 2 per unit regardless
of its costs. We have a second Nash equilibrium with an expected cost to
the government of 200.
So y is too high. Try y = 1.9 and z = .2. Now we're in business.
If a firm's costs are 2, it will not report 1, no matter what it thinks the
other firm is doing. If it reports 1, it will be saddled with some of the
output, and it won't recover its costs. While if a firm's costs are 1, it
must assume that its rival will report 2 when its costs are 2. If it thinks
its rival will truthfully report 1 when its costs are 1, then it is indifferent
between reporting 1 or 2. If it thinks its rival will report 2 when its costs
are 1, then it strictly prefers to report costs of 1; reporting 2 nets 50, while
reporting 1 nets 90. If we sweeten the pot just a bit, making y =1.91 and
 = 21, then the unique Nash (equilibrium between the two firms, given i+
| the( mechanism the government has (imposed, is to_reveal costs truthfully. |
| And the government's expected cost of procurement is 150.50. (The extra
50 is the result of sweetening the pot.)
It is possible, though, to continue to quibble about this scheme. Sup-
pose that firm 1 gets it into its head that firm 2 will always report a cost
of 1, even though this is not Nash behavior. If firm 1's costs are 1, then
reporting the truth means that firm 1 will sustain a loss (it gets half the
order and is paid less than its costs). So firm 1, if it is convinced that firm
2 will always report a cost of 1, prefers to name costs of 2 (or to refuse to
participate altogether).
684 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
Consider the following scheme. The government announces that if
both firms claim that their costs are 2, the order will be split between
them, and each will be paid 2 per unit. If both claim that their costs are 1,
the order will be split between them and each will be paid 1.01. And if
one claims that its costs are 1 and the other claims its costs are 2, then the
one claiming costs of 1 will get the entire order and will be paid 1.51 per
unit, And each firm will be given .01 for participating at all.
Suppose firm 1 has costs of 2. Then no matter what it thinks firm 2 will
do, it is better to name 2 than to name 1, and the .01 participation bonus
means that it is better to name 2 than to refuse to participate. Suppose firm
1 has costs of 1. If firm 2 names costs of 1, it is better for firm 1 to name a
cost of 1 (and make .01 on each of fifty units) than to name a cost of 2 and
make nothing. If firm 2 names costs of 2, it is better for firm 1 to name a
cost of 1 than a cost of 2; naming 2 will net 1.00 on each of fifty units, while
naming 1 will net .51 on each of one hundred units. That is, against this
scheme, truth-telling is a strictly dominant strategy for each of the firms.
Note that this costs the government (1/4)101 + (1/2)151 + (1/4)200 + .02 =
150.77. Moreover, by making the sweeteners (the extra .01s) vanishingly
small, the cost falls to 150.
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 685
If we look at different schemes, either of the same general qualitative
structure but with different sorts of quantity assignments and payments,
or of a completely different form, perhaps we can find one that will lower
the government's expected costs below 150. Over the next two subsections
we will see that this cant be done, subject to some qualifications. In this
section, we keep to the general qualitative form used previously, vary-
ing the parameterization. In the next section, we argue that any general
mechanism is equivalent in terms of outcomes to some mechanism of
the qualitative form of this section. The second step, which is called the
revelation principle, gives this chapter its name.
We begin with a definition of the general qualitative structure of
the mechanisms discussed in the previous subsection. A direct revelation
mechanism is any mechanism of the following sort. For each of the four
pairs mn such that m = 1,2 and n = 1,2, there is given a four-tuple
Ginn Zinn tmns tan) RE such that ci, + 2%,,, > 100. (By Rt, we mean
the nonnegative orthant in R*.) The two firms, who already know their
true costs, are given the opportunity to participate. If they elect to do so,
they simultaneously and independently announce whether their costs are
lor 2. (This is what gives a direct revelation mechanism its name.) Letting
Let us summarize where we are. We found a(scheme in which( fray 4a
- x telling is a(Nash equilibrium, costing the government an expected 150:
_ (But (this scheme has (multiple Nash (equilibria for the two firms, (one of
which is better for both firms(than is truth-telling, Gp we (modified the) + -
m be the announcement of firm 1 and n the announcement of firm 2, the
' four-tuple (thins Zins tn: tan) Corresponding to their announcement mn
determines their responsibilities: Firm i must produce z#,,, units of the
item, for which it receives a payment of ,,,. Note that if c* is the true
_, scheme in a way that(makes|truth-telling the (unique Nash equilibrium. \- + marginal cost of firm i, then the firms net profits are t,,, c'zt,,-
 But (truth-telling isnt in this case, a(dominant strategy..Sp we (modified Mem
. ;) the scheme (again, go, that (truth-telling (becomes a (dominant strategy for\-- Note carefully that we have allowed firms the option of refusing to par-
each firm. And still, except for sweeteners that can be made arbitrarily
small, the expected cost to the government is 150.
Optimal direct revelation mechanisms
In the foregoing analysis, we made two special assumptions about
the mechanism the government employs to award the contract. First, we
made a qualitative assumption that the government would ask the firms to
name their costs, with the contract amounts and corresponding payments
depending on the pair of named costs. Second, we assumed that the
contract amounts and corresponding payments took a particular form.
The contract quantities are split if the firms name the same price, and
the entire contract is given to the firm naming the lower price. If both
name 2, each is paid 2 per unit. If one names 1 and the other 2, the one
naming 1 is paid y per unit. And if both name 1, both are paid x per
unit.
ticipate at the stage after they know their true costs but before they have
learned what the other firm announces. In effect, we are supposing that the
government can compel the firms to produce according to the rules of the
mechanism if they agree to participate at the point indicated. We can think of
at least two other possibilities: (a) The government cannot compel the firms
to carry out the dictates of the mechanism at any time; firms need only carry
through with the dictates of the mechanism if they continue not to expect a
loss; (b) the government can propose this mechanism to the two firms be-
fore they know their costs, and they are compelled to carry through with the
mechanism if they agree at that point.
In restricting the ' to be nonnegative, we are making a further assump-
tion, namely that the government cannot compel the firm to make a payment
to the government. You may feel that this is in the spirit of but a poor sub-
stitute for (a); if the idea is that the government cannot compel the firm to
take a loss ex post, then (a) and not our nonnegativity constraint would seem
appropriate. We continue our analysis under the assumptions that the firm
can be compelled to take a loss if it agrees to participate after it learns its own
cost but cannot be compelled to make a monetary payment to the govern-
686 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
ment, bearing in mind that perhaps the sign of the # should be unrestricted
or that (a) or (b) should be assumed. :
Now we ask the following question.
Suppose the government restricts attention to direct revelation mechanisms with
the property that agreeing to participate and then truthfully revealing costs consti-
tutes a Nash equilibrium for the two firms in the corresponding game of incomplete
information between them. What is the lowest expected payment that government
must make to the firms using such a mechanism?
You may wonder why we are asking (and answering) this question. If so,
suspend your wonder for the time being.
This question can be turned into a linear programming problem. A
linear programming problem is a constrained maximization problem with
linear objective function and linear constraints. Such problems are very
easily solved numerically, using a variety of methods, the most promi-
nent of which are variations on the simplex algorithm. If you dont know
about linear programming, you should learn; Luenberger (1984) gives an
accessible treatment. In any event, in all the optimization problems that
follow in this chapter, we will announce answers. This may seem a bit
like magic if you dont know about linear programming, but in fact we
are simply reporting solutions-obtained by the simplex algorithm. (Trying
to solve the problems given below by hand with Lagrange multipliers is
not recommended.)
To begin, we consider what is required if participation and truth-
telling are to be a Nash equilibrium for a given direct revelation mecha-
nism. For each of the two firms, we have four constraints. For firm 1 they
are: :
(P1-1) If firm 2 participates and tells the truth, and if firm Vs costs are
1, then firm 1 is willing to participate in the mechanism and tell the truth
instead of refusing to participate,
1 1
stn 1zh]+ 5h 1z,] > OC.
(P1-2) If firm 2 participates and tells the truth, and if firm 1's costs are 2,
then firm 1 is willing to participate in the mechanism and tell the truth
rather than refusing to participate,
1
lth oul l+ gld2ak] 2 0.
etm rms se emir +
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 687
(I1-1) If firm 2 participates and tells the truth, and if firm 1's costs are 1,
then firm 1 is willing to participate in the mechanism and tell the truth
instead of participating and falsely claiming that its costs are 2,
1 1 1 1
sta 1z},] + sl 1x] > 5a _ 14] + 5ltz 1x1.
(I1-2) If firm 2 participates and tells the truth, and if firm 1's costs are 2,
then firm 1 is willing to participate in the mechanism and tell the truth
instead of participating and falsely claiming that its costs are 1,
1
2 21+ lh 2a] > lth 2a] + lth 2ahl
If you go through each of these four constraints carefully, you will be able
to make sense of them. Take (I1-2), a mnemonic for the Incentive constraint
for firm 1 when its costs are 2. On the left-hand side we have the expected
profits of this firm if it participates, truthfully says that its costs are 2, and
the other firm participates and tells the truth. This is the appropriately
weighted average of its profits if the other firm's costs are 1 (and are so
revealed) and if the other firm's costs are 2. On the right-hand side we
have the expected profits of this firm when its costs are 2 if it participates
and falsely maintains that its costs are only 1. Note that on both sides, the
production quantity the firm is assigned is premultiplied by 2, since these
are the true costs of the firm in this case.
There are four similar constraints for firm 2. We also have nonnega-
tivity constraints (by assumption) on all the variables and four constraints
that say that the government obtains its 100 units, constraints such as
zh +x? > 100. :
The set of direct relevation mechanisms, specified by the sixteen variables
zi, and tf for 4,m,n = 1,2, that satisfy all these constraints is precisely
the set of direct relevation mechanisms for which participation and truth-
telling is a Nash equilibrium. So to answer the question that has been
posed, we wish to minimize
1 1 1 1
ni +t] + lta +p] + lt +15] + lt +15],
which is the expected amount the government pays out in a given mech-
anism, subject to all the constraints so far given.
688 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
We asked the computer to solve this linear programming problem
(minimize the objective function subject to all the constraints above), and
it gave back: z} = zl, =z} =z} = 100, t}, = t}, = t, = 200, and all other
variables equal to zero. That is, firm 1 is assigned all the production if it
announces costs of 1; otherwise firm 2 is assigned to produce all 100 units.
Firm 1 is paid 200 if it announces its costs are 1 and firm 2 announces
costs of 2, and firm 2 is paid 200 if firm 1 announces that its costs are 2.
This costs the government an expected 150.
As we know from our earlier discussion, this is not the only way
to induce truth-telling as a Nash equilibrium in a direct revelation game.
Another way is to set zl, = #} = x}, = 2%, = 50,2}, = 2}, = 100, &}, = t}; = 50,
#, = 3, = 100, tl, = & = 150, and all other variables equal to zero. (This
corresponds to paying 1 per unit when both firms name costs of 1, 2 per
unit when both name costs of 2, and 1.5 per unit to the firm that names
1 if one names 1 and the other 2.) We will wish to refer to this particular
scheme later on, so we give it a name; this will hereafter be referred to
as the nice direct revelation scheme. The solution given in the previous
paragraph is much more extreme; it has many more zero elements. In
general, linear programming will tend to produce extreme solutions of
this sort. But the point is not so much the solution produced as it is the
value of the solution: There are many direct relevation schemes for which
participation and truth-telling give a Nash equilibrium in this situation and
which cost the government an expected 150. But there is no scheme for
which participation and truth-telling is a Nash equilibrium that produces
a lower expected cost; this is what we learned by solving the constrained
optimization problem using linear programming.
In the formulation above, we have limited attention to direct revela-
tion mechanisms where, for each pair of reports mn by the two firms, a
single four-tuple (Ty, Tan, bins barn) 18 implemented. For later purposes,
we need fo generalize this a bit and consider direct revelation mechanisms
where, for each pair mn, there is a probability distribution pm, over such
four-tuples. The idea is that firms report their costs, and then a lottery over
four-tuples is conducted, with distribution given by my, for the reported
pair mn. The outcome of this lottery is then implemented.
In the context of this problem, allowing for random direct revelation
mechanisms doesnt change anything. Since the government and firms
are risk neutral and the firms have linear production technologies, replac-
ing any lottery pms by the four-tuple that is its mathematical expectation
doesnt affect any partys expected profits. Hence the best the government
can do (in terms of minimum expected costs) with a random direct revela-
tion mechanism (which induces participation and truth-telling as a Nash
LO
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 689
equilibrium) is the best it can do with a nonrandom mechanism, and that
is expected costs of 150.
We will return to this basic formulation in a bit, but before doing so we
consider three alternative formulations, based on different notions of which
constraints bind on the government in designing a direct revelation mecha-
nism.
(a) Imagine that the government cannot compel a firm to produce if the firm
would, by producing, sustain a loss. In other words, firms are allowed to
refuse to participate after they learn their assignments and monetary transfers.
We assume that firms, if indifferent between participating or not, will agree
to participate. (This is the usual problem of weak versus strict inequalities in
this sort of analysis.)
Suppose the government restricts attention to direct revelation mechanisms with the
property that truthfully revealing costs and then, ex post, agreeing to participate
constitutes a Nash equilibrium in the game with incomplete information between the
two firms. What is the lowest expected payment that government must-make to the
firms in such mechanisms?
We already know the answer to this question; the lowest expected payment
will be 150. We know that this is the answer by the following chain of logic:
(1) The lowest expected payment under these constraints will be no lower
than the lowest expected payment if a firm can be compelled to produce if it
agrees to participate once it knows its own costs but not those of its rival. This
is so because in any scheme where the firms will always agree to participate
ex post, they will surely agree at the earlier stage. Mechanisms that meet the
test of this question meet the test of the earlier question, and the minimum
cost under the earlier constraints was found to be 150. Hence 150 is a lower
bound on what can be achieved under these tighter restrictions.
(2) In the nice direct revelation scheme, which has expected costs to the
government of 150, these extra constraints are met.
Even though we know the answer to this question, it is instructive to
see how we would modify our constrained optimization problem to encom-
pass this changed formulation. It is easy. In place of the four, participation
constraints we had before, we now have eight. A typical one of these is
th 22h > 0, (P1-21)
which expresses the constraint that if firm 1s costs are 2 and firm 2's costs
are 1, then firm 1 is willing to undertake the assigned production level l,,
based on a comparison of what the government will pay and what this level
of production will cost. If we drop the four old participation constraints in
 Go back six paragraphs if you dont know what nice means in this context.
 If you write down the corresponding constraint for firm 1 when its costs are 2 and those
of its rival are 2, and you compare these two constraints with the constraint (P1-2) from
before, you will see why this formulation is theoretically more restrictive than the earlier
formulation. :
690
Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
favor of these eight ex post participation constraints, we can again feed the
problem to a linear programming algorithm. When we did this, the linear
programming algorithm used didnt come up with the nice direct relevation
mechanism but instead suggested the following mechanism. Everything de-
pends on what firm 1 reports. If firm 1 reports that its costs are 1, then we pay
it 100 and tell it to produce one hundred units. (We pay nothing to firm 2.)
But if firm 1 reports costs of 2, we pay it nothing, we pay 200 to firm 2, and
we assign firm 2 production of all one hundred units.
(b) Going in the other direction, suppose the government can approach the
firms with a mechanism before they learn their costs. Firms agree whether
to participate based on their initial assessments of what their costs will be,
and once they agree to participate, they are compelled to complete any as-
signments made in exchange for compensation agreed to ex ante as part of
the mechanism originally proposed. In this case, we would replace the four
original participation constraints with two ex ante participation constraints.
The constraint for firm 1 would read
1 1
Lit, To] + 31d, Tah) + 70h 20h] + lth ~ 2451 20
We can ask
o
What is the lowest expected cost to the government if it can employ a direct reve-
Intion mechanism where truth-telling is a Nash equilibrium and where participation
constraints are as just above?
"If we look for a solution to this formulation, we find that costs to the gov-
ernment can be driven down to the first-best level of 125. One scheme that
does this is: Firm 1 produces all one hundred units if it names costs of 1 or if
firm 2 names costs of 2. Only if firm 1 says its costs are 2 and firm 2 says its
costs are 1 does firm 2 get to produce. Firm 2 is paid 100 if it says its costs
are 1 and firm 1 says its costs are 2; note that this induces truth-telling on the
part of firm 2, since to claim costs of 2 means firm 2 is shut out entirely, but to
claim costs of 1 when its costs are in fact 2 means it may lose money (if firm 1
claims costs of 2). Firm 1 is paid 250 if it claims costs of 1 and firm 2 claims
costs of 2, and it is paid 150 if it claims costs of 2 and firm 2 claims costs
of 2. Otherwise firm 1 is paid nothing. Why does this induce truth-telling by
firm 1? If its costs are 1, by claiming costs of 1 it knows it will produce one
hundred units and it will get 250 with probability 1 /2. If it claims costs of 2,
it will produce one hundred units with probability 1/2 and receive 150 with
probability 1/2. Telling the truth is just as good as lying. But if its costs are
2, telling the truth means a loss of 25 (with probability 1/2 it will be told to
produce one hundred, costing 200, and it gets back 150), while lying means a
loss of 75 (it will be told to produce one hundred, costing 200, for sure, and
it gets 250 with probability 1 /2).
Variations (a) and (b) turn on when the firm is allowed to decide whether
to participate or, more precisely, when the firm is no longer allowed to opt
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 691
out of a mechanism earlier agreed to. Can the firms be approached before
they learn their true costs and then be compelled to continue if they agreed
ex ante? Can they only be approached after they learn their true costs, or
compelled to continue only after they learn those costs? Or do firms always
retain the right to opt out? In the literature you will find reference to ex ante
interim, and ex post implementation, referring (roughly) to variations (b), the
original formulation, and variation (a), respectively.
(c) As noted earlier, we have constrained the government to make nonnegative
payments to the firm. We might wonder what can be achieved (say, in our
original formulation) if we allow the t},, to be negative. This change, in
this case, doesnt amount to much. The minimum cost remains 150, and in
fact the computer returned the same solution as we obtained for the original
formulation. (However this variation will become interesting in problem 8.)
The revelation principle
We now know that the government cannot do any better than an
expected cost of 150 by using a direct revelation mechanism that induces
participation and truth-telling as a Nash equilibrium. Can it do better with
some more complex sort of mechanism?
The revelation principle says that it cannot, subject to some important
caveats. Truth-telling in a direct revelation mechanism (which induces
truth-telling) mimics every possible equilibrium outcome in every possible
mechanism, however complex.
The revelation principle is one of those things that is obvious once
you understand it but somewhat cumbersome to explain. We try here to
strike a balance between excessive formality and verbal arm waving, but
the appropriate level of formality is highly subjective, and if, after reading
about this here, you dont find the basic idea rather transparent, then you
should seek a different treatment.
To begin, we have to say what we mean by a general mechanism.
We have in mind some game form that the government will design and
in which it asks the two firms to participate. We think of this general
mechanism as a finite extensive form tree for the two firms, possibly in-
corporating moves by nature.? At the end of each branch of the tree is
a four-tuple of the sort in the previous section. The government designs
and presents this game tree to the two firms and asks if they would like to
play. (We assume that each firm knows its costs but not those of its rival
when faced with the decision whether to participate; variations in the spirit
d .
The government is presumed able to conduct any needed randomizations objectively
and credibly.
 We assume that the game tree prescribed is one of perfect recall and the two firms are
capable of playing the game tree as it is designed.
692 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
of those in the previous section are straightforward.) If both agree, then
they play the game, and the four-tuple at the end of the branch they play
determines what each is asked to produce and how much each is paid.
Because the government is allowed to present any finite game tree at
all (with the sorts of endpoints we've described) for its mechanism, this
formalism encompasses many mechanisms one can imagine. f
In the context we have set, for every general mechanism of this sort
there is a corresponding game of incomplete information for the two firms.
Each firm begins with private information about its costs; think of four
possible initial nodes. Append to each of these initial nodes a copy of
the mechanism, and at each endpoint use the four-tuple specified by the
mechanism with the costs of the firms as specified by the initial node
to compute payoffs for the players. Right at the start of the game, give
each player the option to decline to participate, with payoff zero for each if
either declines.? Information sets are used to mimic the idea that the firms
know their own costs but not the costs of the other firm while playing this
game.
An example may help clarify. Imagine the following simple mecha-
nism. The government goes to firm 1 and offers to firm 1 the opportunity
to produce the hundred units for a payment of 100. If firm 1 declines, the
government goes to firm 2 and offers firm 2 the opportunity to produce
the hundred units for a payment of 150. If firm 2 declines, the government
goes back to firm 1 and offers it the opportunity to produce the hundred
units for a payment of 200. And if firm 1 refuses, the rules specify that
firms 1 and 2 each produce 50 at a payment of 10 for each firm,
We depict this mechanism in figure 18.7(a). At the end of each end-
point is a four-tuple, which gives in order the production quantity assigned
to firm 1 and then to firm 2, and then the payments made to the firms.
f Certain relatively free-form bargaining schemes may not be reducible to a definite game
tree, and you may wish to consider how what we will say here applies to such situations. In
this regard, note especially our later comments about games so complex that it is inappro-
priate to.assume that players will play a Nash equilibrium.
9 If one firm accepts and the other declines, why is the payoff zero for the accepting firm?
Why doesnt the government continue to conduct business with the firm that accepts? We
could specify something more interesting for cases where one firm accepts and the other
declines, but whatever is specified will be irrelevant to what follows, because we assume
that both firms anticipate that the other will accept. You might worry that this will preclude
mechanisms that are intended to ignore one firm entirely. But we can construct mechanisms
where one firm or the other gets nothing and does nothing at the end of each branch; such a
mechanism would be as if the government decided to deal with the other firm only, and the
first firm in this mechanism would be indifferent between accepting and rejecting. Hence the
revelation principle encompasses mechanisms where the government sets out to deal with
one firm only.
ee inn
me ron
rnc vs sao
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 693
Firm 1 Retect Firm 2 Reject Firm 1
jec o ejec o Reject
O offer > = fer iN offer > 50,50.10,10
Accept Accept Accept
offer offer offer
100,0,100,0 0,100,0,150 -100,0,200,0
(a)
-40,-90
0,0
nN
0,-50 os 0
Ny 1000" A A
0,50 SA A
Figure 18.7. A complex mechanism and the
corresponding game of incomplete information.
In (a), a complex mechanism is depicted. The endpoints give firm 1's
production quantity, then 2's quantity, then 1s income, and then 2's
income. In (b), we show the corresponding game of incomplete infor-
mation between the players, although we have left off the diagram the
opportunity to opt out at the start of the game. The four initial nodes in
the game tree are labeled wm, where m is the actual costs of firm 1 and
n is the actual costs of firm 2. We have supressed the initial probability
distribution, which is 1 /4 on each of the four initial nodes. Endpoints
are evaluated in terms of firm 1's profits and then firm 2's profits.
694 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
Then in figure 18.7(b), we construct the associated game of incomplete
information.5 Here the endpoints are evaluated using the firms costs as
determined by the initial node in the game tree.
The revelation principle. Consider any mechanism of the sort described above,
the associated game of incomplete information between the two firms, and any
Nash equilibrium of this game in which both firms agree to participate. The
expected costs to the government and the assignment of production levels and
payments to the firms in this equilibrium, viewed as a function of their costs, can
be precisely obtained by participation and truth-telling in a direct revelation game
for which participation and truth-telling give a Nash equilibrium.
The proof runs along the following lines. Take the mechanism, associated
game, and Nash equilibrium. Think of the equilibrium strategies for the
two firms as being given in the following form: Firm 1 follows (possibly
mixed) strategy o} in the mechanism tree if its costs are 1, while if its costs
are 2, it follows strategy o;; similar notation is used for firm 2.
Now construct a (possibly random) direct revelation game as follows.
Take each of the four possible pairs of costs in turn. For the pair corre-
sponding tp the costs m for firm 1 and n for firm 2, construct the proba-
bility distribution over outcomes in the mechanism tree that results from
firm 1 playing o}, and firm 2.playing 02. This gives a probability distri-
bution over four-tuples, which in the direct revelation game is pmn
The claim is that in this direct revelation game, truth-telling and par--
ticipation is a Nash equilibrium that induces the same outcomes as the
Nash equilibrium in the original game. The reason is simple (but hard
to say). Suppose, by way of contradiction, that firm 1 strictly prefers in
the direct revelation game to report costs of 2 when its costs are 1. By
construction if firm 1's costs are 1, then the distribution over outcomes of
claiming costs of 1 in the direct revelation game against truth-telling by
firm 2 is precisely the same as the distribution over outcomes of playing
0! against firm 2's strategy in the original game, and the distribution over
outcomes of claiming costs of 2 in the direct revelation game against truth-
telling by firm 2 is precisely the same as the distribution of outcomes from
playing 0} against firm 2's strategy in the original game. If firm 1, when
its costs are 1, prefers to claim costs of 2 in the direct revelation game, then
it must prefer to play 0} when its costs are 1 in the original game. But
since we suppose that we began with a Nash equilibrium in the original
game, this is impossible.
5 To keep the figure from becoming too complex, we have left off the initial option not to
participate.
ea ee ip ore nl ++
rrr
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 695
If that didn't penetrate, try putting it this way: In the original game,
a firm can always act as if its costs were the other value. The statement
that we have a Nash equilibrium means that it has no positive incentive
to do this. Our direct revelation game is constructed essentially as fol-
lows. The two firms simultaneously and independently report their costs
to some disinterested third party. This third party then implements in the
original general mechanism what the firms would have done in the orig-
inal equilibrium as a function of the costs they report. That is, if firm 1
reports costs m and firm 2 reports n, the third party implements play of
or, against play of 02. Since a firm would not choose in the original game
to act as if its costs were other than what they are, so the firm would not
wish to have the third party misplay on its behalf.
Similar arguments ensure that firms will participate in the direct rev-
elation game. If a firm prefers in the direct revelation game not to par-
ticipate (against truth-telling by its opponent), then it would prefer not to
participate in the original game (against its opponent's strategy). But the
hypothesis of the revelation principle is that the firms choose to participate
in the original game.
We employed the revelation principle, albeit in somewhat degenerate
form, in section 18.1, when we asserted that to find the optimal marketing
strategy for the insurance firm, it suffices to look for the optimal menu
of contracts to offer, with the choice of contract from the menu left to the
consumer. Think of implementing this choice as follows: The insurance
company says that contract A will be given to any consumer who reveals
that she is high risk, and B will be given to any consumer who reveals she
is Jow risk; then the consumer is told to state which she is. Anything that
can be achieved by a complex marketing scheme, the revelation principle
asserts, can be asserted by this simple direct revelation mechanism. This
isn't precisely the same as having the consumer choose directly between
A and B, which is what we imagine when we think of a menu of choices
from which the consumer chooses. But in a one-person problem, it comes
down to the same thing.
A sometimes heard paraphrase of the revelation principle (adapted
to this context) is: Anything that the government can achieve with a gen-
eral mechanism can be achieved by a direct revelation mechanism where
truth-telling is a Nash equilibrium. This, like many paraphrases, is too
broad. The antecedent in the paraphrase should be: Anything that the
government can achieve in a Nash equilibrium between the two firms in
a general mechanism.... Getting the antecedent right is important on at
least two grounds, both having to do with the revelance of Nash analysis
in general mechanisms.
696 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
In the first place, the government might be able to devise a mechanism
so complex that the firms do not see their way to a Nash equilibrium in
it, and their behavior may then give the government lower expected costs
than it gets in a truth-telling equilibrium of a direct revelation game. (In
the one-person case of section 18.1, this is just the problem of the insurance-
buying consumer who is not completely aware of all the choices she will be
offered. Rational maximization in a one-person choice problem is Nash
equilibrium analysis if we think of the choice problem as a one-person
game.) Of course, unless we have a theory about how the firms will act in
the face of mechanisms so complex that they dont see their way to a Nash
equilibrium, it will be hard to see how the government can evaluate such
mechanisms. This isnt to say that interesting theories of this sort can't be
devised. But such theories are not very well developed at present.
The second objection relates to chapter 14. We can imagine contexts
in which the two firms interact repeatedly. Think of the firms as being,
say, Boeing and Airbus, and the hundred units being commercial aircraft.
Although perhaps not descriptive of the current relations between Boeing
and Airbus, we can imagine that the firms are engaged in implicit collu-
sion, sustained by the usual sort of folk theorem construction. If this is
50, it is notrentirely reasonable to suppose that the firms in one particular
encounter will behave according to the dictates of Nash equilibrium in
that encounter. We might anticipate two implicitly collusive firms main-
taining that each has costs of 2, even if one or the other has costs of 1, and |
even if it is to the short-run advantage of the firm with costs of 1 to so
state, because the short-run advantage must be weighed against long-run
considerations of future encounters between the firms. In such a situation,
the party designing the mechanism might do well to think about how to
design a mechanism that reduces the firm's abilities to collude, for exam-
ple, by adding noise to the outcome. Direct revelation mechanisms may
be more or less conducive to collusion between the firms; insofar as direct
revelation supports collusion, the government may do better with a more
complex mechanism.
Ome should be clear about the uses to which the revelation principle
is put. It can be thought of as a statement about how actually to implement
contracts. But it may be better to use it with greater circumspection as a
tool of analysis for finding the limits of what outcomes can be implemented,
without reference to how best to implement a particular outcome.
We can make this point in another way. In some contexts of direct
revelation, there will be situations ex post where the party in the role of
7 And, in the literature, this is primarily how it is used.
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 697
the government knows that it can obtain further gains from trade from
one or more of the parties who participated. We already saw an example
in the context of insurance with adverse selection, where the insurance
company knows ex post that it can improve its profits and the welfare
of the consumer, if the consumer self-identifies as being low-risk. As we
said before, the insurance company must be able to restrain itself from
renegotiating with a consumer who identifies herself as being low-risk.
Similarly, in many applications of the revelation principle, the party in the
role of mechanism designer must be able to commit credibly to no sub-
sequent (re)negotiation once it learns the types of the parties with which
it is dealing. As a matter of practical implementation, the ability to make
such a credible commitment may be greater if the optimal mechanism is
implemented by some scheme other than direct revelation, because more
complex mechanisms may give less information (on which to base renego-
tiation) to the party designing the mechanism. So, to repeat, the revelation
principle can be useful for saying what is the range of (conceivably) im-
plementable outcomes, without being taken quite seriously as a statement
of how to implement a given outcome.
What do we know, then, about our problem of the government procur-
ing the one hundred units? The best that it can do (in terms of minimizing
its costs) with truth-telling in a direct revelation mechanism is to get costs
down to 150. If it can do better with some fancy mechanism, then this
will have to be a mechanism that so confuses the two firms that they don't
play to a Nash equilibrium. In any mechanism where they play to a Nash
equilibrium, the expected payments to them can be no less than 150.
Multiple equilibria and dominant strategy implementation
To continue on the theme of how to implement a particular outcome,
we note once more that in many direct revelation mechanisms truth-telling
is a Nash equilibrium that costs the government 150 in expectation, and
some are better than others. Recall that we described a direct revelation
mechanism in which truth-telling was a Nash equilibrium (with expected
costs of 150), but another Nash equilibrium (involving some lying) was
better for both firms and worse for the government. And we described
a direct revelation mechanism in which truth-telling was the only Nash
equilibrium (with expected costs of 150), but where a firm would deviate
from truth-telling if it thought its rival was playing a non-Nash strategy.
Best of all the mechanisms we constructed was the nice? mechanism, in
which truth-telling was a dominant strategy for each of the firms.
8 See footnote b if you've forgotten what this means.
/
/
698 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
More generally, when one designs a mechanism, either a direct revela-
tion mechanism in which truth-telling is a Nash equilibrium or something
more general, it is natural to worry whether there are other Nash equi-
libria (with outcomes that are not so good for the mechanism designer),
or whether the participants in the mechanism will find their way to the
Nash equilibrium. Everything else held equal, it seems natural to prefer
a mechanism in which the equilibrium the designer wishes is the only
Nash equilibrium or, at least, in which all the equilibria are no worse for
the designer than the one being aimed for. Moreover, the mechanism de-
signer might worry that the players won't settle on an quilibrium at all,
for example, because the environment is too complex for players to find
their way to an equilibrium.
These worries are ameliorated if the desired behavior constitutes a
dominant strategy for all the players in the mechanism that is designed.
If the desired behavior is a strictly dominant strategy for each player, then
it is of course the unique Nash equilibrium. And more: In cases where
it may be unreasonable to expect players to find their way to a Nash
equilibrium, it may be reasonable to expect them to recognize (and play) a
dominant strategy. Even if the strategies are not strictly dominant (so there
may be othr equilibria in weakly dominated strategies), the mechanism
designer may feel relatively secure in a prediction that players will settle
on strategies that are dominant.
These considerations motivate the notion of a dominant strategy mech-
anism, a mechanism (of the general sort described in the previous sub-
section) in which each participant, for each possible value of her private
information, has one course of action that dominates all others, no matter
~ what other participants in the mechanism do. Suppose the government,
in our example, thought that it would like to see what its expected costs
would be if it insisted on the safety of a dominant strategy mechanism
for the two firms. How could it proceed to conduct an analysis?
Of course, we already know the bottom-line answer for the problem
we have been analyzing. The government can construct a direct revela-
tion mechanism, the nice mechanism, in which truth-telling is a dominant
strategy for each firm and the expected costs to the government are 150. In
this case there is no loss from insisting on a dominant strategy mechanism.
But if we hadn't stumbled upon the nice mechanism, could we have come
to this conclusion analytically?
We could have done so, in two steps. First, we can consider direct
revelation mechanisms in which truth-telling (and participation) is a dom-
inant strategy for both firms. We ask, For which direct revelation mech-
anisms (x, t5,,) is participation and truth-telling a dominant strategy?
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 699
There are more constraints than before, but all the constraints are simple.
For firm 1, we have four participation and four incentive constraints. The
participation constraints are: For each of the four pairs of its actual cost
and the cost reported by its rival, it must not sustain a loss by reporting
its true cost. For example,
th, 2x3, > 0
is the constraint that firm 1 must not sustain a loss when it truthfully
Teports its costs are 2 and firm 2 (truthfully or not) reports costs of 1. The
incentive constraints are: For each of the four pairs of its actual cost and
the cost reported by its rival, the firm must prefer truth-telling to lying
about its own cost. So, for example,
tn ~ 225, > th 2x},
expresses the constraint that firm 1, when its costs are 2 (note the cost
premultiplying the production quantity it is allocated) and when its rival
reports costs of 1, prefers to report truthfully that its costs are 2 rather than
misrepresenting its costs as 1. If we satisfy all eight of these constraints
for firm 1 and all eight for firm 2, we have a direct revelation mechanism
in which participation and truth-telling are dominant. (We are only re-
quiring weak dominance. To be really safe, the government might wish
for strict dominance, in which case we could sharpen the constraints by
adding a few pennies difference in the right direction in each.)
The government, then, can solve the problem of minimizing its ex-
pected costs of
1 1 1 1 
zt + 1 + lt +15] + lt + &,] + re) +15]
subject to the constraints above that ensure that the mechanism has truth-
telling as a dominant strategy. (We impose any appropriate nonnegativity
constraints, and we insist on zl, +22, => 100, so the government is sure to
get its hundred units.) Once again we have a linear programming problem,
and we can go to the computer to find a solution. When we did this, the
computer returned a minimum cost to the government of 150 (which, given
h a . .
} Compare the participation constraints with those we imposed when we considered cases
in which the firms could opt out of the mechanism ex post. In a direct revelation mecha-
nism, where ex post opting out means opting out after all the players types become common
knowledge, the two are the same. y oP
700 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
that we know about the nice mechanism, is hardly a surprise), and it gave
the mechanism: z2, = 12, = 1}, = 5}, = 100, #, = t}, = 200, & =} = 100,
and everything else equal to zero. In words, firm 2 makes all the hundred
units if it reports costs of 1, for which it is paid 100. If firm 2 reports costs
of 2, firm 1 is given the assignment to make the hundred units and is paid
200. (If it isn't evident, go through the steps to show that this mechanism
does indeed have truth-telling and participation as a dominant strategy
for each firm.)
Can the government do better with some more complex dominant
strategy mechanism? Of course, since we already know that 150 is the
best we can do in any Nash equilibrium for any complex mechanism, we
know that the answer is no. But for problems where the answer isn't
apparent, we give the following general result.
The revelation principle for dominant strategy mechanisms. The outcome
of any dominant strategy mechanism can be achieved in a direct revelation mech-
anism for which truth-telling and participation is a dominant strategy.
The proof js left as an exercise. If you understood the proof of our first
revelation principle, this one should be easy.
General discussion
We have couched our discussion in terms of our simple toy problem,
but it should be apparent that what we have said about direct revela-
tion mechanisms, the revelation principle, and the revelation principle for
dominant strategy mechanisms generalizes considerably.
The problem we have tackled can be stated roughly as: Which mech-
anism among all possible mechanisms is optimal for achieving some given end?
Again roughly, we tackled this question in a two-step attack. First, we
restricted attention to direct revelation mechanisms, and specifically to
truth-telling behavior in direct revelation mechanisms. Then via a reve-
lation principle, we were able to show that restricting attention from all
possible mechanisms to direct revelation mechanisms was without loss
of generality. Consider each of these two steps in turn.
The problem of finding an optimal direct-revelation mechanism in
which truth-telling is a Nash equilibrium or is a dominant strategy equi-
librium is a fairly simple mathematical programming problem, because
the conditions that truth-telling is Nash and truth-telling is dominant
are expressible as a set of inequalities. This continues to hold in problems
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 701
more general than our toy problem, although our toy problem was special
in two ways that made the problem we looked at especially simple:
(1) In our toy problem, each of the firms had only a finite number of types
(i.e., costs). Many applications in the literature deal with a continuum
of types (e.g., the firms levels of costs can be any number within some
closed interval); and one will have to find ways of analyzing the problem
algebraically instead of numerically.
(2) The linearity of the cost structures in our toy problem meant that all the
constraints were linear. If instead the firms had nonlinear cost functions,
we would be doubly cursed. For one thing, we couldn't apply linear
programming. For another, even if the cost function is convex, if we
wrote the incentive constraints, we would be putting a convex function on
both sides of the inequality, which means that, viewed as an optimization
problem, what we would have would not necessarily be well behaved.
In the toy problem, we discovered that it costs the government no
more to have a mechanism in which truth-telling is dominant than to
have one in which truth-telling constitutes a Nash equilibrium. You might
wonder whether this is a fluke or the tip of some general result. It is, so
to speak, both. If the firms have three possible costs and if those costs are
not independently distributed, then it can be costly for the government to
insist on dominant strategy implementation. (If you have access to a linear
programming package, you can verify this in problem 8.) Hence the result
we obtained is somewhat special. On the other hand, there are general
classes of problems for which dominant strategy implementation costs no
more than Nash implementation; this is so, for example, for a range of
optimal auction design problems (see Bulow and Roberts, forthcoming.)
A general analysis of this question is given by Mookherjee and Reichelstein
(1989b).
Now we turn to the second part of our general attack: the demon-
stration that we can restrict attention to truth-telling in a direct revelation
game, to see which outcomes can be implemented in general mecha-
nisms.
The term outcome as used here in general means the selection of some
state of affairs as a function of the private information held by parties for
* The reader may wish to consider whether, in the spirit of the analysis of chapter 16,
we could employ some substitution of variables to make the constraints linear, even if the
objective function is nonlinear.
702 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
whom the mechanism is to be designed. An outcome in this sense is some-
thing more than just the expected costs to the government; an outcome
specifies how much each firm produces and what transfer is made to the
firm as a function of the firms costs. In our toy problem, and in many
problems of optimal mechanism design, all that matters to the mechanism
designer about the implemented outcome is some one-dimensional mea-
sure of goodness, such as expected cost. But in other applications, such as
the one in the next section, we would want to look at the implementability
of outcomes in the more general sense.
The term implementable is put in quotes because it can take on a
number of different meanings, such as:
(1) There is some mechanism with a Nash equilibrium (in the associated
game of incomplete information) which gives this outcome.
(2) There is some mechanism for which all the Nash equilibria give this
outcome.
(3) There is a mechanism for which there is a unique Nash equilibrium,
and this Nash equilibrium gives this outcome.
(4) There isa mechanism in which the outcome arises from the play of
dominant strategies.
Each of these is progressively stronger, and each is presumably progres-
sively more desirable for the mechanism designer, in order to have faith
in the participants finding their way to the desired outcome. To repeat
what we said before, if a mechanism admits several Nash equilibria, some
of which are worse for the designer (and, more importantly, better for the
participants) than is the equilibrium that is desired, then one worries that
the participants will find their way to the wrong equilibrium. And even
if the equilibrium is unique, one might worry whether the participants
have the sophistication needed to find the equilibrium strategies (or that
they have sufficient faith in their fellow participants sophistication, so that
they are happy to carry out their part of the equilibrium). If the desired
outcome is the product of dominant strategy choices by the participants,
then the mechanism designer can (presumably) have the greatest faith in
the mechanism she has designed.
These four possibilities are far from exhaustive. You can probably
think of other variations on this general theme, and you will find most of
those variations somewhere in the literature.
9 To be precise, in (4) we must worry about other equilibria in weakly dominated strate-
gies, so (4) isn't quite stronger than (3).
18.2. Optimal contracts for interacting parties 703
We have seen two revelation principles, which claim that anything
that can be implemented in the sense of (1) or (4) can be implemented
in the corresponding sense in the form of truth-telling in direct revelation
games. These results are true in substantial generality.
We have not seen revelation principles corresponding to (2) and (3)
as the notion of implementation. In general, the correspondence between
truth-telling in direct revelation games and outcomes of general mecha-
nisms breaks down when the solution concept is adapted from (2) or 3).
But it is possible to augment a direct revelation game, adding signals that
the participants send (beyond a declaration of type), and then to obtain
augmented revelation principles that speak to implementation in the
sense of (2) and (3). That is, for any outcome that is implementable in
the sense of, say, (2) in a general mechanism, there is an augmented di-
rect revelation mechanism for which truth-telling is a Nash equilibrium
that gives this outcome, and all other Nash equilibria give this outcome.
The observation that this is possible is made in Ma, Moore, and Turnbull
(1988), and the corresponding general augmented revelation principles
are given by Mookherjee and Reichelstein (1989a).
Some outcomes cannot be implemented in the sense of (2), but there
are mechanisms such that every subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for the
mechanism gives this outcome, even though some subgame imperfect equi-
libria give other outcomes. And for outcomes that cannot be implemented in
the sense of (2), there are mechanisms such that all the Nash equilibria that
involve the play of no dominated strategy give this outcome, even though
other Nash equilibria involving dominated strategies give other outcomes.
That is, we can implement more (in the rough sense of [2]) if we look not at
Nash equilibria but at some suitable refinement of Nash. For developments
along these lines, see Moore and Repullo (1988) and Palfrey and Srivastava
(1987).
All of the extensions and elaborations on optimal contract design that
were described in section 18.1 can be undertaken in this more general and
complex context. In particular, mixtures of adverse selection and moral
hazard are possible. We might imagine, for example, that our two firms
costs are not determined entirely endogenously but result as well from
R&D and investment decisions made by the firms. Then the government,
besides buying its hundred units, might seek to put in place a mechanism
that induces firms to invest optimally in plant and in R&D, where opti-
mality means that make the government's costs as low as possible. In
principle, one can use the revelation principle to tackle such problems; in
practice, they become rather complex. See Laffont and Tirole (1987) for an
example.
704 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
18.3. The pivot mechanism
In the literature are a number of applications of the general ideas just
given to the design of optimal mechanisms that deserve your attention.
In particular, the analysis of optimal auction design is especially rich and
well developed; references will be supplied at the end of this chapter.
Rather than pursue one of these, we look at a different sort of problem
in mechanism design that uses some of the notions of the previous section.
Instead of looking for an optimal mechanism, according to the interests
of some individual who (presumably) is designing the mechanism with
her own interests in mind, we will look at a classic example of mechanism
design where the objective is to satisfy a set of criteria.
Consider the following story. Several farmers live on the banks of a
stream. (Some live on one side, some on the other.) The number of farmers
is I, and we index them by i =1,2,...,1. They consider building a bridge
over the stream that will permit them all to cross back and forth. There is
only one place where the bridge can be constructed, and the bridge will
cost K to construct. Each farmer attaches some value to having the bridge
constructed, but none is quite sure what value the others attach to it. If
they construct the bridge, the funds to do so will have to come from their
own pockets.
These farmers must decide whether or not to build this bridge. We
take it as given that if the bridge is built, each farmer will pay K/I, his
pro rata share of the costs of building the bridge. But in addition to this,
the farmers are willing to consider transfers among themselves; we write
* for the amount of money taken from farmer 4, above and beyond the
K/I that is collected if the bridge is to be built. We do not preclude # < 0,
which means that a subsidy is paid to farmer i.
Farmer i's utility depends on whether the bridge is built and on any
monetary fransfer * that is made to or from him. We suppose that each
farmer 4 attaches some monetary value to the bridge, *, and that farmer
i's utility is linear in money and in this valuation. That is, farmer i's
utility depends on (a) whether the bridge is built, (b) the building tax K/I
that he pays if it is built, and (c) any further tax or subsidy, *; this utility
is given by
oo ere [ut K/Itt if the bridge is built, and
Farmer &s utility = { if the bridge isn't built.
Note that we permit transfers even if the bridge isn't built, We assume
that farmers may dislike having this bridge built; ie, vf <0 is possible.
18.3. The pivot mechanism 705
In fact, we assume that u could be any real number whatsoever; no value
is precluded.
It will be expositionally convenient to work with the farmer's valua-
tion of the bridge, ret of his contribution for building it, or v* = uf K/I.
Note that with this substitution, farmer 4's utility is v* * if the bridge
is built.
The farmers meet together one evening to try to decide whether to
build the bridge and what taxes and subsidies to enforce beyond the pro
rata contribution to building it. One farmer suggests majority rule and
no transfers: Put building the bridge to a vote, and if a majority vote
to build the bridge, then everyone pays only his contribution KX, 11; if a
majority vote against, no transfers are made at all. If this plan is adopted,
farmers will vote for the bridge if and only if their net personal valuation
v' exceeds 0. But there are several objections to this. One farmer observes
that some farmers may really want this bridge, and if most farmers dont
care that much (i.e, if u* < K/I for many farmers), then the bridge won't
be built, even though general social welfare would be improved if it were
built. Another objects that he doesnt want this bridge much at all, in fact
he positively dislikes it, and yet he may be assessed with a building fee
of K/I. What justice is there in that?
So someone suggests that farmers subscribe to the bridge. Everyone
will write his name and a pledge (an amount of money) on a piece of
paper and toss it into a hat. After all the pledges are collected, they
will be added together. Negative pledges are allowed; farmers in this
way demand compensation for having the bridge built. If the sum of
the pledges exceeds 0, the bridge will be built, and every farmer must
contribute the amount of his pledge (plus his share K/I). If the pledges
amount to less than 0, then the bridge isnt built and no transfers will
be made. What to do with the surplus, if more than zero is pledged?
One farmer suggests that this surplus be divided equally among all the
farmers. Another suggests that it be divided proportionally (in proportion
to original pledges) among those farmers who pledged positive amounts.
Still another suggests that it might be a good thing to collect the excess
and burn it. (This last suggestion is met with some incredulity.)
Thinking about this mechanism, the farmers recognize some difficul-
ties. Imagine a farmer who values the bridge at a net amount v*. How
much should he pledge? If he believes that it will take a pledge of v or
more to get the bridge built, then he is willing to pledge precisely v. He
certainly would never wish to pledge more than this, since he will be stuck
with a pledge that is greater than the net value of the bridge to him. On
the other hand, if he believes that a pledge of less than v* will do, then he
706 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
wishes to shade his pledge down from v and free-ride on the pledges
of his fellow farmers. In general, he won't be sure which of these two
circumstances pertains, but as long as he assesses positive probability for
the second, his optimal bid will be something less than v*. Hence the total
pledges will be less than Yo, vt, and the bridge may not be built when it
should be. In any case, another farmer objects that figuring out how to
behave in this mechanism is too hard for simple country bumpkins, and
all sorts of bad outcomes may result.
After much discussion, the farmers decide that they wish to find some
mechanism for deciding whether to build the bridge and what taxes to
assess that has the following properties:
(a) The bridge will be built if and only if it is socially efficient to do so;
that is, if and only if 32 > 0.
(b) No farmer should have to waste his time doing complicated analysis of
how to behave in the mechanism. In particular, no farmer should have to
spend time trying to assess what his fellow farmers will do. Put another
way, the optimal actions of each farmer in the mechanism (as a function
of the farmer's private valuation v*) should dominate any other actions
the farmer might take, no matter what his fellow farmers do.
(0) The mechanism, if played optimally by a farmer, should never be so
injurious to the welfare of the farmer that he would prefer that the decision
to build or not to build is taken by decree. That is, farmer i should not
wind up with utility less than min{v*, 0}.
(d) Since no outsider is willing to put up money to permit the mechanism
to function, the taxes collected (less any subsidies, and not including the
building tax K/I per farmer, if the bridge is built) must be nonnegative.
One can certainly quibble (a), (b), and (c) (and later we will have a very
large quibble with [a], in particular), but let us accept them and see where
they lead.
We translate (b) as saying that the farmers want a dominant strat-
egy mechanism. They wish to design a general mechanism in which each
farmer, as a function of his personal valuation vf, has a dominant strat-
egy to play. With this, we appeal to the revelation principle for dominant
strategy mechanisms: Anything we can do with a general dominant strat-
egy mechanism can be done with a direct revelation mechanism in which
truth-telling is a dominant strategy. So we can restrict attention to direct
revelation mechanisms.
18.3. The pivot mechanism 707
In this context a direct revelation mechanism takes the form: Each
farmer is asked to reveal his personal valuation v*. We put hats on vari-
ables to distinguish what farmers reveal from their true valuations; that
is, is what farmer 1 reveals. As a function of the vector of revealed
valuations 9 = (#',...,97), a decision is made whether to build the bridge
or not, and taxes on each farmer are determined. We write (9) for the de-
cision whether to build the bridge, where a(9) = 1 means that the bridge
is built and od) = 0 means it is not. (In a more general treatment of
these issues, we might let a(f) take on any value in the interval [0,1],
interpreting this as the probability that the bridge will be built. But given
the farmers requirement [al], we know what must be, and this doesnt
entail randomized decisions whether to build the bridge) And we write
#(5) for the tax imposed on farmer i. (More generally, we could permit
random taxes, but as farmers are risk neutral, this would add nothing to
the story except horrid notation.) i
Tt will be handy to have the following pieces of notation. We let 47% =
(#1, --.,Ds1,Dis1y---,0r). That is, 9% is the vector of reported valuations
for all the farmers except for i. We sometimes write t(D) as (04,077);
ie., we put i's valuation as the first argument. Finally, we write 5 for
Yi # and 7 for 3,07. That is, 57 is the sum of all the announced
valuations, and $i is the sum of all the announced valuations save i's.
We are looking for a direct revelation mechanism in which truth-telling
is a dominant strategy and in which the bridge is built if and only if
vt = 0. The latter restriction, combined with the notion that truth-
telling will be dominant tells us what the function a must be:
a ={? if 20, and
0, if XN <0.
M
Furthermore, we have the following results:
Lemma 1. The taxes paid by farmer i must take the form
#058, 97Y) {Zo if X > 0, and @)
toh, if 4 <0,
for and functions of 77".
The idea is that what a farmer pays in taxes cannot depend on what he
himself reveals as his valuation, except insofar as this revelation changes
the decision whether or not to build the bridge. To see why this is so,
708 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
suppose v* and w?, two valuations for 7, and 9~* are such that vi+ 5% >
0, w'+2~% > 0, and *(vf, 5%) > #(w?, 5%). In words, if the other farmers
are announcing 9%, then whether announces v* or w?, the bridge will
be built. But announcing v* (when the others are announcing 9%) results
in higher taxes than does announcing w. In such circumstances, the
mechanism doesnt have truth-telling as a dominant strategy; farmer 1, if
his valuation is v*, would prefer to misrepresent his valuation as w? (if
his fellow farmers announce 9%). This establishes the first part of the
proposition: For such that > 0, (9) depends only on 9%. A similar
argument gives the other half.
Lemma 2.
FH fh = 5 3)
To prove this, fix 9~ and consider the case where v* = 5%, If farmer
truthfully reveals v* when the others reveal 9~*, then farmer i must prefer
revealing v to revealing v* for > 0. But, in these circumstances,
revealing v* means the bridge will be built and revealing v* means
that the bridge won't be built. So by revealing v*, farmer i nets v*% (5%),
while revealing v* nets ~*(9~%). The former must be at least as large
as the latter, so
vi= = > Fem) 09).
Now consider the case where v* = e~ 2% for > 0. Truthful revelation
of v* causes the bridge not to be built, giving farmer i utility :(5%).
Falsely revealing v* + causes the bridge to be built, and farmer i has
utility v #(5~%). Since the former must be at least as large as the latter
(to support truth-telling),
viz e Si Toh 0).
This is true for arbitrary > 0, so by letting 0,
~EH SFE) - 67).
Together with the next to last inequality, this gives the desired result.
18.3. The pivot mechanism 709
Lemma 3.
ipni gi Sis 0, and
t < ! PO
e =<{3 if 5 <0. @
Consider first the case where ~* > 0. Suppose v* = 0. By truthfully
reporting v*, farmer i causes the bridge to be built. His utility in this
case is v! T(6%) = 0 [t*(6~%) 5-1]. Since ()? entails that farmer i
is no worse off for having revealed the truth than 0 (in utility), we have
=~" 1 > 0 or #(@~% < 5% Consider next the case where
5 <0. Again suppose v* = 0. By truthfully revealing v*, farmer i
causes the bridge not to be built. Hence he nets (3~). Since he must
be no worse off than 0 by so doing, we have (%%) > 0, or #(%~%) <0.
Lemma 4.
oi =i # 5-1>0, and
#5) = , W220,
6) {5 if 5 <0. 
In other words, inequality (4) must be an equation.
To see this, we note first that from lemmas 1 and 2, (d) rendered in symbols
is
YH) >0if <0, and (d1)
TN FH = SEO - 120 if 30. (d2)
Suppose, then, that for some 7 and 9% such that ~% > 0 we had a strict
inequality in (4). That is, (5%) < ~*. Choose v* to be sufficiently large
so that = > 0 for all # and so that > 0. The bridge will be built,
and by lemmas 1 and 2, farmer i pays
To) =o) = 5
By lemma 3, each such term is nonpositive and, by the supposition, the
term for 1 is strictly negative. Hence the sum of all the payments is strictly
negative, contradicting (42).
Similarly, suppose that for and 9~*% such that I~ < 0, we had
t4(9%) < 0. We can choose v' sufficiently small so that ~% < 0 for all #/
? In case you forgot, (c) says that, in general, a farmer should do no worse than min{v*, 0}
by reporting the truth.
710 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
and 5 < 0. Arguing along the lines just given, we obtain a violation of
(dD).
We now put all the pieces together and provide a converse.
Proposition 2. There is only one direct revelation mechanism for which (a)
through (d) hold, namely the direct revelation mechanism defined by (1), (2), (3),
and (5). This mechanism is alternatively defined by (1) and
0, if >0and 7 20,
, if $< 0and 7 <0,
4, if 5 <0and 720, and
5 if >0and 7 <0.
t(D) = )
Proof. The lemmas establish that this is the only possible candidate.
Showing that (6) is equivalent to (2), 3), and (5) is a matter of simple
bookkeeping. We see from (6) that t*(v) > 0 in all cases, so (d) is obvious.
So all that remains is to show that the mechanism defined by (1) and (6)
satisfies (b) and (c). We will do half of this, leaving the other half for
homework. A Co
Suppose that, for some 1 and 9%, 5 > 0 and v'+27* 20. If 4 tells
the truth, the mechanism calls for the bridge to be built and for i to pay
no tax. The only way that i can change the outcome is to report (falsely)
a valuation 9 less than ~*. Then the bridge won't be built, and 7 will
pay a tax of 5~i. Reporting truthfully, then, leaves i with utility v*, and
a misrepresentation sufficient to change the outcome leaves i with utility
equal to ~ $i. Since we assume in this case that vie > 0,9 > 2
Thus, telling the truth is a best reply; also, ends up with utility v*, s0
(0) holds in this case. oo CL
Suppose that, for some i and i, 5 <0 and v' + >t > 0. The
bridge will be built if reports truthfully, and he will pay a tax of Xx,
which gives i utility i + 5% > 0. So (c) holds. Moreover, the only way
that i can change the outcome (and his utility) is by reporting a valuation
#t < 5t. But if he does this, $i 0 and < 0, which means that
there is no transfer, and i winds up with utility 0. So misrepresenting is
not beneficial.
(The other two cases are left for you.)
This particular mechanism is called the pivot mechanism because a tax
is paid by farmer i only if his valuation v* is pivotal, that is, only if his
valuation changes the decision from what it would be if he reported zero.
18.3. The pivot mechanism 711
Moreover, when 4's valuation is pivotal, i is taxed an amount that is just
equal to the social distress his pivotal valuation causes; ie., if he causes
the bridge to be built when it otherwise wouldn't be, he pays ~*, which
is the monetary cost to the rest of the farmers of the bridge; and if he
causes the bridge not to be built when it otherwise would be, he pays
#, the monetary benefit to the other farmers of the bridge.
This mechanism satisfies our four criteria, and in fact it is the only
mechanism that does this, so if we accept the four as desirable, we have
come upon quite a nice result. Condition (a), however, seems especially
suspect. The justification for it is that we wish to achieve a social op-
timum, which in this society where utility is linear in money means
maximizing the sum of individual utilities. But the mechanism doesnt
achieve a social optimum if there are any pivotal individuals, because it
produces a positive net collection of taxes. Note well: The transfers are all
nonnegative, and they are all zero only if there are no pivotal individuals.
This raises the question, If there are pivotal individuals, so a net sur-
plus of funds is collected, what happens with that surplus? Unthoughtful
answers are to give it back to the farmers, or to hold it for the next project
to come along, or to use it to throw a dance. If the surplus is used in any
fashion that gives utility to the farmers, and if the farmers anticipate this,
then the direct revelation mechanism isnt what we described. We would
have to include in the farmer's utilities the value they attach to the uses to
which the surplus is put. But our uniqueness result is that the only mech-
anism that will achieve the four required properties is the one described.
This means that if we wish to achieve (a) through (d), we must find a use
for the surplus that is of no benefit (or detriment) to our farmers. The
surplus must be burned, or mailed off to aid some other lucky group of
individuals about whom none of our farmers cares in the least. (And our
farmers cant anticipate that any such largesse may result,in a reciprocal
gift coming to them. It is probably safest to burn any surplus.)
Condition (a), then, can be attacked on the grounds that it doesnt
guarantee that a social optimum is reached. The decision whether to build
the bridge will be done optimally, but at a waste of other social resources,
if there are any pivotal individuals.
We can put this another way. Condition (2) would imply that a so-
cial optimum is reached if it were joined to the following modification of
(d): The sum of taxes and transfers, not including the taxes collected to
build the bridge if the bridge is built, totals zero precisely. This condi-
tion is known in the literature as the balanced budget condition, and what
we know from our analysis is that it is impossible to satisfy this together
with (a), (b), and (). In fact, one can show that the balanced budget
712 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
condition is inconsistent with (a) and (b) alone. It is impossible to achieve
a Pareto optimal outcome in this closed society with a dominant strategy
mechanism.
18.4. The Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem
One way to view the results of the previous section is that asking for a
dominant strategy mechanism may be asking too much. We close by alerting
you to another result that reinforces this message (or which, at least, im-
plies that asking for a dominant strategy mechanism is asking for rather a
lot).
Recall Arrows possibility theorem from chapter 5. The setting is one
with a finite number I of individuals, and a finite number of possible so-
cial outcomes. We let X be the set of social outcomes. Each individual
has preferences >; defined on X that are asymmetric and negatively transi-
tive. 
In Arrows theorem, we were concerned with aggregation of the array of
societys preferences (>1,...,>7) into a social ordering * on X. The story
before was that members of society attempted to design some social choice
rule that would take the array of preferences (>4,...,>) and transform them
in desirable fashion into society's preferences. We saw that a few, seemingly
quite desjrable properties for the social choice rule, forces social choice to be
dictatorial, which doesnt seem very desirable.
One thing unexplained was how, even if we had found a nice social
choice rule, we were going to work out what the preferences of each member
of society were. - Perhaps the preferences of individual would be obvious.
But it seems more likely that at some point individual 7 would have to vol-
unteer what she liked and didnt like. And even if we had a nice social choice
rule, we might worry that individual { would misrepresent her preferences
in an attempt to get social preferences more to her liking.
So we can approach the matter as one of mechanism design. Suppose
we had a desirable social choice rule. In fact, well make things easier on
ourselves: Suppose we had a desirable social choice function that asso-
ciates with every array of individual preferences (>1,...,>r) some outcome
@(>1,...,>1) =z X, which is the outcome that is implemented. All we
want to know is whether the given can be implemented reliably by some
mechanism, where what we mean by reliable implementation is that if in-
dividual preferences are given by (s~1,...,>), then the mechanism (which
involves actions of some sort by the members of society, each of whom knows
her own preferences) has dominant strategies for members of society that lead
.to the outcome (>1,...,>r). By the revelation principle for dominant strat-
egy mechanisms, we can turn this into the following question:
Given , is there a direct revelation mechanism, where each individual is
called upon to reveal her preferences over X, which has truth-telling as a
dominant strategy and which results in the outcome (~1, cee 1) when pref-
erences are (>1,...,>1)? -
18.5. Bibliographic notes 713
The Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem. If the domain of is the space of all I-
tuples of preferences over X , if the range of has at least three elements, and if 
can be implemented by a dominant strategy mechanism, then must be dictatorial;
there is some i such that (>,...,r) is one of the ;-most preferred elements
of X. :
For elegant proofs, see Schmeidler and Sonnenschein (1978) and Barbera
(1983).
You may find the conjunction of the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem and
proposition 2 (on the pivot mechanism) a bit jarring. The pivot mechanism
implements a particular social choice function with dominant strategy mech-
anism, yet that social choice functon is hardly dictatorial. As we noted in
the previous section, the social choice function of the pivot mechanism is not
efficient. But the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem says nothing about efficiency
of the social choice function. So how are these reconciled?
They reconcile because the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem requires that
domain of the social choice function is the set of all possible I-tuples of pref-
erences over the social outcome. In the farmers and bridge story, preferences
over social outcomes come from a very restrictive domain. Preferences are
quasi-linear in the decision whether to build the bridge and the transfer
received by a farmer, and farmers dont care at all about the transfers their
neighbors receive. If we allowed farmers to have all manner of preferences
over the full social outcome, proposition 2 would crumble, as the Gibbard-
Satterthwaite theorem says it must.
18.5. Bibliographic notes
The general subject of optimal contract and mechanism design covers
many different categories in the literature. In this chapter, we have limited
attention to contract design when adverse selection (or hidden informa-
tion) is the issue; compare with chapter 16, where we studied some basic
results in optimal contract design in situations of moral hazard. (Although
we didnt discuss it except in passing in chapter 16, issues related to imple-
mentation of particular sets of actions for interacting agents arises there,
just as in this chapter. If you did problem 3 in chapter 16, you at least got
a taste of this.) And while we have looked at problems that involve only
moral hazard or only adverse selection, problems that mix the two can be
tackled by a mixture of the methods we have explored.
At the same time, the techniques discussed in this chapter are used
to study optimal contracts and problems in social choice, where the objec-
tive is to see which social choice rules can be implemented in particular
environments. (Sections 18.3 and 184 gave two examples of the latter
sort of activity.) Finally, there is a wide range of applications of these
techniques.
714 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
Sending you out into the literature, therefore, is a formidable task. It
is hard to know where to begin, and once a list is started, it is harder to
know where to stop. So we make very limited suggestions.
(1) A neat application of optimal contract design for a single party is found
in Baron and Myerson (1982), where they study how to regulate a monop-
olist whose costs are unknown to the regulatory body. We did nothing at
all with the problem of mechanism design by an informed party; on this
topic, Myerson (1983) is seminal.
(2) The issues tackled with the toy problem of section 18.2 are especially
well developed in the domain of optimal auction design. Myerson (1981)
is seminal, McAfee and McMillan (1987) and Milgrom (1987, 1989) give
very nice, up-to-date surveys, and Bulow and Roberts (forthcoming) is rec-
ommended for the way in which they reduce auction design to a classical
problem in price theory.
(3) For an analysis of a problem of optimal mechanism design that mixes
adverse selection and moral hazard, see Laffont and Tirole (1987).
(4) On the general topics of sections 18.3 and 18.4, Green and Laffont
(1979) is a good place to begin. The introduction to Moore and Repullo
(1988) provides an excellent summary of recent developments concerning
mechanism design in the context of general social choice.
References
Barbera, S. 1983. Strategy-proof and Pivotal Voters: A Direct Proof
of the Gibbard-Satterthwaite Theorem. International Economic Review
24:413-18.
Baron, D., and R. Myerson. 1982. Regulating a Monopolist with Un-
known Costs. Econometrica 50:911-30.
Bulow, J., and D: Roberts. Forthcoming. The Simple Economics of Opti-
mal Auctions. Journal of Political Economics 97.
Crmer, J., and R. McLean. 1988. Full Extraction of the Surplus in
Bayesian and Dominant Strategy Auctions. Econometrica 56:1247-58.
Green, J., and J.-J. Laffont. 1979. Incentives in Public Decision Making.
Amsterdam: North Holland.
Laffont, J.-J., and J. Tirole. 1987. Auctioning Incentive Contracts. Journal
of Political Economy 95:921-37.
76.
1988. The Dynamics of Incentive Contracts. Econometrica 56:1153~
18.6. Problems 715
Luenberger, D. 1984. Linear and Nonlinear Programming, 2d edition. Read-
ing, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Ma, C., J. Moore, and S. Turnbull. 1988. Stopping Agents from Cheating.
Journal of Economic Theory 46:355-72.
McAfee, R. P,, and J. McMillan. 1987. Auctions and Bidding. Journal of
Economic Literature 25:699-754.
Milgrom, P. 1987. Auction Theory. In Advances in Economic Theory, Fifth
World Congress, T. Bewley, ed., 1-32. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
1989. Auctions and Bidding: A Primer. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 3:3-22.
Mookherjee, D., and S. Reichelstein. 198%. Implementation via Aug-
mented Revelation Mechanisms. Stanford University. Mimeo.
. 1989b. Dominant Strategy Implementation of Bayesian Incen-
tive Compatible Allocation Rules. Stanford University. Mimeo.
Moore, J., and R. Repullo. 1988. Subgame Perfect Implementation.
Econometrica 56:1191-220.
Myerson, R. 1981. Optimal Auction Design. Mathematics of Operations
Research 6:58-73.
. 1983. Mechanism Design by an Informed Principal. Economet-
rica 51:1767-98.
Palfrey, T., and S. Srivastava. 1987. Mechanism Design with Incomplete
Information: A Solution to the Implementation Problem. Carnegie-
Mellon University. Mimeo.
Schmeidler, D., and H. Sonnenschein, H. 1978. Two Proofs of the Gibbard-
Satterthwaite Theorem on the Possibility of a Strategy-Proof Social
Choice Function. In Decision Theory and Social Ethics, 'H. Gottinger
and W. Leinfellner, eds. Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel Publishing.
Stiglitz, J. 1977. Monopoly, Nonlinear Pricing, and Imperfect Information:
The Insurance Market. Review of Economic Studies 44:407-30.
18.6. Problems
m= 1. Recall that in chapter 9, we considered a large manufacturing mo-
nopolist selling to individual retailing monopolists. Recall that in one
parameterization of the problem, there were fen retailers, three of whom
faced demand of the form p = 12 9z, five of whom faced demand of the
form p = 12 6z, and two who faced demand of the form p = 12 2x.
Costs of production and sales were zero. The retailers are price-takers in
their dealings with the manufacturing monopolist.
(a) Assume that the manufacturer can tailor a take-it-or-leave-it offer for
each individual retailer, of any form desired. To maximize her profits,
what should the manufacturer do?
(b) Suppose the manufacturer is compelled by law to make identical offers
to all ten retailers, but she can otherwise make take-it-or-leave-it offers,
offers with menus where retailers are restricted to taking only one item
from the menu, and so on. What is the best the manufacturer can do in
this instance?
w 2. Consider the problem of designing an optimal insurance contract as
discussed in section 18.1. Prove that it is never optimal to offer consumers
a random contract, where by a random contract we mean one in which
the amount the consumer is left with, y; or y,, is random beyond the
randomness caused by the initial endowment risk. (You should assume
that any additional randomness has the same distribution for high- and
low-risk congumers.) Compare this with problem 12 in chapter 3.
w 3. In the optimal menu of insurance contracts offered to the consumer
in section 18.1, if p > 0 is it ever optimal to pool the two types of con-
sumer? If p <1 is it ever optimal to offer only full insurance to high-risk
consumers, leaving low-risk consumers uncovered?
a 4. Suppose that the insurance company of section 18.1 was (for some
reason) constrained to offer a single insurance policy. That is, menus are
not permitted. What will the optimal (profit-maximizing) insurance policy
look like? In particular, will it involve full insurance? (Hint: If you did
problem 3, you should have a good start on this. If you need a bit of
inspiration, go back to the analysis in chapter 9 of the manufacturer selling
to retailers under the constraint that all the retailers had to be made the
same single take-it-or-leave-it offer.)
w 5. Suppose, in the context of the menu of insurance policies depicted in
figure 18.6, a number of (cartelized) firms were offering the menu shown,
and consumers could buy the policies from different firms simultaneously.
We imagine the policies being in the form of a premium that is paid at the
outset and, if the lJow-endowment state prevails, a payment that is made
from the firm to the insuree. Hence buying two of the same contract
would double both the premium and the contingent payments. (Don't
18.6. Problems 717
worry about the time value of money or the fact that the premium must be
paid before the insurees endowment is realized.) What would a high-risk
consumer do in this case? What would a low-risk consumer do? How
does this affect the profits of the insurance firms? (How would similar
considerations affect the answers you gave to problem 5 in chapter 167)
= 6. Consider the toy problem of section 18.2. Imagine that the govern-
ment institutes the following procedure: The two firms are asked to bid
(simultaneously and independently) on the prices they will charge. They
may not name a price greater than 4 or less than zero. (Of course, each
knows its own unit.cost when it does this.) If they name the same price,
the order is split between them. If they name a different price, the order is
given entirely to the firm naming the lower price. In both cases, the firm
is paid per unit what it bids.
(a) I we construct from this mechanism the corresponding game (between
the firms) of incomplete information, does the game have a pure strategy
Nash equilibrium?
(b) If not, can you find a symmetric mixed strategy equilibrium?
(c) If you find any equilibrium, what is the corresponding direct revelation
mechanism?
= 7. Suppose we modify problem 6 in two ways. First suppose that the
firms have costs of 1, 2, or 3, with each level of cost equally likely, and with
the cost levels of the two firms independent of one another. (Bach firm
knows its own cost but not the costs of its rival.) Suppose the government
solicits bids from the firms. If they bid the same amount, the order is split;
if one firm bids less, it is given the entire order. And (the second change)
a firm is paid not what it bid but what the other firm bid.
(a) If we construct from this mechanism the corresponding game of incom-
plete information, does this game have a pure strategy Nash equilibrium?
Does it have more than one? If there is more than one, is there any reason
to think that one equilibrium is more tenable than the others?
(b) For the equilibria you find in (a) construct the corresponding direct
revelation games.
(This sort of auction, where the winning bidder is rewarded according to
the bid made by the second best bid, is called a Vickrey auction. Almost
any treatment of auction theory will tell you how to analyze this sort of
auction, if you cant figure it out for yourself.)
718 Chapter eighteen: The revelation principle and mechanism design
w8. (Do this problem only if you have access to a linear programming package on a
computer. Do not attempt to do it by hand.) Consider a problem similar to the
toy problem of section 18.2. The government must procure one hundred
units of some good. The good can be procured from two firms. Each
firm Has a linear cost technology with costs that are private information.
Each firm's costs are either 1, 2, or 3 per unit produced. The marginal
probabilities of each of the three costs prevailing at one of the firms are all
1/3. But the costs are not statistically independent. The probability that
both firms have costs of 1 is 1/6, as is the probability that both have costs
of 2 and the probability that both have costs of 3. The probability that
firm 1 has costs of 1 and firm 2 has costs of 2s 1 /12, as is the probability
of all the other nonequal cost combinations.
If the government knew the costs of the two firms, it could get its hundred
units at a cost-of 100 with probability 1/2, at a cost of 200 with probability
1/3, and at a cost of 300 with probability 1/6, for a total expected cost of
166.67. But, we suppose, the government doesnt know the costs of the
two firms. In addition, we suppose that all that one firm knows about the
costs of its rival is the value of its own costs. That is, firm 1 might know
that its costs are 2, which means that it assesses probabilities 1/4 that its
rival's costs are 1, 1/2 that its rival's costs are 2, and 1/4 that its rival's
costs are 3.
(a) Suppose the government seeks to find the best it can do (in terms of
minimizing expected costs) in a Nash equilibrium of some mechanism.
Firms must agree to participate after they learn their own costs, but then
they are constrained to continue to participate. The government is not
allowed to extract money from the firms; ie., the transfers # must be
nonnegative. What is the best the government can do?
(b) Suppose we remove from (a) the constraint that transfers must be non-
negative. What is the best the government can do? (If you find the answer
striking, see Cremer and McLean [19881)
(0) Suppose the government seeks to find the best it can do (in terms of
minimizing expected costs in a dominant strategy mechanism). What is
the mimimum expected payment the government must make?
29. Consider the mechanism depicted in figure 18.7(a). What are the Nash
equilibria associated with this mechanism (that involve participation by
both firms)? For one of those Nash equilibria, design the corresponding
direct revelation mechanism and verify that participation and truth-telling
is a Nash equilibrium in the corresponding direct revelation game.
18.6. Problems 719
w 10. Finish the proof of proposition 2.
u 11. In the context of the pivot mechanism, show that (a), (b), and the
balanced budget condition are incompatible.
Firms and transactions
part V
+
+
$
$
4
+
$
$
+
+
4
3
$
+
$
$
4
4
$
?
4
9
?
chapter nineteen
Theories of the firm
In this last part of the book, we take a brief look at firms (and, implicitly,
other sorts of economic institutions). Our purpose is two-fold. Needless
to say, firms are important parts of most capitalist economies, and a better
understanding of what they do and why they exist is important to any
conception of the economy. At the same time, discussion of the current
state of theorizing about firms gives us an excellent vehicle for exploring
some of the weaknesses of the methods with which we have.been con-
cerned in the second half of this book and, in the end, with the methods
that we have used throughout. In a sense, this part of the book and espe-
cially the postscript that follows serve as denouement. We take stock of
the limits of the tools that formal microeconomic theory provides.
The plot is as follows: We begin in this chapter with models of the firm
that have the firm as the unit of analysis when they become formal. The
classic theory of the firm as a profit-maximizing production possibilities
set (a wonderful subject for animation) is the starting point, and we begin
by attacking the notion that profit maximization is what a firm does or
ought to do. We then very briefly discuss so-called managerial models of the
firm, where the firm is conceived of as a production possibilities set that
doesnt (necessarily) maximize profits but pursues some other goal that
reflects the interests of managers: maximization of sales revenue, or of
capital, or of the probability of a satisfactory level of profits. Finally we
consider a very different conception of the firm, due to Nelson and Winter
(1982). In this approach, firms are dynamic entities, which at a given point
of time, are described by a production routine and which evolve according
to environmental factors through patterns of search and imitation, looking
for better (but in no sense optimal) routines.
Although the firm is the unit of analysis in all these models, each is
grounded in some finer conception of what goes on within the firm, and
each is amenable to (some) finer-grained analysis. In chapter 20, we ex-
plore a general paradigm for finer-grained analysis, known as transaction
cost economics, where the unit of analysis is the individual transaction. In
this theory, firms are not entities, things of the rough category of the con-
sumer; instead firms are institutions, in the rough category of the market.
724 Chapter nineteen: Theories of the firm
Firms are places in which exchanges take place between individuals, ex-
changes that could take place in markets, but which are more efficiently
consummated within a firm.
In this theory, the line between firms and markets is rather fuzzy, but
what line there is is drawn along the dimension of the frequency of inter-
action, the relative permanance of certain legal and market relationships,
and the extent to which parties to a transaction are tied to one another.
The methods of part III and, in particular, chapter 14 seem natural for an
explanation of such relationships. At the same time, firms both respond
to and call up an array of informationally complex transactions, the stuff
of part IV. So it seems natural to attack some of the basic notions of chap-
ter 20 with those techniques as well. But the complexity of transactions
within a firm and the inherent indeterminateness of equilibrium in situa-
tions of repeated interaction call into question both the standard models
of individual dynamic choice and the relevance of equilibrium analysis,
where every individual is well aware of the role she has to play. In the
postscript, we will see that this presents both a weakness in the current
state of formal theory and an opportunity for the development of new
methods.
a
19.1. The firm as a profit-maximizing entity
In neoclassical theory, the firm is described by a production possibil-
ities set, and it is assumed to choose the (feasible) production plan that
maximizes profits. For the time being, we will accept the notion that those
who control the firm know the production possibilities of the firm, and we
will corisider why the firm would seek to maximize its profits.
Some typically cited reasons are:
(1) It is a good positive model of how firms act.
This may well be the case, but if it is to be believed, we'll need either
some empirical evidence or some more fundamental theoretical analysis
that leads to this conclusion. An example of the latter might be:
(2) Firms that profit maximize will drive out firms that don't by a process of
natural selection.
Natural selection of this sort might work, but just the bald assertion
that this is so is hardly convincing. Some sort of detailed model of the
natural selection process is needed. We will return to this in section 19.3.
19.1. The firm as a profit-maximizing entity 725
But for now we adopt a cynical demeanor and press on for other possible
rationales for profit maximization.
(3) If the managers of the firm don't maximize profits, then the firm will be taken
over by some corporate raider (who can make money by maximizing profits), and
the managers will be fired. Since managers dont want to be fired, they maximize
profits.
At least two things are missing from this argument. First, it requires that
one have faith in the takeover mechanism; that is, we must believe (or
be convinced) that firms that dont maximize profits will be taken over.
Second, it ignores the unhappy possibility that in order to avoid being
taken over, the incumbent management of a firm will pursue any num-
ber of strategies whose aim is to avoid a takeover, to the detriment of
profits. At least in the United States, the financial press is filled with
notions such as: green mail, where incumbent management buys off
a corporate raider (with shareholders money, presumably) to defeat a
takeover attempt; poison-pill provisions, where incumbent management
adopts policies that are solely intended to forestall raiders; and golden
parachutes, where incumbent management provides itself with employ-
ment contracts that transfer a lot of wealth to themselves and away from
the firm in the event that the firm is taken over and they are discharged,
thus (simultaneously) lessening the profits of the firm in the event of a
takeover and lowering the incentives of incumbent management to avoid
a takeover. }
Formal analysis of the takeover mechanism as a form of discipline on
incumbent management has been an area of very active research in micro-
economic theory over the past few years. We will not review this literature
here, except to give the basic observation that provided the starting point
for many recent developments. This basic observation addresses the point
that takeover targets will be those firms from which the raider can expect
to extract profits for herself, which dont necessarily coincide with firms
whose current management is not pursuing maximal profits.
Imagine that a firm is being poorly run to the extent that a share of its
profits is worth only $10. A raider comes along, and it is known by all and
sundry that this raider will, if she succeeds in taking over the firm, adopt
all manner of improvements in the running of the firm, enough so that a
share in the profits of the firm will be worth $20. To take over the firm,
she must buy up a majority of the stock. But can she do so successfully?
If it is known that she will succeed, then an individual holding a share
of stock knows that the stock will become worth $20. This individual
726 Chapter nineteen: Theories of the firm
would, in consequence, refuse to tender (sell) his shares to the raider at
anything less than $20. But if this raider must pay $20 per share, she is
making nothing for herself by taking over the firm, and if there are costs
to attempting a takeover (the costs of finding the target, registering the
tender offer, lining up capital with which to accomplish the takeover), she
will not even try. She must be compensated if she succeeds, to persuade
her to try.
How might she be compensated? She might take her compensation in
the form of perks: an overly generous salary for herself, a corporate jet, a
corporate retreat in the Bahamas; these are hardly profit maximizing. She
might benefit by diluting the value of the shares, once she takes control: If,
for example, she owns a competing firm, she might be able to sell some of
the assets of the firm taken over to her original firm at less than their full
value. This doesnt sound like profit maximization, per se, nor is it clear
that targets possessing such assets include all poorly run firms. She could
benefit if she already holds a significant fraction of the shares of the firm
(valued, until she shows her hand, at something less than $20 per share);
she benefits to the extent that the shares she purchased (quietly) at $10
or so per share will become worth $20 if she succeeds. This story hangs
together rather well, as long as the raider has an opportunity to accumulate
quietly a number of shares large enough so that the improvement in their
value covers the costs of the takeover. But then raids that will result in
minor improvements only will not pay for themselves, and while grossly
mismanaged firms may be takeover targets, firms that are not so poorly
managed will not be targets, and profit maximization will not be achieved
by the discipline of takeovers.
We will not attempt a formal presentation of any of these ideas or
those that follow them in the literature; a reference will be provided at the
end of the chapter. For our purposes, the point is that justification (3) may
not be entirely erroneous, but it requires a good deal of study if it is to
be believed, and those analyses that have been performed do not provide
unambiguous support of the justification.
(4) (a) Profit maximization is in the best interests of shareholders of the firm.
(b) Shareholders can and do create incentive schemes for managers that force
managers to do what is best for the shareholders. So we conclude that managers
maximize profits.
The second part of this argument, that shareholders are able to (and
do) give managers the incentives to do whatever it is that shareholders
want, is somewhat dubious; this should be dear from our study of
19.1. The firm as a profit-maximizing entity 727
incentives in part IV. At least, it should be clear that assertion (b) requires
some very substantial justification itself.
Be that as it may, we take this opportunity to attack (a). Suppose
that managers are just good-hearted people who will automatically do
whatever is in the best interests of the firms shareholders. Should they
select whatever production plan maximizes the firms profits?
The notion that shareholders necessarily want the managers of their
firms to maximize profits is a long-standing component of the folklore
of capitalism. But it is incorrect folklore, if the firm has market power
and if its shareholders participate, even indirectly, in the markets that are
affected by the operations of the firm. Consider four shareholders of XYZ,
Inc., which has market power both in output and factor markets.
Shareholder 1 is a consumer of the output of XYZ. If XYZ has and
uses its market power in the output markets to push up its profits, it does
so at the expense of its customers, who must pay more for what they
buy. If shareholder 1 consumes a lot of the output of XYZ and owns a
relatively small fraction of its shares, she can be hurt by XYZ's exercise of
market power (in the pursuit of profits) more than she is helped by the
distribution of those profits to shareholders.
Shareholder 2 sells factor inputs to XYZ. If XYZ exploits its market
power in the factor markets to maximize profits, it may increase the divi-
dends that shareholder 2 receives. But it may hurt shareholder 2 more by
driving down the price for the factor that 2 sells.
Shareholder 3, having taken a course in portfolio management and
having been convinced that diversification of her investinents is the wise
course of action, holds shares in many companies, some of which compete
with XYZ, some of which buy from XYZ, some of which sell to XYZ. As
XYZ exercises its market power, it may hurt any of those other companies
(and it may help them, although hurting them is the important possibility
here), and thus make 3 worse off.
Shareholder 4 buys nothing from XYZ, sells nothing to XYZ, consumes
none of the factor inputs of XYZ, and holds only shares of XYZ. But this
shareholder does happen to consume a good that is complementary fo
one of XYZs factor inputs for some consumers (but not for XYZ itself
or for shareholder number 4). Then as XYZ holds down the price of
its factor inputs (in its pursuit of profits, on behalf of shareholder 4 and
others), it indirectly increases demand for the factor from other sources,
which increases demand for the complementary good, which bids up the
ee
1 Recall that if a firm can affect by its actions the prices it faces, it is said to have market
power. If the firm doesn't have any effect on the prices it faces, it is said to be a price-taker
or a competitive firm.
price of the complementary good, which makes poor shareholder 4 worse
off.
What, then, could conceivably be the basis for this bit of capitalist
folklore? Imagine that the firm is competitive. Its actions do not affect the
price of any good. Now consider a shareholder in the company. Imagine
that this shareholder is a consumer just as in chapter 2, who is seeking to
maximize utility, subject to a budget constraint. Some of the consumer's
wealth comes from the dividends the firm pays, and so the consumer is
better off the more wealth she has, hence the consumer is better off the
greater are the dividends paid by the firm. Moreover, higher dividends
equals greater wealth is the only impact that the firm's decisions have on
the consumer, since the firm is competitive. In particular, because the
firm doesnt affect any prices, it has no impact on the profits made by
other firms,* .and thus it doesn't indirectly affect the consumer's wealth
adversely. Hence, in this case, the consumer is unambiguously better off
when the firm maximizes profits.> What goes wrong in the four cases
above is that when the firm is not competitive, the effect it has on prices can
undo the beneficial effects of greater wealth for the consumer/shareholder.
We-can repose this point in the context of the model of general equilib-
rium with firms developed in chapter 8. Recall that consumer i's problem
there was to maximize utility-of consumption subject to a budget constraint
which took the form
J
prz<pe+y spd,
j=
where p gives equilibrium prices, is the consumers consumption bundle,
' is.is endowment, s" is i's share of the profits of firm j, and 2 is the
production plan of firm j. It is clear that consumer { is better off if p - 27
is raised (as long as s* > 0) and p doesnt change: The budget constraint
loosens. But if p changes with changes in 27, then no clear statements can
be made.
We could make clear statements (or, rather, relatively clear statements)
if we knew that any change in the prices faced by consumer was small
relative to the change in i's income generated by increased profits for firm j.
Consider, for example, a case where the only price firm j affects is the price
of its own output. If consumer is a shareholder in firm j who consumes
@ Nonprice externalities are also ruled out.
% We should have said earlier: We have in mind a world in which all profits are paid out
in dividends. This isnt a realistic assumption; firms retain part of their profits in reality. This
brings on multiperiod complications, for which see the discussion following.
19.2. The firm as a maximizing entity 729
little of firm 7's output, then perhaps we can be sure that she will prefer an
increase in the profits of firm j.
One must be careful with this argument. While consumer /shareholder {
may not consume much of the output of firm J, neither may she hold many
shares of firm j. Very roughly put, we need to know that her share of the
output of firm j is very much smaller than her share of J's equity. Insofar
as consumers can easily hold well-diversified portfolios (and the theory of
finance teaches that well-diversified portfolios may well be optimal choices),
it isn't clear how the comparison will run. For an exact analysis of all this,
see Hart (1979).
We take this opportunity to add a further thought: Once we pass from
a one-period, no-uncertainty world, into the world of uncertainty and many
periods of economic activity, it isnt even clear what the term profit maxi-
mization means. The firm will hold some assets through time, and it could
increase short-run profits by selling off those assets. In the interests of long-
run profit maximization, we surely dont expect it to do so. The firm may be
able to influence overall price levels by, for example, triggering inflation. Prof-
its are usually measured in dollar amounts, so do we expect a firm to trigger
or increase inflation, insofar as it is able, so that it will make more dollars and
hence greater overall profits? How do we compare dollars earned in one state
of nature against dollars earned in another? The usual pat answer to all these
questions is: The firm should maximize the value of current shareholder's
equity. There is a large literature concerning why this might be so (and what
it means), which comes down to: This makes sense (once again) only if the
firm is a price-taker, where being a price-taker in this context entails many
more conditions. (For a survey of this literature, see Kreps [19871.)
All this isn't to say that firms with market power dont maximize
profits, only that because it is in the interests of shareholders is a poor
excuse indeed.
19.2. The firm as a maximizing entity
If a firm doesnt maximize profits, what might it do? Suppose we
continue to take the point of view that the managers of the firm are aware
of all'of its production possibilities, but they do not choose a production
plan to achieve maximal profits. Instead they choose in order to advance
some other (personal) agenda.
What might that agenda be? To know this, we must consider, however
informally, the objectives of those who control the firm. Think of managers
who are distinct from shareholders. Of course, shareholders (working, one
presumes, through the board of directors, which is another class of indi-
viduals whose interests and incentives must be analyzed) will attempt to
provide managers with incentives to act on behalf of shareholders. So
that there is no ambiguity about what is in the interest of shareholders,
730 Chapter nineteen: Theories of the firm
imagine that the firm is competitive; shareholders would wish the man-
agers to maximize profits. Accordingly, we can imagine that managers are
given incentives to maximize profits though stock option plans, bonuses
tied to the profits the firm earns, and so on.
Even so, managers are motivated by things other than their salaries.
Managers like prestige, and it is sometimes held that the prestige a man-
ager is accorded by her peers derives from the size of her organization
measured in terms of gross sales or in terms of capital. (By what mea-
sures, for example, are the Fortune 500 ranked?) Of course, the single-
minded pursuit of ever-increasing sales or physical plant and equipment
will shortly drive a firm into bankruptcy. But we might imagine a manager
whose objective is to maximize some combination of profits and sales and
capital; or one who seeks to maximize sales or capital subject to a mini-
mum profit constraint.
And when there is uncertainty about profits, managers must Worry
about the chances of profits so low that shareholders become angry and
displace them. A manager, liking her position of power and prestige, may
well become conservative in the actions she takes, so as not to lose her
position in some risky venture that holds out excellent prospects for profits
in expectation, but that at the same time holds out some chances of losses
or even worse.
Managerial theories of the firm begin with discussions of the sort above,
and move from such informal discussions to models of firms in which |
the firm chooses a production plan, say, to maximize sales subject to a
profit constraint, or to maximize capital subject to a profit constraint, or to
maximize the probability that profits stay above some critical level. This
sort of theory is not much in vogue these days, but it presents a first
variation on the neoclassical model of the firm firms as maximizing
entities with well-defined production possibilities sets.
A variation on managerial theories of the firm (and a variation that is
somewhat more in vogue at the current time) is the notion of the worker-
managed firm. In this sort of model, the firm is run in the interests of its
workers; the production plan is selected in order to maximize the size of
the wage bill the firm pays, or the average compensation per worker. As
with managerial theories, the firm's production possibilities are assumed
known to some decision maker, who then selects whatever production
plan that maximizes a well-defined objective function.
3 And it is worth observing here that it is far from clear that managerial compensation
provides managers with the incentive to maximize profits. Excellent empirical work has been
conducted on the structure of managerial compensation packages; see, for example, Antle
and Smith (1986) and Gibbons and Murphy (1989).
19.3. The firm as a behavioral entity 731
19.3. The firm as a behavioral entity
To go one step further away from the neoclassical model, we can
imagine treating the firm as an entity that acts in a particular fashion, but
which doesnt (necessarily) act in a way that can be described as maximiz-
ing anything at all. This sort of model is especially relevant in a dynamic
setting, since most interesting behavioral patterns are dynamic.
To set the scene, imagine an industry in which there are a large number
of firms; six to be precise. Each of these firms hires capital and labor to
produce an undifferentiated product. Demand for this product is given
by the demand function X =100-P, where P is the price of the good in
question and X is the industry level of supply. Because there are 50 many
firms in the industry, firms are price-takers. In any event, the prices of
capital and labor are unaffected by any decisions taken by this industry;
for convenience we imagine that these prices are both one.
Production in this economy occurs in each of a sequence of periods:
t=0,1,.... In period t, the production function of firm 4 depends on two
parameters cf and f; and is given by
y= , - .
ot 1af
Besides the costs of the two factor inputs, each firm also has fixed costs of
100 per period.
Both of and i change with time. Specifically, suppose that of =
8ai_,+.05+, where is a random variable that is uniformly distributed
over the interval (0,.1). And fi = 946} _, + .02+ 8; + 7}, where &; and 7
are uniformly distributed over the interval (0, 01). It is assumed that
the , 4}, and ; are all independent of each other. Note that of will be
independent across firms, whereas the Bi will be correlated across different
firms because of the common shock term 6.
(You should be able to convince yourself that if we begin with of 
,1) and a fi (0,1), then of and B; for every will live in the interval
(0,1). The sequences of parameters will look something like random
walks on a rubber band; they will drift slowly, with enough pull towards
5 so that they never drift too far away from that level. In table 19.1, you
will see typical sequences of {af} and {Bi} for i = 1,...,6, beginning
with of = .37,.38,...,.42 and fj = .5 for all 7, generated by Monte Carlo
simulation.)
We have in this example an industry in which the production func-
tions of the firms are uncertain and move through time. Note that there
732 Chapter nineteen: Theories of the firm
PERIOD 1 PERIOD 4
FIRM ALPHA BETA . FIRM ALPHA BETA
1 422308 50068 1 A76185 495287
2 371998 50521 2 398806 502979
3 452788 501514 3.408959 497389
4 458984 501289 4 45912 511639
5 A16701 500184 5 456818 508136
6 433592 500652 6 492404 498119
PERIOD 2 PERIOD 5
FIRM ALPHA BETA FIRM ALPHA BETA
1 466295 495808 1 525771 491632
2 41925 501068 2 403722 497977
3 439777 496075 3 397327 495878
4 478998 504609 4 457687 509075
5 427759 499498 5 417736 502173
6 491228 49901 6 450174 48946
PERIOD 3 PERIOD 6
FIRM ALPHA BETA FIRM ALPHA BETA
1 522857 494829 1 500224 494885
2 395073 500286 2 405354 496073
3 A71801 499734 3 455182 4957
4 447678 507847 4 510295 510537
5 467395 504796 5 476586 497293
6 45029 .494539 6 473573 493652
Table 19.1. Sequences of {ai, pi} for i=1,...,6 and t=1,...,6.
is a common component to this uncertainty and an idiosyncratic com-
ponent. How would a neoclassical economist handle this sort of uncer-
tainty? It depends on what the firms are presumed to know about their
production functions. We might imagine that the firms know at each date
t just what their production functions are. Then we can imagine that firms,
acting as price-takers, set their output quantities to maximize profits. The
supply function of any individual firm, if firms are price-takers, is given
by zH(P; ai, i) = (PB})P:/9F) % Note that oi doesnt enter into this at
all, owing to the nature of the production function and the fact that (we
assume) prices of capital and labor are always equal. In a more complex
 You might wonder how it is that firms know the equilibrium price when they set their
output quantities. If this bothers you, you might think in terms of a Cournot-style model,
where firms take as given the equilibrium production levels of their rivals.
-
19.3. The firm as a behavioral entity 733
example, say where the prices of capital and labor were different, a! would
enter into the firm's supply function. 
In terms of our example of a six-firm industry, and the set of parameter
values given in table 19.2, this would give the corresponding equilibrium
shown in table 19.2. We'll say where these parameters come from in a bit.
One might object to this story about the firm knowing precisely the
parameters of its production function. We might suppose that the firm
only learns the values of of and f after it produces in period . In this
case, we could move (within the neoclassical tradition) to a model in which
firms pick their production plans with a view towards, say, maximizing
their expected levels of profits, given whatever information they happen
to have available when production decisions must be made. This gets
very complicated very quickly, and so we won't try to work out what the
equilibrium would look like.
Instead, we move next to a general critique of the neoclassical ap-
proach to the problem, following the more general critique of the neoclas-
sical approach by Nelson and Winter (1982).4
Nelson and Winter contend that it is unlikely the firm would even be
aware of the distribution of its possible production function. What the
FIRM ALPHA BETA CAPITAL LABOR OUTPUT PROFITS
53197 49805 85.58 75.30 12.56 $62.14
.50980 50038 84.76 81.50 12.92 $66.01
51384 49318 77.21 73.05 11.85 $54.42
55856 49935 91.52 72.33 12.76 $64.28
50430 .49807 81.15 79.77 12.56 $62.17
52309 ...49168 76.99 70.19 11.64 $52.16
OO GN
price: $25.72
Table 19.2. Theoretical equilibrium values for given of and f.
 We haven't said anything about what firms know about each other's production func-
tions. In this example, what firm i knows about the values of al and 8 turns out to
be irrelevant on two grounds: The nature of firm js production function is such that its
supply function doesnt depend on of ; the supply of firm j does depend on f, but the
price-taking assumption implies that firm i will be able to react to equilibrium prices,
and so doesn't need to know about js supply function. If we had an underlying model of
imperfect competition, where, say, the firms had Cournot conjectures about each other, then
we would need to say what each firm knows about the other firm's 37s.
* What follows is a very quick summary of the arguments of Nelson and Winter. Consult
their book for a fuller account.
734 Chapter nineteen: Theories of the firm
firm knows (in quotes, because no single entity has this knowledge)
is the pattern of productive activities that it has been able to follow in
the past, its routine. The model given would have the firm changing the
amounts of capital and labor from period to period, with changes in the
two parameters. This is unlikely to happen in reality. Firms will change
their production routines only infrequently. Costs are involved in shifting
production routines, both in terms of hiring/discharge costs, and also (and
more fundamentally) in getting members of the organization to adapt what
they do. Nelson and Winter present an image of the firm as a truce
among various employees, suppliers, and so on, wherein the conflicting
interests of those parties are reconciled. While Nelson and Winter do not
delve formally into the mechanics of the truce, they do note that insofar
as what a firm does at any point in time is the result of such a fruce,
and insofar as truces, once made, are relatively hard to rearrange, firms
routines will not jump around in response to relatively minor changes in
their opportunities, technology, and so on.
This is not to say that firms never change what they do. But they
change relatively less frequently than the neoclassical model would pre-
dict. Firms change in response to a perception that making a change
represents substantial gains. When they do change, moreover, they do not
necessarily optimize in any exact sense. They search somewhat haphaz-
ardly for ways in which to change, and (especially) they tend to imitate
the actions of those rivals that they think are doing better. (Think of all the
manufacturing firms in the United States that have attempted to imitate
Japanese manufacturing techniques over the past decade without a very
clear understanding of why or how those techniques work.) Indeed, the
patterns of search and/or imitation that a firm chooses to employ is itself
a matter of organizational routine; if one method of search has proven
fruitful in the past, then it is apt to be the method relied upon at the
present, and it will continue to be relied upon until the firm feels the need
to change its search/imitation routine.
In place, then, of the neoclassical pair of concepts, the opportunity set
and profit-maximization criterion, Nelson and Winter offer a different pair of
organizing concepts: the short-run production routine and the longer-run
process of search for a better routine. They then take this pair as character-
izing the single firm and embed firms in an environment where the firms
will act, interact, and change according to the behavioral models posed
5 A true-blue believer in the neoclassical model would object that one can build into a
neoclassical model the costs, if any, of adjusting the levels of factor inputs. That is, the prob-
lem is not with the neoclassical model, but with an overly simple specification of it in this
context. We will deal with this objection in a bit.
ee or error
19.3. The firm as a behavioral entity 735
and the overall environmental equilibrium. The objective is to see how
the observed behavior of firms and the overall environmental equilibrium
evolve together.
To take a very simple example, suppose in a six-firm industry that each
firm acts as follows. Each begins with a routine that describes how much
capital and labor is hired. Fixing the capital and labor quantity choices
by firms, the firms different production functions yield levels of output
for each firm, and hence a market (equilibrium) price for the firms and
profits for each firm. In each period, firms profits are reported publicly,
and these serve as the cue for firms to change their routines: When a firm's
profits are more than 15% below the industry average, the firm searches
for a new pattern of production. This search is conducted in two parts:
The searching firm engages in introspection, to see whether fo adjust its
capital to labor ratio. And it imitates more successful rivals in setting its
level of capital input.
Specifically, a firm that is searching adopts the level of capital em-
ployed by its most profitable rival. Note that firms may be making mis-
takes by so doing; the firm being imitated may be profitable because its
scale parameter fis relatively high or even because it has found a prof-
itable (for it) capital/labor ratio. Firms recognize that they should not look
to other firms for the right capital/ labor ratio for themselves, so they do
not engage in imitation here; instead, if a firm decides to search (ie. if its
profits are more than 15% below the industry average), it draws a noisy
signal \ of the optimal capital proportion oi. Specifically, A = pai,
where p has uniform distribution from .9 to 1.1. If A is more than 5%
away from the ratio the firm is currently using, the firm adopts the ratio
given by \; otherwise it stays with its old capital/labor ratio. (The ratio-
nale for this bit of the model is that changing ratios is costly, and firms
will not undertake to make a small change.) After each period's price and
profits are realized, firms decide whether to search as above. If they decide
to do so, they carry out the search in time for next periods production.
Parameters for production for the following period evolve according to
the random process specified above, firms set their levels of inputs, and
50 On.
What will happen in this industry? Will firms evolve to a posi-
tion where their behavior approximates the behavior of profit-maximizing,
competitive firms? The system of behavior described above is fairly simple
to describe, yet it seems too complex to answer even these simple ques-
tions analytically. We can, however, simulate the system. A Monte Carlo
simulator for this system was built, where firms were started off know-
ing the correct capital/labor ratios and producing at the theoretically
736 Chapter nineteen: Theories of the firm
PERIOD 98
FIRM ALPHA BETA PROFITS SCALE RATIO
1 530549 499526 173.835 110.003 539757
2 519665 495387 160.707 126.692 .468657
3 529616 490394 156.749 118.087 .502806
4 511884 .50331 180.407 124.876 475472
5 500778 494868 180.98 132.596 494924
6 522573 495059 158.708 108.484 547317
PERIOD 99
FIRM ALPHA BETA PROFITS SCALE RATIO
1 507066 499206 172.128 110.003 539757
2 545456 496198 161.179 126.692 468657
3 527188 492893 170.285 118.087 .502806
4 518491 503433 186.755 124.876 475472
5 456039 497635 182.573 132.596 .494924
6 528068 489151 158.599 108.484 547317
PERIOD 100
FIRM ALPHA BETA PROFITS SCALE RATIO
1 531965 498054 172.694 110.003 539757
2 500804 500375 174.758 126.692 468657
3 513837 493177 168.342 118.087 502806
4 558562 499345 156.798 124.876 475472
5 -.504303 .49807 187.03 132.596 494924
6 523086 491682 154.07 108.484 547317
Table 19.3. Results from a simulation.
correct scale for the starting values in table 19.1, and then 100 periods
were simulated. The results of periods 98, 99, and 100 are given in table
19.3. In the first two columns we list the firms production parameters
of and gf; in the third column, the firms levels of profits; in the fourth
column, the total amount of capital and labor the firms hired; and in the
fifth column, the proportion of total capital and labor that is capital. Note
that a firm that knows its production function would want the first and
last columns to be equal. And if the firms conform to the neoclassical
model and know their production functions, they would be producing
at a total scale (column 4) of approximately 156.25. More precisely, for
the values of period 100, the theoretical equilibrium values are given in
table 19.2.
In the three periods represented in table 19.3, no firm engaged in
search, 50 no firm modified its production routine. Nonetheless, levels of
19.3. The firm as a behavioral entity 737
profits bounce around as the firms production parameters move. In the
one hundred periods simulated, fifty-one searches were conducted.
What do we learn from this simulation? This is a very simple model,
built for exposition and not to conform to any realistic model of how
firms operate, so the appropriate answer must be nothing about the real
world. Nonetheless, we can learn something about the model we have
built. The most striking thing about the ending values are that firms are
producing at a scale significantly below the scale they would use according
to the neoclassical model based on. the hypothesis that they know their
production functions. And, in consequence, they are making higher profits
than they would according to the neoclassical model. This particular
simulation was run several times, and for 1,000 periods, and the scales
observed in period 100 are not atypical of where firms wound up after
1,000 periods.
Can you see why this is happening? We'll give the answer in the
next; paragraph, but if you like to play detective, this is a good chance.
The model we have described here is very seriously flawed, and the flaw,
while obvious after the fact, illustrates my own lack of experience with
this sort of model. Can you see where I screwed up?
Think about the evolution of the capital levels firms employ. A firm
either keeps its level of capital or it copies the level employed by one of its
rivals. I began the simulation with six different levels of capital, and when
the first firm began to search only five were left, and so on. In the situation
described in table 19.3, only two of the original six capital levels are left,
and (it is relatively easy to prove rigorously) eventually only one level of
capital will remain. Moreover, I began the model with six levels of capital
appropriate for as of .37, .38, .39, 4, 41, and 42, which is significantly
lower than the long-run levels of a we see (which roam around in the
neighborhood of .5). Hence I started the industry off in a capital-poor
state, and I imposed dynamics for capital that ensured the industry could
never escape; capital levels can never rise above the largest initial level
of capital (around 65) or get any smaller than the smallest initial level of
capital (around 59). Without some external source of mutation in capital
levels that would allow a firm to experiment with a larger level of capital
(and discover how profitable this can be), there is no way for the firms
in this industry to attain the neoclassical scale of 156.25 once they realize
that capital/labor ratios should be approximately one-to-one.
 Be careful here: The profits of firm i are high because the other firms are producing at
a relatively small scale. Given the scales used by the other firms and given the price-taking
assumption, a firm that knows its production function would make much higher profits by
increasing its scale from the values in table 19.3.
738 Chapter nineteen: Theories of the firm
This is a very simple and flawed example of the mode of analysis
adopted by Nelson and Winter. Their book should be consulted for more
complete, better-analyzed, and (needless to say) much better models. But
the basic constructions in this model and the use (in the end) of a sim-
ulation model to see how things evolve is typical of their general plan.
It would be very useful to complement their simulations with analytical
analysis, but even in the simple model given above, you can see how hard
analytical analysis would be.
We can tie this mode of analysis to an idea from section 19.1. Re-
call that one of the alleged reasons for believing that firms act as if they
maximize profits is that in an evolutionary sernse profit-maximizing firms
will come to dominate the industry at least insofar as there is initially
a mix of firm types, and profit-maximizing firms survive longer and
grow larger. Presumably, one would build a model where firms behaved
differently some coming closer to profit maximization in their routine
and in their search behavior, and some further. And one would wish to
build into the model a stronger tie from period to period. For example,
one could naturally model capital as a durable good, subject to depreci-
ation, and have firms accumulate capital out of retained earnings. That
way, more profitable firms would have higher earnings and, in accordance
with the story we are attempting to provide, more profitable firms would
grow more quickly and dominate less profitable firms. The point is- that
with such an elaborated model we could either give a decent burial to the
story that competition leads to dominance by profit-maximizing firms
or we could provide a setting in which the story is theoretically consistent.
Some work along these lines has been done by Nelson and Winter, but a
lot more remains.
This is a very new mode of analysis in economics, and it is clearly one
that deserves further development in building models, running simula-
tions, doing more exact analysis, and developing procedures for calibrating
and testing models. Certainly, the sort of behavioral patterns that are nat-
urally built into these models are more realistic than those in simple neo-
classical models. A true believer in the neoclassical model would have a
ready retort to all this, which would run something like: One can accom~
modate within the neoclassical framework all manner of adjustment costs,
search costs, and so on. The behavioral models of Nelson and Winter are
entirely ad hoc. The right way to do business is to stick with the standard
 }
7 Actually, the simple model we have given is amenable to straightforward analysis, but
only because it is so badly flawed.
19.4. Firms in the category of markets 739
model of maximizing behavior, complicating the environmen But to
accommodate all these things within a neoclassical framework is at least
an awesome undertaking and probably impossible. If we are unable to
analyze these models, then it is difficult at least to see how managers can
truly optimize dynamically in the vastly complex problems they are set. In
any event, the notion of a single manager deciding on a production plan
for the entire firm does not seem very descriptive of the way firms make
decisions. And we still dont have any good reason to believe in profit
maximization as being descriptive. of what firms pursue. Any of these
would be sufficient grounds to push research in the direction of models
of the sort described above. Put all together, they make the case fairly
compelling: If profit maximization is a good model, then a demonstration
of that fact (along these lines) should be feasible.
19.4. Firms in the category of markets
So we have firms first as profit-maximizing entities, and then as
(fill in the blank) maximizing entities, and then characterized behaviorally.
In each case, the firm is an entity. In the justification for the sort of iner-
tial behavior seen in the simulation model, in the justifications for some
of the criteria that replaced profit maximization, and even in the justifica-
tions that are made for profit maximization, we see reference to the actors
within the firm: managers and raiders in section 19.1, managers (and their
objectives) in section 19.2, and the truce within a firm in section 19.3.
But these are largely informal arguments. (The literature on takeovers is
quite formal, and it fits into the category to which we are now coming.)
When it comes down to modeling the firm formally, all these models take
the firm and its behavior as the unit of analysis.
This leaves a very different way of modeling the firm to be explored,
namely the firm as an arena within which the conflicting interests of man-
agers, workers, capitalists, customers, and so on are met and resolved. But
this raises the question: Why should a firm have advantages or disadvan-
tages relative to any other marketplace? To address this question, and
to address generally the notion of the firm (and other organizations) as
marketlike entities, we turn in chapter 20 to the topic of transaction cost
economics.
8 This isn't to say that such a model isn't a good reduced form for what does goonina
firm. But one would like either empirical or theoretical confirmation of this.
740 Chapter nineteen: Theories of the firm
19.5. Bibliographic notes
For a survey of the theoretical work on profit maximization as an
appropriate criterion for managers (in the sense that it is in the interests
of shareholders), see Kreps (1987). For managerial theories of the firm, see
Baumol (1959) and Williamson (1964). There has been quite a lot of analysis
on the takeover mechanism as a restraining influence on managers; an
introductory survey is provided in Schleifer and Vishny (1988). Needless
to say, Nelson and Winter (1982) is highly recommended. To my own
tastes, they are unduly harsh concerning the neoclassical traditions. (My
reasons are given in chapter 1 and dont need reiterating here.) But the
positive aspects of their research program deserve a lot of attention.
References
Antle, R,, and A. Smith. 1986. An Empirical Investigation of the Relative
Performance Evaluation of Corporate Executives. Journal of Account-
ing Research 24:1-39.
Baumol, W. 1959. Business Behavior, Value and Growth. New York: Macmil-
lan.
Gibbons, R., and K. Murphy. 1989. Relative Performance Evaluation
for Chief Executive Officers. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Mimeo.
Hart, O. 1979. On Shareholder Unanimity in Large Stock Market Econo-
mies. Econometrica 47:1057-83.
Kreps, D. 1987. Three Essays on Capital Markets. Revista Espanola de
Economia 4:111-45.
Nelson, R., and S. Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change.
Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap/Harvard University Press.
Schleifer, A., and R. Vishny. 1988. Value Maximization and the Acquisi-
tion Process. Journal of Economic Perspectives 2:7-20.
Williamson, O. 1964. The Economics of Discretionary Behavior: Managerial
Objectives in a Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-
Hall.
19.6 Problems
a 1. Consider an industry in which firms produce an undifferentiated
commodity for which demand is given by X = 100 P. A number of
19.6 Problems 741
firms produce the item in question, all of whom have production function
1/2
v= (mn (55)
a l-a
where Y is the level of output and is some constant from (0,1), KX is
the amount of capital employed, and L is the amount of labor employed.
The prices of capital and labor are fixed at $1 throughout. All firms have
fixed costs of $16. . :
(a) Suppose precisely six firms are in this industry, all of which maximize
profits taking prices as given. What is the equilibrium in this case?
(b) Suppose there is free entry into this industry, with all of the firms
having the production function given above. What is the equilibrium in
this case?
m 2. (a) Suppose that firms in this industry maximize their sales revenue,
taking prices as given, subject to constraint that profits must be nonneg-
ative. What is the equilibrium in this industry if there are precisely six
firms?
(b) What would be the equilibrium if three of the six firms were profit
maximizers and three maximized revenue?
(c) Now suppose that all firms are revenue maximizers, taking prices as
given, subject to a zero-profit constraint. Why is it difficult to contemplate
an equilibrium in a case where there is free entry?
= 3. Suppose that the industry has six firms, each of which seeks to maxi-
mize its use of capital, subject to a zero-profit constraint. (Firms continue
to be price-takers.) What is the equilibrium in this case? |
 4. To repair the model that was discussed and simulated in section 19.3,
one thing that comes to mind is to have firms that are imitating the capital
levels of other firms over-do the imitation. That is, if firm i is imitating
the level of capital of firm j, firm i chooses capital that is, say, three
percent higher than the level of capital of j (on the grounds that firm 7 is
doing so well that firm should do even more of whatever it is that firm
J is doing). This is not much better (in fact, i's worse) than the model
discussed in section 19.3. Why?
u 5. Give suggestions how the model in section 19.3 might be repaired. If
you have access to a computer and know how to construct Monte Carlo
simulations, you might wish to try out your suggestions.
chapter twenty
Transaction cost economics
and the firm
This chapter continues the discussion initiated in chapter 19 about models
of the firm, with consideration given to models where the firm is something
more like a market than a consumer. That is, we think of the firm as an
institution within which transactions between individuals take place an
alternative to transactions that take place in a market. To make sense of
this, we have to see how a transaction placed within the context of a firm
is different from the same transaction placed within a market, which is
the subject of transaction cost economics.
This chapter also continues to prepare for our critique of the methods
that have been developed throughout the book. To accomplish this second
purpose, we take things in somewhat roundabout fashion. To begin, we
recount the theory of transaction cost economics as told by Williamson
(1985).! This recounting will seem more verbal and less mathematical
than topics discussed earlier in the book, and after laying out the theory
along the lines of Williamson (1985), we go back and see how we can
match pieces of that theory with things we did earlier.
20.1. Transaction cost economics and firms
Transaction costs
When undertaking a transaction, parties to the transaction must incur
several sorts of costs. Ex ante costs are incurred before the transaction
takes place. If the transaction is to be governed by a written contract, the
contract must be drafted. Whether governed by a contract or simply by
verbal commitments, the terms of the transaction must be negotiated. Ex
post costs are incurred in consummating and safeguarding the deal that
was originally struck.
1 The rendition given here is not precisely as in Williamson (1985) in emphasis or, in some
minor respects, in organization. And the rendition here is not nearly as rich in examples and
elaborations as is the work being abridged.
In some cases these costs are negligible. But in other cases they can be
quite substantial. Insofar as transactions can be arranged in different ways
(making use of different legal and social institutions, providing more or
less detail in a contract, reserving rights to the transacting parties in one
fashion or another), these different ways will have distinct costs. The basic
notion of transaction costs economics is that transactions tend to be placed
in a way that maximizes the net benefits they provide, including the costs of the
transaction. In particular, a transaction whose (transaction) costs outweigh
the benefits of completion will not be undertaken at all.
To get a better fix on these costs, it is helpful to look at factors that
give rise to them. Williamson compiles a list of these factors in two parts:
factors pertaining to the individuals who undertake the transaction, and
factors specific to the particular transaction.
Human factors
Human beings are boundedly rational and opportunistic. Bounded ra-
tionality is important because, in the first place, it means that it will be
costly for individuals to contemplate and contract for every contingency
that might arise over the course of the transaction; this adds to the ex ante
cost of drafting the contract. These costs may be so high that the individ-
uals fail to provide for the contingency in the contract or fail to undertake
the contemplation necessary to foresee the contingency. And there may
be contingencies that the individuals cannot foresee at all.? Contingencies
that are not provided for ex ante may add to ex post costs, since parties to
the transaction may be required to negotiate further whenever such con-
tingencies arise. And, insofar as it is understood that some contingencies
are not foreseen or provided for ex ante, the parties may build into the
original contract specific means by which the contract will be amended as
required. These means or governance structures bring on costs of admin-
istration and the like.
To say that individuals are opportunistic means that they are self-
interested with guile. If it will further his own weal, an opportunistic
individual will break any of the commandinents. Note well the condi-
tional if here. Institutions can be sometimes arranged so that when an
individual gives his word of honor, then it will not be in his interests
0 go back on that word to extract some short-term gain. (Think back to
chapter 14 or see below if it isnt obvious to you how this can happen.)
2 We will distinguish between contingencies that are unforeseeable and those that could
be foreseen but that are not foreseen because of the costs of contemplation. From a theoretical
point of view, these two categories could be combined by saying that the cost of foreseeing
the first sort is infinite.
20.1. Transaction cost economics and firms 745
To distinguish simple self-interest from opportunism, think of a com-
pletely honest individual who would never break her word or misrepresent
what she knows, but who still seeks to maximize her own welfare. This is
self-interest, as compared to an opportunistic individual who would break
his word or engage in misrepresentation under the right circumstances.
Moreover, our use of the term opportunism is stretched to mean that
it is opportunistic to refuse to divulge information that you hold and an-
other lacks when the other person asks you to give up that information.
That is, if you are selling a used car whose quality you know and a buyer
asks you what the quality is, even to withhold this information would be
opportunistic behavior. 2
Classify individuals according to a three-by-three scheme, where the
first dimension is the individual's degree of rationality and the second is
the individual's self-interest orientation.
For degree of rationality, our three categories are complete rationality,
bounded rationality, and behavioral. A completely rational individual has
the ability to foresee everything that might happen and to evaluate and
optimally choose among available courses of action, all in the blink of an
eye and at no cost. A boundedly rational individual attempts to maximize
but finds it costly to do so and, unable to anticipate all contingencies and
aware of this inability, provides ex ante for the (almost inevitable) time ex
post when an unforeseen contingency will arise. A behavioral individual
acts according to some specified behavioral pattern that doesnt (except
by coincidence) correspond to the maximization of any specific utility or
welfare function.
For the individual's self-interest orientation, to the opportunist and
the completely honest but self-interested individuals discussed, add the
utopian, someone who has a sense of the social good and seeks to maxi-
mize it. ,
Various pieces of economic theory can be thought of as concerning
societies comprising one of the nine classes of individuals so created. If
the individuals in a society are behavioral, then their self-interest orien-
tation is irrelevant once their behavior is specified, since (by definition)
they dont act out of self-interest at all.* Also irrelevant to such individu-
 This stretches the notion of opportunism very far indeed, far beyond its most natu-
ral usage. To amplify, suppose A owns a piece of land on which is buried some: treasure.
A doesnt know where the treasure is, and it is too expensive to dig up the entire plot to
find it; B knows where the treasure is, however, and with that knowledge it would be
worthwhile for B (or, if A had the knowledge, for A) to dig. According to this definition of
opportunism, it would be opportunistic of B to refuse to tell A where the treasure is, if A asks.
3 While correct as stated, this is a bit misleading. Reasonable models of behavior will
reflect the self-interest orientation that is supposed of the individual. For example, firms
746 Chapter twenty: Transaction cost economics and the firm
als is all of orthodox economic theory, which is based on consumers who
maximize. Evolutionary theories, such as in Nelson and Winter, but ap-
plied to the actions of consumers instead of the actions of firms, would
seem to be appropriate to the economic analysis of a society of such div-
iduals.
Most economic theory concerns completely rational individuals. Tf
they are utopian in their interest orientation, then one employs team theory,
in which (it is assumed) all individuals have the same utility function
(which can be thought of as social welfare). They may not have common
information, which makes the subject interesting, but they all act in a
way that anticipates perfectly what their fellows will do contingent on the
information their fellows possess, and they act to maximize some single
criterion of overall welfare. *
Completely rational individuals who are self-interested but without
guile populate the economies of general equi {brium. There is no mention
of deceit or of private information. Since self-interested individuals who
are not opportunistic will not withhold pertinent information, and since
cach side to the transaction is completely rational and so anticipates the
possibly pertinent information that the other side possesses, there will be
no pertinent private information at all (after a round of questions and
honest answers). In undertaking a transaction, therefore, parties know
just what they are getting, and any allowance for future contingencies is
complete and completely understood by all. i
Completely rational and opportunistic individuals populate the mod-
els of moral hazard and incentives and adverse selection and market sig-
naling; ie., the stuff of part IV. One is able to work through how others
will act and react given appropriate incentives. And one is able to work
through the distribution of qualities that will be brought to market, or the
distribution of qualities that accompanies some given signal or other, or
the appropriate (equilibrium) action to take when faced with a menu of
contracts. But the incentives that are put in place (either to take a partic-
ular action or to send a particular signal) must respect the ability of the
individuals to lie, cheat, and steal if so doing would be beneficial
JE
in the simulation model of section 19.3 are #pehavioral, but their behavior is tied to their
wgelf-interest as measured by relative profitability. Similarly, we could imagine a model
of individual behavior where the individual responds to prompts that are tied to her self-
interest such as her levels of consumption of various goods relative to those of her neighbors,
and so on.
4 For an exposition of team theory, see Marshak and Radner (1972).
b In general equilibrium, different firms are allowed to have different production func-
tions. So, as a matter of the formal theory, the fact that one firm can undertake a particular
production plan that another cannot is nof based on proprietary information held by the first.
cee
20.1. Transaction cost economics and firms 747
Self-interest orientation
Self-interested Self-interested
Utopian without guile ~~ with guile
Behavioral Evolutionary methods(?)
Degree of Bounded Temporary Transaction
rationality Team equilibrium |cost economics
Complete theory General Information
equilibrium economics
Figure 20.1. Matching economic theories to types of individuals.
This leaves boundedly rational individuals. For boundedly rational
individuals who are utopian, some pieces of team theory (Marshak and
Radner, 1972) apply. For boundedly rational individuals who are self-
interested but without guile, the literature of temporary equilibrium applies
(See Grandmont [1988].) And, finally, boundedly rational individuals who
are self-interested with guile populate the world of transaction cost eco-
nomics.
Figure 20.1 (loosely adapted from Williamson [1985, fig. 2-1]) presents
all this schematically. (The question mark attached to evolutionary meth-
ods records the relative lack of work along these lines. The usefulness of
evolutionary methods for exploring these categories seems clear, but more
evidence is desirable.)
Qualities of transactions
Bounded rationality and opportunism dont come to much when the
sort of transaction that is contemplated is something like an exchange of
apples for oranges or for money. At least, this is so if we imagine that the
buyer of the apples/oranges is sufficiently well versed in these matters
to be able to tell the quality of a piece of fruit upon quick inspection. It
is the conjunction of the human factors discussed above and various as-
pects of the specific transaction that lead to significant transaction costs.
Williamson identifies three aspects or qualities of a transaction that bear
on the level and nature of transaction costs: asset specificity, extent of uncer-
tainty, and frequency.
A transaction has high levels of asset specificity if as the trade develops
one side or the other or both becomes more tied to and in the power of
the other side. A simple example is a company that makes glass bottles lo-
cating a plant adjacent to a bottler. Before the bottle maker puts his plant
next to the bottler, each side can (potentially) deal with many alternate
traders. If there is negotiation between bottle manufacturer and bottler
748 Chapter twenty: Transaction cost economics and the firm
before any plants are built, we would expect (if there are many of each
type) that the deal struck will reflect other opportunities that each side
has. The technology of the two production processes is such that there
are efficiency gains if the two locate side by side, and we expect the two
to divide, according to some bargaining scheme, the efficiency gains that
come from side-by-side plants. Note well that in ex ante negotiations, if a
bottler doesn't like the deal that a specific bottle manufacturer proposes,
she can (typically) turn to many other bottle manufacturers. But once the
bottle manufacturer puts his plant next to the bottler and the bottler puts
her bottling lines next to the bottle manufacturing plant, each side has
specific assets at risk. Now each side has a degree of monopoly power
against the other; opportunism has scope to operate. The bottler, for ex-
ample, might tell the bottle manufacturer that despite the contract signed
earlier she wants a lower price per bottle. The bottle manufacturer, held
up in this fashion, doesnt have any as-good alternative trading partners.
So, anticipating this possibility, the bottle manufacturer (and, for that mat-
ter, the bottler) may expend resources to negotiate a very rigid contract ex
ante and to have the ability to enforce that contract ex post. Oz, to take
a slightly less oportunistic example, the bottler and bottle manufacturer
may not foresee, ex ante, the impact that plastics will have on their two
industries. But the two will have to adapt their transactions as the tech-
nology for plastic containers dvelops, and their proximity will mean that
each is somewhat a captive of the other in any ex post (re)negotiations.
In the story above, asset specificity is at work on both sides of the
transaction. There will also be cases in which asset specificity binds only
or mainly on one side. To take an example, consider the plight of the
graduate student. After a year or two of study, the student has invested
enormously in assets that are specific to the department at which she
studies, such as meeting specific requirements, passing specific exams, and
50 on. Some of this may be transferable to another department, but much
is not. The department, on the other hand, has much less invested in the
particular student. (When the student proceeds to the dissertation stage,
this balance is redressed to some extent.) What began as an.exchange
in which each party had many alternative trading partners becomes one
in which one side has much more at risk. In such cases, relatively more
resources will be expended in the form of transaction costs to safeguard the
individual student from being exploited by professors and administrators;
e.g., formal structures are set up by which the student can appeal unjust
5 For this to be an example of asset specificity, it is important that the old assets put in
place earlier are not rendered completely obsolete by the new technology.
20.1. Transaction cost economics and firms 749
decisions to department chairpersons, deans, and the like; and both within
the university and in the courts the burden of proof rests more on the
university than on the student.
The second quality of a transaction that bears on its costs is the extent
of uncertainty in the transaction. This goes hand in hand with bounded
rationality. Indeed, uncertainty is the major complexity that gives rise to
bounded rationality. Note that uncertainty here is defined very broadly. It
includes uncertainty about contingencies that can be anticipated, insofar as
it is costly to anticipate them or to include provisions for dealing with them
within a contract. It includes uncertainty about contingencies the nature
of which can only roughly (or not even roughly) be divined ex ante. And
it includes uncertainty of the sort where one party has information that
the other lacks.
Finally, there is the frequency of the transaction. This aspect of the
transaction does not bear on the absolute magnitude of its costs, as with
the previous two aspects, but rather on the relative costs of various means
for dealing with the transaction. When a transaction between two parties
recurs frequently, the two parties can construct special governance struc-
tures for the transaction, even if these special structures are costly, since the
cost. of the structure can be amortized over many transactions. But when
the transaction is a one-time-only transaction or recurs only infrequently,
then it is generally more costly to put into place specialized mechanisms
for this particular transaction and relatively less costly to make use of
general purpose governance structures, which are, perhaps, less than
ideally tuned to the specific transaction.
Classifying transactions by governance provisions
Transaction cost economics lays great stress when classifying different
forms of transaction on the way in which the terms of the transaction are
adapted to circumstances as they arise. These features of a transaction
are called the terms of governance. Terms of governance can be explicitly
and rigidly specified within a contract that governs a transaction, for ex-
ample, an explicit and formalized procedure for arbitration, as in major
league baseball. Or the terms of governance can be implicit, arising from
common practice and law. For example, ownership of an asset generally
 In relations between the courts and universities, private universities are usually allowed
to pursue consistent, so-called deans justice, where the decision of the dean is without se-
rious appeal on procedural grounds. The notion is that if the university follows this practice
consistently, then the student should know of it at the inception of the relationship, and the
courts have no reason to interfere in a private transaction. Of course, this leaves the question
why students would ever trust to dean's justice, a point we will return to in the next section.
750 Chapter twenty: Transaction cost economics and the firm
confers upon the owner the right to command the use of that asset, within
limits. Hence, when a bottler purchases from a bottle manufacturer the
bottle manufacturing plant and simultaneously hires the manufacturer to
staff the facility, the bottler has different rights under law than if she
simply contracts to buy bottles from a manufacturer who owns the bottle
manufacturing plant. The ucontract between the two explicitly specifies
ownership of the assets, and the pattern of ownership together with the
law implicitly specifies the resulting governance provisions.
Williamson (1985, chap. 3) gives the following classification scheme:
Transactions within the framework of classical contracting are those in
which the terms of the transaction are completely specified ex ante. This
includes the textbook exchange of apples for oranges, but goes beyond
this to include any contract where adaptation beyond the explicit terms
of the contract is not expected. For example, a complex purchase and
sale agreement for a given piece of real estate would be included within
this category.. Such P&S agreements typically include very specific clauses
pertaining to liquidated damages: Party 1 receives such and such if party 2
fails to perform in such and such a manner. This sort of explicit, ex ante
provision for nonperformance is typical of classical contracts whenever
nonperformance is an issue. Of course, enforcement of the contract re-
mains a problem; one can rely upon bonded third parties, who act with
very little discretion (such as escrow agents), and in the end (and often
with this sort of contract, from the beginning) the courts are called in to
adjudicate disputes.
As third parties who act with discretion are added, we move into the
realm of neoclassical contracting OF trilateral relationships. The contract no
longer says what damages are due for various sorts of breach or, more
generally, what sort of adaptation will be made in various contingencies,
but instead prescribes a third party who will determine appropriate dam-
ages/adaptation, according, perhaps, to some specified procedure. For ex-
ample, in arbitration one sometimes sees a scheme in which both parties to
the dispute submit their #claims between which the arbiter is compelled
to choose; the arbiter may not propose a compromise.
6 A difficulty in providing illustrative examples in this chapter is that social customs often
decide the form thata transaction takes. Real estate transactions, for example, are conducted
quite differently in different states of the United States, and it is easy to envisage a society in
which the form of real estate transactions is trilateral (see below), with the lending authority
taking the role of the adjudicating third party: The examples that are used throughout this
chapter are drawn from customs and practices that are prevalent in the United States, and
they may not be descriptive of other countries. The obvious challenge in such cases is to ex-
plain in terms of the theory why there are differences. In general, cross-society comparisons
of institutional practices is a very fertile field for empirical tests of the theory described here.
20.1. Transaction cost economics and firms 751
When the two parties to the transaction have no formal agreement
about how the arrangement will be adapted to circumstances but instead
rely upon their own ability to work things out as they go along, we have
a bilateral relationship. Successful bilateral relationships remind one of co-
operation in the repeated game version of the prisoners dilemma: Each
side is willing to cooperate with the other in order to preserve cooperation.
(This connection will be developed more fully in the next section.)
Just as many sorts of trilateral arrangements can be made, so there are
many forms of bilateral contracting. One extreme form deserves special
attention. In a hierarchical transaction one of the two parties retains, by law
or by custom, most of the authority to determine how the contract will
be fulfilled. The second party will retain some explicit rights, such as to
abrogate the contract, perhaps at some specified cost. And certain rights
are implicitly retained under law. But up to such limits, the first party
or hierarchical superior determines how matters will proceed. The chief
example of this form, and the reason for its importance, is the classic labor
contract: A worker earns his wages by carrying out the demands of his
boss, retaining (in economies where slavery and indenture are illegal) the
right to quit the job if these demands become too onerous or distasteful
(cf. Simon, 1951).
When one party to the transaction takes command of the assets of the
second, effectively internalizing the transaction, we have a unified gover-
nance structure. Here the focus is on the fact that ownership connotes
control according to common practice. Note that where slavery and in-
denture are illegal, one party carmot buy the human capital of a second
party; employment of a worker by a firm is not a transaction with a uni
fied governance structure, but is instead a hierarchical transaction (if not
some other form of transaction).
Matching transactions to governance structures
What sort of governance structure will minimize transaction costs in
specific instances? Williamson advances the following scheme: Transac-
tions are classified according to the specificity of the assets involved (from
nonspecific through intermediate specificity to highly specific) and the fre-
quency of the transaction (from occasional to frequent).
If assets are nonspecific, then there is no need for any fancy form of
governance, since there is no need for complex, long-term contracts. Even
if the relationship between the two parties is enduring, the relationship can
be governed by a sequence of short-term contracts, since competition from
the marketplace will prevent either individual from taking too great an
advantage of the other. Classical contracting, then, goes with nonspecific
assets. It is when assets become more specific that the fancier forms come
into play, if at all.
Two caveats to this assertion should be offered. First, this presumes
that the extent to which the two parties face competition in the relationship
is unchanging with time. We can imagine a situation in which A has a lot
of competition initially for 'B, but that competition disappears through time,
even though no physical specific assets are put in place. To keep the simple
conclusion just given while accommodating such a case, we would need to
expand the definition of specific asset to include market power.
Second, we earlier mentioned a purchase and sale agreement for the pur-
chase of real estate as an example of classical contracting. But when buying
and selling real estate, the parties involved commit quite significant specific
assets to the transaction, namely their opportunity to find in timely fashion an
alternative partner should the current deal go awry. What keeps this within
the domain of classical contracting is that the transaction is one with which
there is a lot of experience. A real estate lawyer may be required to explain
to you all the contingencies for which you must make allowance, but the ex-
tent of those contingencies is fairly well known; boilerplate contract forms
can often be used. From the point of view of the match being developed
here, what goes wrong in this case is that we do not have a third axis for
uncertainty or complexity. The usual real estate transaction may be very
occasional (for the parties involved) and may involve substantial specific as-
sets (for'a short period of time), but the range of possible contingencies is
well known; it is not complex in the relevant sense. (Or, alternatively, you
can think of this as a case in which the extent of rationality is substantial, at
least if the parties take the prudent course of action and employ specialists
to help draft the contract.) Hence this sort of transaction can be handled by
a classical contract.
Similar qualifications can be made to almost every piece of the match
between transactions and governance structures that we lay out. We will
refrain hereafter from making these qualifications, but be clear that this is a
very simplistic scheme. It gives general tendencies and it should be qualified
in many ways.
When assets are moderately specific, relational contracting (i.e., tri-
lateral, bilateral, hierarchical) comes to the fore. It is the pattern of the
frequency of the transaction that plays the principal role in determining
which relational-contracting form is best. If the given transaction be-
tween the two parties is repeated between them frequently, then full bi-
lateral contracting can work well. If one party of the two engages in this
sort of transaction relatively frequently (and the second party engages in
7 For frequency of the transaction, you should have in mind the frequency of the specific
transaction or of transactions of a roughly similar nature. Anticipating what will come later,
if two parties never repeat a precise transaction but frequently repeat transactions sufficiently
similar to one another so that parties can carry an overall reputation for. behavior, then we
would essentially have a case of frequent transactions.
20.1. Transaction cost economics and firms 753
Degree of asset specificity
} Intermediate Highly
Non-specific Specificity specific
Rare Trilateral Trilateral or
= _ unified
25 g
EE 3 Bilateral (including
5.5 fo hierarchical when one party
8 g LY engages in this form of
Frequent contract frequently) Unified
Figure 20.2. Matching governance structures to
characteristics of the specific transaction.
the transaction with less frequency), then we may be able to get by with
a bilateral form that gives most of the discretion to the first party; ie, a
hierarchical form may be appropriate. But as the frequency of the trans-
action for either of the two parties decreases, bilateral forms in general
begin to suffer, and it may become necessary to enlist the aid of a third
party who can act in an adjudicary role.
When assets become very specific to the transaction, the costs of rela-
tional contracting rise: Each party has more at risk, and so must engage
in more and more pretransaction planning, during-transaction monitoring,
and Pposttransaction enforcement. A point is reached, then, where the costs
of relational contracting become quite high, and the parties consider, if the
laws permit, a unified governance structure, where one party buys out the
other and takes full command of and responsibility for the transaction.
All these considerations lead to the picture in figure 20.2, adapted
with minor modifications from Williamson (1985, fig. 3-2).
Firms and markets
The connection from the theory just developed to the theory of the firm
is relatively straightforward. A firm corresponds to unified governance;
a firm is a legal entity that commands an array of assets and in whose
name various transactions are consummated (with other firms and with
individuals).?
8 : . .
We will see one reason why in the next section,
9 ; . .
) We will not be very precise here about the differences between corporations, proprietor-
ships, partnerships, and so on. These differences can be significant, but for a first cut at the
theory they are best ignored.
754 Chapter twenty: Transaction cost economics and the firm
Why does this make a firm into something in the category of a mar-
ket? After all, the preceding sentence has firms acting in markets, playing
the sort of role that is played by the individual consumer. Think of it in
terms of the following example: Party A and party B wish to undertake
an exchange. Party A will supply expertise concerning the design of some
product, and B will supply expertise in manufacturing the product. This
transaction requires certain tools computers to aid in the design, and
industrial lathes and various jigs to produce the product. We could imag-
ine A owning the computers and B owning the lathe and jigs, in which
case we would think of the exchange between them as a market-mediated
exchange. Alternatively, we can imagine (say, because once B owns the
jigs, he doesnt need many of the design capabilities of A) that A owns
the computers, the lathes, and the jigs; she then controls a firm, which em-
ploys B for his labor services. The exchange of labor services for money
is a firm-mediated transaction; as distinct from (say) the market-mediated
exchange of a product design for money where B continues to own the
lathes and jigs, or the market-mediated exchange where A obtains from B
finished pieces produced according to plans given to Bby A, which A then
sells to the consumer. If A controls all the assets and employs B, it isn't
important at a first level of analysis whether A owns the assets directly or
controls th assets through some form of corporation; it is A's control of
the assets that changes the nature of the transaction.
In this example, if the design and/or the production technique is propri- 
etary then perhaps the most important asset of all will be the design or the
technique or both. And ownership of this asset is the most complex thing of
all If A owns all the physical capital and also the right to block others from
using the design, so she controls the production amounts, and if B supplies
labor services and is disbarred from taking the knowledge he acquires about
the production technique to form another firm or to some competitor, then
we have a very clean case of a firm (controlled by A) employing B's labor
services. An equally clean case would be where B owns all the physical cap-
ital and the design, and he has the right to employ another designer who
can modify A's original design, while A is barred from using the design or a
modification of it. Now imagine a case where the two work across a market
interface, with A owning the computer and B the machine tools. Who owns
the design? Who controls the amount produced of the good? (If B purchases
the design from A, then presumably B. But if B acts as a subcontractor to
A, then A has this control.) Who controls the ability to modify the design?
( A sells turn-key jigs, then this could be A; if A sells the details of the
design outright, then perhaps both have this right, depending on the details
ee 
10 The legal form of A's contro} may have important consequences for legal responsibilities,
taxes, and the like and, at a second level of analysis, these considerations would enter into
the calculus of transaction cost economics.
pre
tr mere op ee
20.1. Transaction cost economics and firms 755
of the contract between them.) Even a very simple exchange like this one can
become quite complex very quickly.
Inefficiencies in unified governance
This example suggests a question that brings to bear the final piece
of theory that will be recounted from Williamson: What are the relative
inefficiencies of unified governance? When telling the tale of figure 20.2,
it was asserted that we move to unified governance when the level of
specialized assets is high, presumably because the costs of consummating,
monitoring, and enforcing the transaction at arms length, given the amount
at risk and the relative infrequency of the transaction, become prohibitive.
But if one avoids these costs through unified governance, then why not
use unified governance exclusively?"
As our example of A and B points out, the move to unified governance
doesnt avoid transactions all together; instead it changes the nature of
the exchange that must be made. In place of an exchange of plans for
money or finished pieces for money, we have an exchange of labor services
for money. This new exchange comes with an array of transaction costs
itself, and it is the relative costliness of the various sorts of transaction
that determines which form of governance we use. Note well: We see
some cases of our prototypical transaction in which B buys plans from A
in the market (A is an independent industrial designer), cases where A
buys pieces from B (B is a subcontractor), cases where A holds all the
equipment and buys labor services from B (the typical machine shop),
and cases where B holds all the equipment and buys labor input from A
(automobile manufacturers who employ designers). Of course, real-world
examples will usually involve more than two individuals and so will be
vastly more complex than the simple example we have given, but in each
case you should expect to see how the relative costs and benefits of various
patterns of exchange determine which pattern of exchange is used.
Go what are the costs attendant to unified governance? Williamson
points to the differences in what he calls high-powered market incentives
and low-powered internal incentives. That is, with a full market inter-
face between A and B, B faces strong incentives to produce efficiently, to
care for his lathe, and so on. There are many things that dull these
11 A related question can be asked at a more macroeconomic level. As there are such things
as market power and externalities in the world, we know that a market economy will not
necessarily reach a Pareto-efficient outcome. Doesnt this make a centrally planned and run
economy superior? What can the market do that a centralized economy cannot? What are
the inefficiencies in centralization? These questions, which have answers somewhat similar
to the answers we will give for unified governance of a single transaction, are known as the
Lange-Lerner controversy in the literature.
incentives when A owns all the assets and employs B. Williamson's list
(1985, chap. 6), which is longer and more detailed than we can give here,
but a selection follows. If A buys out B's assets and employs B, then A
is unable to match such strong incentives in the employment contract she
gives to B. She has a difficult time monitoring the effort B expends, and
she has an especially difficult time seeing how B expends whatever effort
he does expend. For example, A may give B a piece-rate contract, which
gives B strong incentives to produce parts but very weak incentives to
maintain what are now A's lathe and jigs. If B has private information
about how hard a particular task is, A may have a difficult time wresting
that information from him. It might be imagined that any incentives the
market can provide, A can provide for B as well. But there are measure-
ment problems in this case. If B is responsible for maintaining the lathe
in good condition and if his contract gives him a financial incentive to do
so, the cost of inspecting the lathe must be borne by the two parties. If B's
contract incorporates some measure of the profitability of the entire enter-
prise, B must be concerned that A will manipulate the accounting system
to B's detriment. On a more humane note, if A and B form a long-term
employer-employee relationship, then A may forgive B if certain bad
outcomes Sccur. But this removes the hard edge of market incentives that
B would face in an arms-length, market-mediated transaction.
20.2. Mathematical models of transaction cost economics
The preceding discussion, while (I hope) clear, does not conform to
the style adopted throughout the book. By now you are probably used to
seeing ideas exposited with models that begin with consumers who have
specific utility functions, living in a particular (highly stylized) environ-
ment, who go on to maximize their way to whatever they can get. How
much of Williamson's story can be cast in such terms?
2 There is another side to this last point. Sociologists are usually aghast at the way
economists predicate most behavior on base self-interest, and they are quick to point out
that in a good organization workers internalize the interests of the organization and act
at least in part for it. Presumably, the social forces that lead boss A to forgive and protect
subordinate B also lead subordinate B to act against his own narrow interests and in favor of
the interests of A. Forgiveness may be a cost of unified governance (or any form of long-term
relationship), but it may accompany substantial benefits,
3 Why should we attempt to recast Williamson's story in this fashion? The maintained
hypothesis throughout this book is that formal mathematical modeling promotes comprehen-
sion and clarity of thought, and it is especially valuable for checking the internal consistency
of the stories told.
rem
 res ee + ge
20.2. Mathematical models of transaction cost economics 757
Williamson locates transaction cost economics. in the domain of in-
dividuals who are boundedly rational and opportunistic. After part IV
(and even part III), you should have no problem with opportunism. But
all the consumers we have analyzed in this book have been rational, at
least in the sense that their choice behavior has conformed to the basic
models of chapters 2, 3, and (when there were dynamics) 4. How are
we to model boundedly rational behavior? What does boundedly rational
behavior mean?
As noted in part I, there are no generally accepted answers to these
questions. There has been some movement towards developing theories
of boundedly rational behavior, but nothing yet has taken center stage as
the standard model. In retelling pieces of the preceding story in terms
familiar from earlier parts of this book, we must rely on models of indi-
vidual behavior that are rational in all the standard ways. In effect, we
are pushing the theory of transaction cost economics into the domain of
individuals who are unboundedly rational and opportunistic. It is impor-
tant to think through how this colors the analysis and, as importantly or
more so, what is missed by this.
With all this as prologue, we mention (in varying degrees of detail)
a few of the pieces of the grand scheme of the previous section that have
been scrutinized in more mathematical terms.
Incomplete contracts and ownership
Grossman and Hart (1986) analyze a variation on the basic story of
the designer A and craftsman B. Their focus is on who should own which
assets. The story runs roughly as follows: A and B must, in a two-period
model, decide how much to invest in their particular assets, A in a com-
puter system that will aid the design and B in a lathe and jigs. We let ay
and ap be these levels of investment. The investment levels are chosen,
and then further decisions g4 and gp must be taken. The benefit to party
X(X=AorB) depends on the initial decision a x that X takes as well as
the two subsequent decisions and is given by a function Vx (ax, ga, gz).
The crucial assumptions made in the analysis are:
(1) At the outset, before the decisions ax are taken, the two parties can
negotiate over ownership of the two types of assets. This is done in a
competitive market. Ownership of an asset gives its owner the right to
choose gx. So, for example, if B sells his assets to A, then in the second
period A chooses both g4 and gz.
d Grossman and Hart use a particular functional form for Vx. As we won't attempt to re-
produce their analysis but only to relate the form of their story, we won't go into these details.
758 Chapter twenty: Transaction cost economics and the firm
(2) Irrespective of who owns the assets, party X must choose ax - Think of
ax as a maintenance decision, made in an earlier period while the assets
were being used.
(3) Payments made for the exchange of ownership rights to the assets
cannot be made contingent on the ax, gx, or the values of Vx.
(4) Binding contracts concerning the levels of the ax cannot be written.
(5) Binding contracts concerning the levels of the gx can be written, but
only after the ax decisions have been made. It is assumed that efficient
levels of the gx will be chosen. If each party retains ownership of his
own asset, then the gains from choosing efficient levels of the gx (over
the levels of benefits obtained if the gx are chosen noncooperatively) are
split 50-50 between the two, coming from some (unmodeled) bargaining
process.
Assumptions 3,4, and 5 drive the model and deserve comment. As-
sumption 4 corresponds to a standard story of moral hazard with no ob-
servability at all. This also explains why it is that the prices charged for
ownership rights cannot depend on the ax. Itis further assumed that the
Vx are not, observable or, if observable, cannot be made the basis of an
enforceable contract. (The latter possibility can arise if the levels of the Vx
carmot be verified to a standard required by a court of law or some other
third party who would be called in to adjudicate any disputes.) As for the -
gx , the notion is that gx comprises a lot of detail about what to do with
asset X, depending on contingencies that ex ante cannot be foreseen, or
that are too expensive to foresee, or that are foreseen but too expensive oI
(because of problems of verifiability) impossible to provide for contractu-
ally. Ex post binding contracts concerning the gx can be made, however,
since once the contingencies have been realized, a simple, single decision
is taken.
When Grossman and Hart turned to analysis, they assumed that the
two individuals are well aware ex ante what levels of gx will be chosen
(depending on the pattern of ownership rights). That is, there is no uncer-
tainty about the level of gx in the model. Why is it infeasible to contract
over the levels of the gx in the first period, but feasible to specify these
levels contractually in the second period? Grossman and Hart suggested a
model in which gx is an overall level of investment or effort, which must
be directed in particular ways ex post, and one cannot specify ex ante
which of the many ways investment or effort should be allocated because
of an inability to foresee later contingencies. But then why not write a
contract giving the overall level of investment or effort in the first period?
cen roe
cr i mesmo
+ een mre mii
ce A ee
re
co
error a reel
20.2. Mathematical models of transaction cost economics 759
A consistent story is that while an enforceable contract can be written con-
cerning the precise allocation of investment or effort (so much to task 1,
so much to 2, and so on), one cannot write an enforceable contract on the
overall level (so much effort to be distributed in a manner later to be de-
termined). And, in the first period, a detailed contingent contract is either
impossible or too expensive to write.
Because ownership confers the right to choose the gx, different pat-
terns of ownership yield different initial decisions concerning the ax. If
A sells her assets to B, she can anticipate that ga and gg will be chosen
with B's interests in mind, and this will affect her choice of a4. A similar
story results if A owns the assets. And if each party owns his own asset,
then the ax decisions are made with a view towards strengthening the
bargaining position of each, in the bargaining envisioned in (5). Gross-
man and Hart show how different parameterizations of the model lead to
different patterns of ownership being optimal; in effect, they give cases
where it is optimal for A to buy out B, for B to buy out A, and for the two
to maintain an arms-length, market-based relationship.
This model gives a mathematical look into several of the aspects of
transaction cost economics crucial to theories of the firm. The opportunism
of individuals is represented by the choices of the ax. Asset specificity
is captured by the fact that each side is locked into a relationship with
the other once we move past the stage of choosing the ax. Governance
ex post is determined by ownership; the contract is filled out in the
second period according to who owns the assets. If we make a rough
identity between ownership of assets, unified governance, and firms, then
we have a theory that, depending on the particular circumstances, specifies
what is the transactionally efficient scope of the firm or firms.
The importance of bargaining costs
Milgrom and Roberts (forthcoming) offer an important commentary
on the basic scheme of transaction cost economics. Specifically, they re-
inforce the importance of the human factors to the story, and they sug-
gest that emphasis in the context of market-mediated transactions should
be placed on short-run bargaining costs. Their argument runs as follows:
Imagine two parties to a transaction are fully rational (in particular, they
can foresee all future contingencies and how those contingencies will be
met, even if a contract doesnt specify these things) and are able to ex-
ecute binding short-term contracts. Assume as well that the parties are
risk neutral, so that any redistribution of wealth between them has only
distributional consequences; there are no income effects.
760 Chapter twenty: Transaction cost economics and the firm
In general, if the two parties undertake a long-term transaction and
do not write (for whatever reason) a long-term contract covering all con-
tingencies, they will have to engage in bargaining and renegotiation as
events unfold. In general, bargaining can be costly; time is taken, and
(although we didnt see this in the simple settings of chapter 15) in cases
where parties have private information, inefficient outcomes can result. It
is clear, therefore, that bargaining costs are an important part of transaction
costs.
Milgrom and Roberts argue that in this context bargaining costs are the
only part of transaction costs. Even if there is high asset specificity, much
uncertainty, and any specification of frequency, if short-term bargaining
costs are zero, all transaction costs will be zero; the parties will reach
efficient arrangements as time unfolds. What does it mean for short-term
bargaining costs to be zero? That binding contracts governing short-run
actions can be made at zero cost, and these contracts always result in
short-run efficient actions (holding fixed subsequent actions).
Consult Milgrom and Roberts (forthcoming) for the formal argument,
but a sketch is easy to give. In the final stage of any transaction, the as-
sumptions guarantee that an efficient arrangement will be reached. Move
back to the'penultimate stage. Because the two parties are farsighted, they
know what arrangements will arise in the final period, and they know
those arrangements will be efficient. Because they are risk neutral, any
redistribution of wealth that will take place in the final round of arrange- .
ments can be undone at the current stage. Applying the no-bargaining-
costs assumption again, they achieve an efficient arrangement concerning
the penultimate round of actions, and so on. They can work back to the
start of the transaction, and their short-term agreements will guarantee
efficient actions all the way along.
All of Milgrom and Roberts assumptions play a role in this argument,
but two deserve special highlighting. The assumption that the two par-
ties are rational (in particular, farsighted) is crucial, and it reinforces the
importance Williamson attaches to human factors. The assumption that
enforceable short-term contracts can be reached is crucial. Compare the
conclusion reached by Milgrom and Roberts with that reached by Gross-
man and Hart. Grossman and Hart had rational, farsighted individuals.
But in their story, these individuals cannot sign a binding agreement con-
cerning the initial round of decisions ax. As both Grossman and Hart
and Milgrom and Roberts noted, if the ax could be made the subject of a
 If they discount, they would seemingly have to discount at the same rates or have avail-
able simple loan contracts between themselves so that they could take advantage of any
efficient trading of wealth across time.
rs pe
en
tr a + or
Bem i - spe
20.2. Mathematical models of transaction cost economics 761
binding contract, then (in their setting) the ownership of the assets would
be irrelevant.
Having put bargaining costs into the spotlight, Milgrom and Roberts
went on to study the costs of bargaining and their sources. In so doing,
they made use of the formal literature on bargaining what we discussed
in chapter 15, what we omitted (i.e. bargaining with incomplete informa-
tion) and also work on bargaining via particular mechanisms, such as
auctions. And they discussed how both asset specificity and measurement
problems play a role in bargaining costs.
Chapter 14 and figure 20.2
A third way we can set the discussion of the first section to mathe-
matics is to interpret figure 20.2 using the theory of repeated play from
chapter 14. We saw in chapter 14 that cooperative behavior can arise in
situations of repeated interaction where each side to the transaction coop-
erates because each has a stake in the future sufficient to outweigh any
gains that could be obtained by acting opportunistically in the short run.
The theory of chapter 14 suggests the following:
(a) Each side must have a stake in a maintained relationship. Or, more
accurately, if one party is at risk from opportunistic behavior by the second,
then the second must be at risk in the future if he engages in opportunism.
Moreover, if the short-run gains for the second party from opportunism
are quite large, the current value of the long-run gains from a continued
relationship must be large as well. Either the relationship must be repeated
fairly frequently (so that, effectively, the discount factor is close to one), or
the value of the continuing relationship must be high.
(b) It is enough that the party who puts the other party at risk repeats
the transaction fairly frequently, has a substantial amount at stake in the
execution of any single transaction, and has her performance observed by
potential future trading partners. Then this party's behavior can be tied
to her reputation for behaving in a particular way.
(c) The noisier the environment, the less well such constructons work.
(d) There are many possible equilibria in Tepeated interactions, so that
definite predictions can become difficult.
Figure 20.2, at least in one respect, appears to fit well with this theory.
As the frequency of the transaction is lowered, the nature of relational
4 I
They went on to study the sources of bargaining costs in unified governance, to which
we will come in a bit. 
762 Chapter twenty: Transaction cost economics and the firm
contracting passes from bilateral and hierarchical to trilateral. This can
be explained in some cases Very naturally and directly from (a) and (b)
above. Think, for example, in terms of the sale of securities. An indi-
vidual seller of securities may sell with sufficient frequency to particular
buyers (or a particular community of buyers) so that no intermediation is
necessary. An example might be AT&T directly marketing its securities to
its shareholders (although even here there is some intermediation). But
in most cases a third party, an exchange, is brought into the picture; the
exchange provides certain guarantees that facilitate trade. For example, in
futures contracts, the exchange acts as guarantor that the contract will be
made good. The exchange polices the trades that take place, monitoring
the actions of professional traders, and the exchange (often) offers arbi-
tration services when disputes arise. For this the exchange is paid some
sum of money. It is the stream of those payments (or, rather, the amount
by which this stream exceeds the direct costs of the service) that gives
the exchange an incentive to police trades made in its name, at least as
long as investors monitor the reputation of the exchange and are willing
to take their business elsewhere if the exchange doesn't fulfill its part of
the bargain.
Another example of the applicability of (a) and (b) to the study of
governance of transactions is given by Simon (1951). He considers the basic
labor exchange relationship and, in particular, the fact that the employer is
typically a hierar jcal superior in this relationship. That is, the employer .
specifies what tasks the worker will undertake as those tasks arise, subject
only to some general #pyles and to the worker's right to quit. Discretion
is reserved largely to the employer, and so the reputational glue that holds
this together (that allows the worker to trust the employer) is the general
reputation of the employer.
ee
15 Other explanations can be given as well. For example, the lower the frequency, the more
the cost of a specialized institution must be amortized over a single transaction, and hence
the greater the incentive to move to some form of general purpose trilateral relationship.
See Milgrom and Roberts (forthcoming) for a detailed development of this argument.
16 Reputation is not the full story here. (1) Informational efficiency plays a role. Because
many trades take place on the exchange, the exchange is able to centralize information about
the traders who is honest and who is not. Even if individual investors can obtain infor-
mation about one another and deal with each other with sufficient frequency that bilateral
relationships are possible, the relatively lower costs of the information for the exchange may
still push the transaction from bilateral to trilateral form. (2) Securities trading is really a
good deal more complex than a simple exchange between two individuals. Typically, each
individual has an agent, a broker, who executes the trade for the individual. As individuals
deal relatively infrequently with their brokers, and brokers deal with each other constantly,
the possibility of collusion between the brokers against the interests of the individuals is
quite high. Hence the exchange has a role to play in monitoring the actions of brokers.
I,
ee
ee <
20.2. Mathematical models of transaction cost economics 763
Point (c) fits very neatly into the commentary that accompanies figure
20.2 as well. Quoting from Williamson, successful bilateral relationships
are found in cases where the conditions to which parties adapt are ex-
ogenous, germane, and easily verifiable ... and ... consequences must be
confidently related thereto (Williamson, 1985, 77). In other words, it must
be clear to each party that circumstances call for an adaptation, and the
nature of the required adaptation must also be clear.
Consider in this context the trilateral relationship between a publicly
held firm, investors, and external auditors. The firm, to raise capital pro-
vides investors with information about its financial health. Since a good
deal of moral hazard is associated with the provision of this information, a
third party, an auditor, is brought in to bless the reported information (or
not). These auditing firms are well paid for their services, as long as they
maintain a reputation for giving honest audits. The question is, On what
is this reputation pegged? Because each audit engagement is unique and
because the number of decisions an audit firm must make is very large, if
each audit was tailored to very specific circumstances, it would be quite
difficult to decide ex post whether an audit firm was diligent and honest
in what it did. Accordingly, when the quality of an audit is questioned,
what is important is whether the auditing firm followed well-established
guidelines (in the United States called Generally Accepted Auditing Stan-
dards) that are set by the industry, even if following those guidelines does
not provide the most informative audit possible in the particular circum-
stance. Moreover, auditors provide very coarse signals of the information
they receive. In most cases, they say only that the information provided by
the firm is basically okay by giving an unqualified positive opinion.
By having fixed procedures and very coarse reports, it is possible to check
ex post whether the auditing firm did what it is supposed to, and so it is
possible to maintain a useful reputation as an independent third party.
It is worth noting that chapter 14 doesnt apply precisely to this story.
Chapter 14 concerns simple repeated game situations where one party (or
both) plays the same game over and over. In most applications, a transaction
is never repeated precisely. But you shouldn't have a hard time seeing how
the theory in chapter 14 adapts to cases in which the sequence of repeated
transactions is really a sequence of similar but not precisely identical trans-
actions. As long as one can find some rule that can be applied (in observable
fashion) to the sequence of similar transactions, reputation and folk-theorem
style constructions can be made to work.
While the theory of chapter 14 helps us to understand parts of figure
20.2, it does not explain all of that figure. In particular, for very high levels
of asset specificity, figure 20.2 calls for unified governance. How do we
explain this? (1) Perhaps it has something to do with the requirement
that the value of a continued relationship must rise with increases in the
short-run inducements to act opportunistically. With higher levels of asset
specificity, short-run inducements can certainly be higher. (2) As assets be-
come more specific, losses from the loss of cooperation increase. Insofar as
there are noisy observables, so that relational contracting will require some
periods of noncooperation, we might expect to find a move towards uni-
fied governance as the cost of those periods increases. (3) There is also
intuitive appeal to the notion that strategic risk aversion plays a role
here. Parties to a relational contract may be afraid of finding an inap-
propriate trading partner, of a relation gone permanently sour, or of long
periods of time spent sorting out how the benefits of cooperation will be
divided; higher levels of asset specificity mean an increase in the cost of
such things, and thus an increase of the overall costs of a relational trans-
action. Some of these things can be found in chapter 14, but others play
no role there; it remains to refine the theory of repeated interaction to
encompass the missing effects.
Firms and reputation
Firms have no role to play in the previous subsection, but it is not
difficult to provide one for them. In all the constructions of chapter 14, at
least one party must be long lived. There are long-lived individuals for
whom these constructions can work, but the reach of these constructions is -
lengthened considerably if we allow firms to carry reputations. A stylized
model of the basic idea runs as follows. We imagine a sequence of pairs
of individuals who play the game in figure 20.3. That is, at date , for
t=1,2,..., an individual 4; plays this game against B;. Note that the
unique Nash equilibrium has B choosing z, which gives both sides a
payoff of 0.
B +. A
0 Lu
ly
00 @-D
Figure 20.3. An extensive form game.
In this game, the payoff to player A is listed first and that of B is listed
second.
J Note that these factors would bind relatively less strongly on the third party to a tri-
lateral arrangement, and so we do not completely lose this form of governance for highly
specific assets and low frequency.
20.2. Mathematical models of transaction cost economics 765
If we had one player A playing a sequence of Bs, and if this 4
discounted her payoffs with a discount factor close to one, in the spirit of
chapter 14 we could construct an equilibrium in which B; always chooses
action z and A chooses action y, giving both sides a payoff of 1: A
chooses y because if ever she chooses 3/, all subsequent Bs choose 7. In
effect, A maintains a reputation for choosing y.
But if each A; plays only once, this construction will not work, and
the mutually beneficial transaction = followed by y cannot be supported
(owing to A;s opportunism and inability to guarantee that she won't
select y').
We can get back the reputation construction if we imagine that each
A; lives and consumes for two periods. In period , 4; plays the game
shown in figure 20.3 against B;. In period + 1, A; retires and lives off
her savings. Assume that 4,s utility is given by c; +.95;,;, where ;, is
A:s level of consumption of the numeraire good in period k (k= ,+1).
Suppose then that a firm is formed by A, called Honest A, Inc. This
firm carries a reputation with the B;s as follows: B; is willing to trust A;
(that is, play z) if A; owns Honest A, and no previous A, who owned
Honest A ever chose y' when trusted by Bs. That is, if some A, ever
chooses 3 instead of y given the chance, and if this A; owns Honest A,
then the reputation of Honest A is irretrievably besmirched.
+ If the B;s act in this fashion, each A; has a positive incentive to
purchase Honest A from A;_; if the reputation of Honest A is still good.
Suppose the purchase price of Honest A is 10 as long as its reputation
is good. Will A; purchase this firm from A; ;? If A; believes she can
sell the firm to As, for $10 as long as she doesnt hurt its reputation, the
answer is yes. Her choices are:
49) Don't purchase the firm from A; ;. Then B, will choose z', and A,
will obtain 0 in each of periods and +1, for a discounted payoff of 0.7
(2) Purchase the firm, and then, when B; chooses z, choose 3. This gives
210 in period (the payoff from the game less the purchase price) and
0 in period +1 (her ownership rights are worthless, since she sullied the
reputation of the firm), for a discounted payoff of 8.
(3) Purchase the firm, and then, when B; chooses z, choose y. This gives
1-10 in period and then 10 in period +1, the latter being the proceeds
from selling the firm to Aj... This gives a discounted payoff of .5.
7We do not include in these computations the utility A; derives from any endowment
she might have. Since we have assumed a linear utility function, this is okay. We should
assume that 4A; has endowment of at least 10 in period , so she can afford to buy Honest
A from Az.
766 Chapter twenty: Transaction cost economics and the firm
Hence (3) is best for As, given the posited behavior by Ata (a willingess
to buy) and B: (a willingness to choose z). This in turn justifies the
presumed strategies of A; and Bg; we have a Nash equilibrium.
There is nothing complicated here. This is just like the reputation
constructions of chapter 14, except that Honest A carries the reputation,
and each owner of this firm is willing to preserve that reputation in
order to recoup the cost of buying the reputation. If Grossman and Hart's
story revolved around the notion of a firm as the owner of capital, here the
firm is something less tangible; it comprises only its reputational capital.
The key is that the individual who makes decisions in the name of the firm
has a stake in the consequences for the firms reputation of those decisions,
obtained here by tying the decision maker's second period consumption
to the capitalized value of the firm's reputation.?
Even by the standards of stylized models in this book, this model is
extraordinarily stylized. It should certainly come as no surprise that firms
and other organizations carry reputations, or even that for some firms
their reputation is as valuable an asset as they have. (Public accounting
firms and investment banks come to mind immediately) These reputa-
tions enable all manner of transactions to take place that without the force
of reputation would either require extraordinarily complex contracts or
would become impossible. Return to the example of the contract be-
tween a graduate student and the department in which she studies. The
contract, such as it is, specifies almost nothing except governance proce-
dures. New students are given a handbook of requirements (subject to
change more or less without notice) and instructions how to appeal to
the department chairperson and/or the dean. The specific details of a
student's program, advisor, financial aid, and so on, are all determined
by the parties as time passes and contingencies arise, with the bulk of
discretion given to the faculty of the department and sundry deans and
administrators. Students can appeal capricious behavior on the part of
9 We don't provide any problems at the end of this chapter, but if we did, one would be:
In fact, this setting permits a few things not altogether possible in chapter 14. Suppose, for
example, there is noise in the observable action of A. That is, suppose that A may intend
to choose y, but there is some chance that by a slip of the hand, y' is observed instead.
Can you construct an equilibrium of the following form? If some As is observed to choose
_, then the value of the firm owned by A: falls to zero. But Az is then able to form a
new Honest A, which starts with a fresh reputation. The value of the reputation of this firm
doesn't start at 10 immediately, but it grows to 10 as long as its owners are never observed
choosing y'. Can you construct an equilibrium where each A; intends to choose y and
each B; chooses =z, if the probability of y' by mistake is small? For which patterns in the
growth of the value of Honest A is this sort of behavior sustained in an equilibrium? Must
the value of Honest A's reputation fall to zero if As is observed choosing y'? And what
happens if A: has the ability to slip some money surreptitiously to Ar?
ee em A
20.2. Mathematical models of transaction cost economics 767
professors to the department chairperson and capricious behavior on the
part of the department chairperson to the dean, but why would a student
ever trust the dean? The student trusts in a combination of goodwill and
concern for the department's and university's reputation with prospective
future students. The stylized model shows how this sort of reputation
works in equilibrium, at least as long as retired faculty and administra-
tors continue to take pleasure in the distinction of their old department or
university.
The question naturally arises whether reputation really adheres to
the individual manager or to the firm. Common sense suggests that the
answer is some of both. The stylized model shows how, in an extreme
case where the manager (party A4;) is so short lived that reputation cannot
adhere to her, reputation adhering to the firm can work instead. But
this model, because of its simple structure, misses important pieces of
this story. In particular, it may be informationally efficient for reputation
to adhere to the organization and not to the individual. It is easier to
keep in mind that Honda produces excellent cars than to keep in mind
the names of all the engineers and mechanics who together make the
cars with the Honda logo. Although more difficult to tell mathematically
(because it involves a formal specification of information processing costs
or some other model where consumers are not hyperrational), firms and
other organizations provide an efficient means for enlisting the power of
reputation in promoting transactions.
Of course, there is a potentially substantial free-rider problem here. En-
gineer Yamazaki may have to work quite hard to provide his portion of the
excellent design of a Honda. He bears all the costs of this effort, yet would
(probably) see only.a tiny dimunition in the reputation of Honda if he slacked
off. So the force of Honda's reputation in keeping him hard at work is prob-
ably quite low. But this free-rider problem is met by peer-goup and super-
visory pressure. (If you are unhappy that there are no problems at the end of
this chapter, you could try to flesh this out into a full-fledged model.)
Ex ante versus ex post incentives
Turning to Williamson's discussion of the inefficiencies of unified gov-
ernance, we note two sorts of contributions.
A major piece of Williamson's discussion concerns the inability of a
hierarchical superior to match market incentives because the hierarchical
superior retains the ability to reset the terms of a contract, an ability
that she will enlist in her own interests ex post. The problem is that the
knowledge that this is how she will behave ex post prevents otherwise
sharp-edged incentives from being put in place ex ante. The problem is
an inability to commit a priori to a particular incentive scheme and/or
intervention rule.
We have seen this theme (the inability to commit) in several places
in the book, and we will not go into much detail here. But, to refresh
your memory, recall our discussion of the ratchet effect. We imagine a
principal, an agent, and a task the difficulty of which is unknown to the
principal. This task must be performed twice (say), and (we suppose) the
principal cannot commit to a two-period incentive scheme. If in the first
period the principal learns from the agent's performance precisely how
difficult the task is, then she will use this information in designing sec-
ond period incentives. Hence it will be in the interests of the agent to
make the task look harder than it really is in the first period. Note that
the root of this problem is the principal's inability to commit to a two-
period incentive contract. If the principal could commit at the outset to
a compensation package (and to refrain from manipulating the accounts,
intervening whenever she wishes to ex post, forgiving unlucky agents,
and so on), then she can (theoretically) match high-powered market in-
centives.
We can take these ideas a step further with an analysis of influence
costs. In a unified governance structure, the authority to make decisions
is centralized, and individuals affected by these decisions will wish to
influence the central authority to whatever extent is possible. If the cen-
tral authority can be corrupted, attempts will be made to corrupt her. If
activities intended to corrupt the central authority take time away from
more productive activities, this is a cost of unified governance. These costs
increase if the corruption causes the central authority to make decisions
that are inefficient. Of course, corruption across a market interface is not
unheard of, but the more centralized the authority, the greater will be the
level of energy devoted to corrupting activities.
It might seem that this depends on a corruptable centralized author-
ity. But even an uncorruptable central authority may be amenable to
influence. Insofar as the central authority lacks information relevant for
making decisions and looks to subordinates (or to their performances)
for this information, then those subordinates will attempt to influence the
central authority by manipulating this information. The central authority
may well be aware of these attempts at manipulation, but the only way
to stop them entirely is to shut off the flow of information, which may
be far from optimal. In equilibrium, even with an uncorruptable central
authority, wasteful influence activities may go on. See Holmstrom (1982),
Holmstrom and Ricart i Costa (1986), Milgrom and Roberts (1988), and
Tirole (1986) for formal models.
rarer mm
20.3. Bibliographic notes 769
20.3. Bibliographic notes
Repeated reference has been made to Williamson (1985) as the ba-
sic source of transaction cost economics; this is an important summary
statement of the subject that should be read by all. While Williamson's
contributions have been many and important (not the least of which is the
unified treatment of the subject in his book), the subject really originates
with Coase (1937). Chandler (1977) and Klein, Crawford, and Alchian
(1978) provide other important perspectives.
As for the more mathematical analyses of section 20.2, besides the
already referenced Grossman and Hart (1986), Holmstrom (1982), Holm-
strom and Ricart i Costa (1986), Milgrom and Roberts (1988, forthcoming),
Simon (1951), and Tirole (1986), see Kreps (forthcoming) for the notion of
a firm as the carrier of a reputation that passes from one generation of
owners to the next and Wilson (1983) on the role and nature of reputation
in auditing. For a survey of other work along these lines, see- Holmstrom
and Tirole (1989).
References
Chandler, A. 1977. The Visible Hand. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Coase, R. 1937. The Nature of the Firm. Economica n.s. 4:386-405..
Grandmont, J.-M., ed. 1988. Temporary Equilibrium. Boston: Academic
Press.
Grossman, S., and O. Hart. 1986. The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A
Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration. Journal of Political Economy
94:691-719.
Holmstrom, B. 1982. Managerial Incentive Problems A Dynamic Per-
spective. In Essays in Economics and Management in Honor of Lars
Wahlbeck. Helsinki: Swedish School of Economics.
Holmstrom, B., and J. Ricart i Costa. 1986. Managerial Incentives and
Capital Management. Quarterly Journal of Economics 101:835-60.
Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole. 1989. The Theory of the Firm. In Handbook
of Industrial Organization, R. Schmalensee and R. Willig, eds. Amster-
dam: North Holland.
Klein, B., R. Crawford, and A. Alchian. 1978. Vertical Integration, Ap-
propriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process. Journal
of Law and Economics 21:297-326.
Kreps, D. Forthcoming. Corporate Culture and Economic Theory. In
Positive Perspectives on Political Economy, J. Alt and K. Shepsle, eds.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
770 Chapter twenty: Transaction cost economics and the firm
Marshak, J., and R. Radner. 1972. The Theory of Teams. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press.
Milgrom, P., and J. Roberts. 1988. An Economic Approach to Influence
Activities in Organizations. American Journal of Sociology 94:5154-79.
Forthcoming. Bargaining Costs, Influence Costs, and the Or-
ganization of Economic Activity. In Positive Perspectives on Political
Economy, J. Alt and K. Shepsle, eds. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. .
Simon, H. 1951. A Formal Model of the Employment Relationship.
Econometrica 19:293-305.
Tirole, J. 1986. #Ifijerarchies and Bureaucracies. Journal of Law, Economics,
and Organization 2:181-214.
Williamson, O. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York:
Free Press.
Wilson, R. 1983. Auditing: Perspectives from Multi-Person Decision The-
ory. Accounting Review 58:305-18.
ie A rm ne
lr er
ee ternal re
ee lr rb me mrt +=
postscript
As we compare transaction cost economics in section 20.1 with the more
mathematical attempts at theorizing related in section 20.2, several pieces
missing from the mathematical analysis spring to mind:
(1) Williamson (1985) stresses bounded rationality and, especially, the in-
ability of individuals to foresee all future contingencies and how they will
be met. The argument of Milgrom and Roberts (forthcoming) shows just
how important this can be.
(2) We rely on folk-theorem constructions to motivate relational contract-
ing. But as we saw in chapter 14 such constructions alone do not give
particularly sharp predictions. There are many plausible equilibria in re-
peated games situations, and the theory doesn't give us much of a handle
on which will be adopted. And if we cannot pin down which equilibrium
will be adopted (or, rather, if we cannot think why some specific equi-
librium will be adopted by the participants), then there is no particular
reason to restrict attention to equilibrium outcomes. We certainly have a
problem if we try to analyze how the equilibrium will shift with small
changes in the environment. (In fact, Nelson and Winter [1982] have sug-
gested that small changes in the environment will be met with no change
at all in the equilibrium. Similar predictions are made in the literature of
sociology and social psychology. See, for example, Hannan and Freeman
[1984] and Stinchcombe [1965])
(3) A similar problem confronts us if we think of parties bargaining (in the
short run) in a situation where each has a degree of monopoly power over
the other. We saw in chapter 15 that one can get quite specific predictions
from bargaining models with certain types of bargaining institutions, but
the predictions seemed intuitively to be too sharp, intuition that is veri-
fied in experiments. Individuals may bargain to consistent and definite
outcomes in certain situations, but the extant formal theory doesnt seem
to be of much use in predicting what those outcomes will be or how they
will change with small changes in the environment.
(4) Earlier in the book, we complained that a weakness of game theory
was that it took institutions (the rules of the game) as given exogenously,
without explaining where the institutions come from. We can view trans-
action cost economics as. giving us a bit of a lead on this, insofar as we
maintain the hypothesis that institutions will be created with a general
view toward minimizing transaction costs (or, more precisely, with a view
towards maximizing the net benefits of transactions). But important pieces
of transaction cost economics depend on the society in which the transac-
tion is embedded on the framework of laws and customs, in particular.
In various places in this book, I have advanced the notion that the
solution to the problem of multiple equilibria, pointed to in (3) and (4),
lies in the individual's strategic expectations and social and normative
environment. This thought is certainly not original to me; the heart of
Schelling (1980) is predicated on this; it is evident from much of the ex-
perimental work in bargaining, such as Roth and Schoumaker (1983)*; and
it can be found in the literature of sociology (Granovetter, 1985; Parsons,
1954). But when one approaches the problem of strategic expectations
with the choice-theoretic orientation of traditional microeconomics, a bar-
rier is hit: Many things can be an equilibrium, if we arrange everyone's a
priori expectations correctly. There are no limits to the individual's pro-
cessing power. There are no theoretical reasons to expect players to pick
a simple equilibrium. (We dont even have a generally accepted formal
definition of the term simple.) For example, we can imagine repeated
game equilibria in which play at date n depends on the nth digit of an
octal expansion of ; players in-our models can anticipate that this is how
their fellow players will behave, and then they respond in kind.
To my mind, all the items listed above are tied together, and their res-
olution will come only with better models of boundedly rational choice; in
particular, boundedly rational choice in dynamic settings, where individu-
als do not have the incredible powers of foresight that they are granted in
the standard models. Instead, individuals learn (or think they do) some-
what imperfectly from past experience about what will happen in the
future. It is this retrospection that forms strategic expectations, and, more-
over, it is experiences from the past that (imperfectly) guide the evolution
of institutions.
The game of chess provides an interesting example. Played by the sort
of individuals who populate the economies of this book, a chess match
would be a boring affair; the players would come on stage, lock at each
other, and agree to whatever (forced) outcome the game happens to have.
Of course, because of the complexity of the game, no one knows what
outcome is forced. And so players are guided by experience and (very
occasionally) by experimentation: This or that variation or gambit seems
1 See also Roth (1985).
ho pe ae
te i me
rn ce eon
>
rr ce lp eas rn lb ieee ween
re en
ere rl men co edb
Postscript 773
to work in this or that way, where the evidence is that this is how things
have worked in the past. But no player can be completely sure how a
particular move will work, and it is especially exciting when grandmasters
suddenly return in a match to well-known variations and try to find
advantage where none is thought to exist.
From the point of view of this book, chess is a dangerous example to
mention. Only the simplest of endgame situations fit nicely into the sort
of equilibrium analysis we have used here. If the economic environment
is as continuously complex as chess; then we would seem to have wasted
a lot of time studying equilibrium techniques. But (of course) the implicit
assertion is that economic situations are not in all respects so complex that
equilibrium analysis is irrelevant. Pieces of the economic environment,
parts of the greater game each economic actor plays, are amenable to
the form of analysis we have used. The problem comes in applying the
forms of analysis we have used for larger chunks of the game each ac-
tor faces; especially chunks that involve long stretches of time and much
uncertainty. Moreover, we may have a good intuitive feel for when equi-
librium analysis is useful (on small pieces), but our feel depends on there
being (roughly) common strategic expectations about how to behave in
a particular situation, and we have much less handle on how to model
where those strategic expectations come from or how they change. The
techniques we have are useful in some contexts, but they are potentially
dangerous in others, and even when they are useful, we dont have the
complete story why. It remains to develop the tools necessary for the
bigger picture and to place the smaller picture properly in that bigger
picture.
These observations are also hardly original to me. A long list of
economists and social scientists have expressed this view both earlier and
with greater eloquence than I. The difficulty, also generally recognized,
is in finding acceptable tools, which I take to be models of boundedly
rational behavior (and especially models that stress retrospection).
There has recently been an upsurge in interest in formal models of
bounded rationality, but since no one of the models advanced is yet emerg-
ing as a winner, I will not go into details. So I close simply, with the
cautions expressed above and with the hope that in subsequent editions
of this book (if any appear), this postscript will be gone, and the material
on dynamic choice, game theory, and firms and other institutions will look
quite different and will be more satisfactory.
% Since I have my own entries in the sweepstakes, I am probably too biased to give a good
survey anyway.
774 Postscript
References
Granovetter, M. 1985. Economic Action and Social Structure: A Theory
of Embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology 91:481-510.
Hannan, M., and J. Freeman. 1984. Structural Inertia and Organizational
Change. American Sociological Review 49:194-64.
Milgrom, P., and J. Roberts. Forthcoming. Bargaining Costs, Influence
Costs, and the Organization of Economic Activity. In Positive Per-
spectives on Political Economy, J. Alt and K. Shepsle, eds. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Nelson, R., and S. Winter. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change.
Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap/ Harvard University Press.
Parsons, T. 1954. Essays in Sociological Theory. Glencoe, Ill. Free Press.
Schelling, T. 1980. The Strategy of Conflict, 2d ed.. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press.
Stinchcombe, A. 1965. Social Structure and Organizations. In Handbook
of Organizations, J. March, ed., 153-93. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Roth, A. 1985. Toward a Focal-point Theory of Bargaining. In Game-
theoretie Models of Bargaining, A. Roth, ed., 259-68. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Roth, A., and E Schoumaker. 1983. Expectations and Reputations in Bar-
gaining: An Experimental Study. American Economic Review 73:362-72.
Williamson, O. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York:
Free Press.
arr oe
ee comer rn mr gp et =
ene erp =
eet + A amin
appendix one
Constrained optimization
The aim of this appendix is to give you a bare working knowledge of how
to solve problems of the form
maximize f(z)
subject to g;(x) < ; fori=1,...,n
for functions f,g1,9,-..,9- Whose domain is RF for some integer k and
whose range is R, and for constants ,,.--,Cn- The mathematical the-
ory of optimization with inequality constraints concerns all the things dis-
cussed here, and this discussion won't get you within shouting distance
of that theory. So while this appendix will tell you enough to make it
through the applications in the book, you should engage in further rigor-
ous study of this material; two recommendations are made at the end of
the appendix.
We'll proceed as follows. First, in cookbook fashion, the recipe for
finding solutions to this sort of problem will be given. Then an example
will be worked to illustrate the recipe. And then, by looking at the simplest
possible example we'll try to give some intuition for the recipe.
3
Al.1. A recipe for solving problems
We want to solve
maximize f(z)
subject to gi(@) < ; fori=1,...,7n.
Here, mechanically, is what to do.
Step 1. Form the Lagrangian.
For each of the n constraints, create a multiplier this is a real vari-
able. The multiplier for the constraint g;(x) < ; will be denoted by );.
Then the Lagrangian is the function
flo) > Aigi(z).
i=1
(In some books the term for the ith constraint is A;(g;(z) ;). It will
make no difference for the form of the recipe that I'm giving you here.)
This should be thought of as a function of k +n variables, namely the
k components of z and the n As. We'll write L(z,)\) for this function,
where A should be thought of as the vector (\y,..., An).
Step 2. Write out the first-order conditions for the x;s.
The first-order condition for the variable z; (j =1,...,k) is that
OL/0z; = 0, or, expanded,
. of _yade =0.
i=1
= ; =
Oz; Nr Ox;
Step 3. Write the n constraints.
Not much to do here: The ith constraint is
gx) < ;.
Step 4. Write the inequality constraints for the multipliers.
This is purely according to recipe; the multipliers must all be nonneg-
ative, or
A: => 0.
Step 5. Write the complementary slackness conditions.
oe
[
pe
ALL. A recipe for solving problems 777
There are n of these one for each constraint. The ith complemen-
tary slackness condition is that
Ailes gi(@)) = 0.
Stare at this one for a moment. In step 3 we required that g;(z) < ;, or
 giz) > 0. In step 4 we required that ); > 0. Hence the product
Ail; gi(x)) is nonnegative. Now, in this step, we require in addition that
the product be zero. That is, we require that if the ith constraint does not
bind (that is, if ; > g;(z)), the ith multiplier must be zero. And if the ith
multiplier is positive, the ith constraint must be an equality (that is, the
ith constraint must bind). Note that we don't preclude the possibility that
the multiplier is zero and also that the ith constraint binds; both terms in
the product could be zero.
Step 6. Mix all the above ingredients.
Look for a solution in z and A to the first-order conditions, the two
types of inequality constraints, and the complementary slackness condi-
tions. When and if you find one, it is the solution to your problem.
That's it. That is the recipe for finding the solution to constrained
optimization problems. For reasons alluded to below (that are properly
explained in good books on optimization and nonlinear programming),
this recipe will produce a solution to most of the constrained optimization
problems in this book. In following this recipe, it is crucial that you get
the signs right; this recipe works: (a) if the problem is a maximization
problem; (b) if the constraints are stated in the form of gi(z) < ;; (c) you
are careful to write the Lagrangi precisely as above (note the minus sign
in front of the sum term); and (d) you remember that the multipliers must
be nonnegative,
How do you make the recipe work in variations? If you are asked
to minimize f(z), then that is the same as maximizing f(z). If you are
asked to satisfy a constraint g:(z) > ;, rewrite it as -9:(z) < ;. If
you are asked to satisfy an equality constraint g;(z) = ;, write it as two
constraints g;(z) < ;, and g;(z) > ;, and then you'll have two multipliers
for these two constraints. Once you get used to adapting this basic recipe
to these sorts of variations, you'll see how to shortcut these steps. For
example, you can handle equality constraints with a single multiplier if
you dont constrain that multiplier to be nonnegative and if you replace
778 Appendix one: Constrained optimization
the corresponding complementary slackness condition with the condition
that the constraint must hold as an equality. But until you are used to
such variations the basic recipe can be adapted, as long as you're careful
about it.
A1.2. The recipe at work: An example
That is a pretty amazing recipe. It will work, and in just a bit I'll
try to explain what it is doing and why it will work, but first let's do an
example and see it in action.
A consumer consumes two commodities, wheat and candy. If w is
the amount of wheat this individual consumes and c is the amount of
candy (in some units that are well specified and that we won't bother
with), then the consumers utility is given by the utility function w(w, ) =
3 log(w) +2 log(c+2). The consumer seeks to maximize the utility he gets
from his consumption of wheat and candy, subject to four constraints. The
amounts of wheat and candy consumed must both be nonnegative. The
consumer has $10 to spend, and the price of wheat and the price of candy
are each $1 per unit. A unit of wheat contains 150 calories and a unit of
candy 200 calories, and the consumer is constrained to eat no more than
1550 calories. .
Mathematically, the consumer's problem is to pick w and c to solve
the following problem:
max 3 log(w) +2 log(2 +c)
subject to > 0
w>0
w+e< 10, and
150w + 200 < 1550.
(This mathematical formulation should be obvious to you. But in case it
is not: The third constraint is the budget constraint, and the fourth is the
calorie constraint.)
Now to apply the recipe from the cookbook, we rewrite the first two
constraints in the form needed for our recipe: w <0 and c <0. Then
we
1. Form the Lagrangian.
crn A ee ee pel
te
el mr te -
JUN
c-
re rns ee
-
te i i mW
A1.2. The recipe at work: An example 779
I'll use p,, for the multiplier on the constraint w <0, py, for <0
A for w+<10, and v for 150w + 200c < 1550, so the Lagrangian is
3 log(w) + 2 log(2 + ) Mw + ) v(150w + 200) + pw + prec.
(Note that the last term is puc(c), which comes to pc.)
2. Write the first-order conditions for w and c.
They are
3
=A 1500 + py =0, and
2
Tra A200 + pe =0.
3. Write the four constraints.
We've already done this, so I won't repeat it here.
4. Constrain all the multipliers to be nonnegative.
A20,v20,py 20, and pc > 0.
5. Write the four complementary slackness conditions.
These are
fw = 0, pee = 0,A(10 w ) = 0, and (1550 150w ~ 200) = 0.
6. Look for a solution (in w, c, and the four multipliers) to all the equations and
inequalities above.
The way this is done, typically, is by trial and error, working with the
complementary slackness conditions (hereafter, CSCs). What the CSCs tell
you is that either one thing or another equals zero. For example, pw =0
means that either p,, or w is zero. Could it be w? If w = 0, then the first
of the first-order conditions won't be solved, since that has a 3/w in it. So
Hy will have to be zero, and we can disregard it in all that follows.
Next, what about ucc = 07? Is it possible that = 0? If this happens
then the second first-order condition reads 1 A 200v +p. = 0. So ither
780 Appendix one: Constrained optimization
A> 0 or v > 0 or both. (Otherwise, the left-hand side of the equation just
given will be at least 1; remember that multipliers are always nonnegative
in this recipe.) Now by complementary slackness, the only way that A
can be positive is if w+ c= 10, and since we're hypothesizing that c= 0,
this will mean w = 10. That's not bad, since then the diet constraint is
met easily: 150-10 +200 - 0 < 1550. But then v will have to be zero.
(Why? complementary slackness again.) And then the FOCs (first-order
conditions), with w = 10 and =0 inserted, will read
3-A=0and1A+p=0.
The first tells us that ) = .3. But then the second won't work, because py.
will have to be .7, and negative multipliers aren't allowed. So (summing
up what we know so far), if = 0, then A cant be positive. But then v
will have to be positive (if c= 0), and that is even worse; complementary
slackness says that the only way v > 0 is if 150w +200c = 1550, and this
together with = 0 gives w = 31/3 > 10, and the budget constraint is
violated. So, we conclude c= 0 won't be a solution and pc = 0 will have
to hold.
Now look again at the first FOC: 3/w A 150v = 0. I've taken the
liberty of getting rid of the fy , since we know there won't be a solution
with pw # 0. Since 3/w > 0 for any positive w, one or both of A and v
must be positive. (A similar conclusion would have emerged if we had.
looked at the second FOC.) So we have three cases left to try: A > 0 (alone),
v > 0 (alone), or both. Take A > 0 and v = 0 first. Then (complementary
slackness, one more time) w + = 10. The FOCs become 3/w A = 0
and 2/2 +c) A =0. That is three equations in three unknowns, and we
can solve A = 3/w = 3/(10 ), which substituted into the second FOC is
2/@+) =3/(10 ), or 2+0)/2=(10)/3, or 32 +c) = 2(10 e), or
6+3c=202, or 5c=14, or c= 14/5, which then gives w=1014/5=
36/5, and (if anyone cares) A = 15/36 = 5/12.
Bingo! We have an answer! Or do we? The FOCs are solved. The
multipliers are nonnegative. The CSCs hold. But we have to go back and
check the original constraints. And, when we look at the calorie constraint
... disaster: (36/5)(150) + (14/5)(200) = 1640. Oh well.
Let me try A =0 and v > 0 next. Then by the CSC, 150w-+200c = 1550.
In addition, the FOCs now read 3/w 150v = 0 and 2/(2 + ) 200v =
0. That is three equations in three unknowns, and we can solve. First
write the two FOCs as 3/w = 150v and 2/(2 + ) = 200v. Then we can
eliminate v, since 3/(150w) = v = 2/(2002 + )). Rewrite this equation as
150w/3 = 200Q2 + )/2, or 50w = 200 + 100c. Multiply both sides by 3,
re ne Bn
lm meer
Lr me to
-
Or en Bs
eens
Al.2. The recipe at work: An example 781
to get 150w = 600 + 300, and then use this and the first equation to
eliminate w, or 600 + 300c + 200c = 1550, or = 950/500 = 1.9. This gives
w = 4+3.8 = 7.8. Which is nice, because this means this solution meets the
budget constraint. It hits the calorie constraint on the nose (since it was
designed to do so). It solves the FOCs (if we figure out what v must be)
and the CSCs. But we still need to check that the value of v that comes out
of the FOCs is nonnegative. And itis: v = 1/(50w) = 1/390 = .00256410....
Let me summarize this solution:
w=7.8,c=19,v =.00256410...,
with A= py = pe = 0.
There is actually one more thing to try, namely A > 0 and v > 0.
I'll leave it to you to show that this doesnt work with a few hints. First,
if both multipliers are to be positive, then complementary slackness says
that both constraints must be satisfied with equality, or w +c = 10 and
150w + 200c = 1550. That is two equations in two unknowns, and you
can solve for w and directly. Then with these two values for w and ,
the two FOCs become two equations in two unknowns, those unknowns
being A and v. And you can solve those. And when you do, one of the
two multipliers will turn out to be negative no solution there. (For
those readers who have seen this all before and are reading along only to
review this, you know that the solution lies where the calorie constraint
and not the budget constraint binds. So you should be able to tell before
doing the algebra which of the two multipliers will turn out to be negative
at the point where both constraints bind.)
We've solved the problem, and in a moment I'll fry to give you some
intuition about just why this recipe works. But before doing so, I want
to make two comments about the problem. First, if we had used a little
common sense, we could have saved a bit of work. This is a very typical
consumer budgeting problem, with the not-so-typical addition of a calorie
constraint. Nonetheless, we can draw the shape of the feasible set of
wheat-candy pairs as in figure Al.
The line b-b is the budget constraint line, and c-c is the calorie con-
straint line, so the shaded quadrilateral is the set of feasible consumption
pairs. Now this consumer is locally insatiable; his utility increases if we in-
crease either his wheat consumption or his candy consumption or both, so
the only possible places an answer could be found would be at one of the
points marked =z, y, and z, or on the line segment zy, or the segment yz.
Each of these corresponds to a particular set of binding constraints, and
782 Appendix one: Constrained optimization
Candy
Wheat Z
Figure Al. The feasible set of wheat-candy pairs in the example.
so a particular set of (possibly) nonnegative multipliers, according to com-
plementary slackness. In this particular case, the picture won't cut down
a lot on the algebra needed to find the solution, but in other applications,
knowing how to draw this sort of figure and relate it to sets of binding con-
straints (and nonnegative multipliers) can be a substantial help. (Imagine,
for example, that I added a third constraint on the amount of cholesterol
that the consumer can take in. Then knowing which pairs of constraints
can simultaneously bind can be a big help.)
Second, one thing we didn't do is compute the consumer's utility at
the optimal solution given above. It is
3 log(7.8) +2 log(2 + 1.9) = 8.88432431.....
Now let me suppose that this particular consumer, having been some-
thing of a success at his diet, is allowed by his doctor to increase his
caloric intake by one calorie to 1,551 per day. If we go back and solve
the problem, we find that the new optimal levels of wheat and candy
are = 951/500 = 1.902 and w = 1951/250 = 7.804. This, in turn, gives
him utility 3 log(7.804) + 2 log(2 + 1.902) = 8.88688776.... So the addi-
tional utility that he gets from one extra calorie is .00256345..., or, to the
third significant decimal place, the value of the multiplier v. An amazing
coincidence? No read on.
Al.3. Intuition
The intuition behind this recipe is most easily communicated in the
special case where k = 1; that is, where the vector z is one-dimensional.
Of course, this special case hides some of the subtleties. But if you see
tr en oe
>
re = me #52
Al.3. Intuition 783
why things work in this special case, then it shouldn't be too hard to
imagine that it will work in general the principles are exactly the same
 and you should be able to consult a book on optimization and nonlinear
programming to see this done more carefully and in greater generality.
Moreover, I'm going to make a number of assumptions that in total
mean that the problem we're trying to solve is well behaved. To be
precise, I'm going to assume that the problem we're trying to solve is
max f(z) subject to g(x) < ; and g(x) < cp.
I'm going to assume throughout that the three functions given are differ
entiable everywhere, that the set of z satisfying the two constraints is a
finite union of disjoint intervals, that there is no point z at which both
constraints bind simultaneously, and that if g;(z) = ; at some point z,
then the derivative of g; at this point is either strictly positive or strictly
negative. (If you are reviewing this material after encountering it previ-
ously, you may recognize that I have just assumed the great-granddaddy
of all constraint qualifications.)
A review of unconstrained optimization
But before we take on this problem in constrained optimization, we
review unconstrained optimization. Suppose that the problem was to max-
imize f(z) without any constraints at all. Then (this is the part you're
supposed to know) you find the optimum by setting the derivative of f
to zero. This is called the first-order condition, and it is a necessary condi-
tion for finding a maximum value of f. Why? Because if at a point z
the derivative of f is positive, then by increasing z a bit from z you'll
get a bigger value of f. And if the derivative of f is negative at z, then
[ gets bigger if you decrease = a bit from 2. ,
You may also recall that finding all the points where f = 0 generates
all candidates for the optimum, but there is generally no guarantee that any
solution of this FOC is even locally a maximum. These solutions, called
critical points, could be minima. Or they could be points like the point 0
in the function z?, which are neither local minima nor maxima. To know
that we have a local maximum, we check the second-order condition: If
f is twice continuously differentiable and f < 0 at a point where f' =0,
then that point is a local maximum. (Why? If you know how to create
Taylor's series expansions, you should be able to see why the condition
Ff" < 0 is sufficient for a local maximum. Note that f < 0 is necessary
for this, but that if f = 0, we need to look at higher order derivatives,
assuming f has them.)
784 Appendix one: Constrained optimization
And even if we have a local maximum, there is no guarantee in general
that it is a global max. This is, however, guaranteed if f is concave. Then
any local maximum is a global maximum. Why? Suppose the function f
is concave. That is, flaz + (1 @)y) => af(@) + (1 a)f(y) for all z,y and
0 < a <1. Then if z isnt a global max, there is some value y with f(y) >
f(z). But then flaz+(1a)y) > af(z)+(1a)f(y) > f(z) for all a greater
than zero and less than one. But this says that = isn't a local max, since for
a arbitrarily close to (and less than) one, az + (1 ay is arbitrarily close
to =. Moreover, if f is concave, any solution of f = 0 is automatically
a local and hence a global max. (If you never knew this before, just take
my word for it) So if f is concave, we know that satisfaction of the FOC
is necessary and sufficient for a global maximum.
Drawing pictures
Now back to our simple example of constrained optimization: maxi-
mize f(z) subject to gi(z) < ; and g(x) < ;. Recall that we assumed that
the set of x satisfying the two constraints is a finite union of disjoint inter-
vals. In particular, assume that the set of = satisfying the two constraints
is a union of three intervals, the middle one of which we will call I. That
is, the feasible set is like the shaded region in figure A2. Now what sort
of conditions must hold at some point z* in the interval I, if z* istobe a
candidate solution for the maximizing value of =? (The fact that I is the
middle of the three intervals is completely irrelevant to what follows.)
Consider first a case where z* is in the interior of I, as in figure A3(a).
Then, just as in the case of unconstrained maximization, it had better be
that f/(z*) =0. Why? Because at such an z* we can move up a bit and
Figure A2. The feasible set.
t
Al.3. Intuition 785
Figure A3. Possible locations of the optimal solution.
In (a), the solution, z* is in the interior of a feasible interval. In (b), it is
at a right-hand endpoint, and in (c) it is at a left-hand endpoint.
down a bit and not violate either constraint (that is, stay inside of I). This
means that if * is going to be optimal, it has to be as good as values just
above and just below it, and, as before, this implies that f cannot have a
strictly positive or negative derivative at z*.
Now suppose that z* is up against the right-hand side of I, as in
figure A3(b). Now z* could be the optimal value of = even if f'(z*) > 0;
786 Appendix one: Constrained optimization
we can increase the value of f by moving up a bit further, but this will
violate one of the constraints.
And in figure A3(c) we see the other boundary possibility. If z*
is up against the left-hand side of the interval I, then f'(z*) could be
negative and still z* is a candidate for the optimum.
The FOCs, the CSCs, and the preceding pictures
Now we relate these three pictures to the FOCs and the CSCs. Let
X; be the multiplier on the constraint g;(x) < ; for i = 1,2. Then the
Lagrangian is f (x) Mg (@) Aoga(@), and the FOC is
F1@) Mgi(@) dagy(z) = 0.
Case a. Suppose we find a solution z* to the FOC, the CSCs (and the
constraints, including the nonnegativity constraints on the multipliers),
such that neither constraint binds at z*. That is, =* is in the interior of
an interval such as I, as in figure A3(a). Since z* is in the interior of I,
the CSCs mandate that A; = A, =0, and the FOC will read that f/(z*) =0.
Precisely what we said we'd want in such a case.
Case b. Suppose that z* is a slution to all the equations and constraints,
the first constraint binds at z* (and the second is slack; recall our assump-
tions), and /(z*) > 0. Then z* must be on the right-hand side of an -
interval such as I, as in figure A3(b). Why? Because since gi(z*) > 0,
increasing a bit past z* will cause the constraint g; (z) < ; to be violated,
while decreasing a bit will cause this constraint to go slack (and since the
other constraint is slack by assumption, it won't be a problem, for small
decreases in x, at least). Now the CSC allows \: to be nonnegative; dp =0
must hold, however. Hence the FOC is now
F@*) Mgi@) = 0.
Since ); is constrained to be nonnegative and gi(z*) > 0 by assumption,
the FOC reads that f'(z*) > 0, which is precisely. what we want for a
candidate solution at the right-hand side of an interval; cf. figure A3(b).
Case c. Suppose the first constraint binds at z*, the second is slack, and
g\(z*) < 0. Then by logic just as above, z* will have to be on the left-hand
side of an interval like I, complementary slackness will say that the FOC
simplifies to f (z*) Mgi(@*) = 0, and since A > 0 and gi(z*) < 0, we
have that f/(z*) <0, or just what we want for figure A3(c).
Al.3. Intuition 787
A few words about the coincidence in the example
About that coincidence, notice that in case b, in the solution to the
FOC we'll find that A; = f'(z*)/gi(z*). Now suppose we increase the
right-hand side of the constraint a(x) < by just a bit say, to ; +e.
This is going to lengthen the interval I by a bit; the interval gets longer by
approximately e/gj(z*). A picture may help you see this. In figure Ad, we
have a more detailed look at the situation in case b. On the bottom set of
axes we've plotted g;, and you'll see that the right-hand side of the interval
I is determined by the solution of g(x) = ;- When we increase ; by e,
we can push over the right-hand side, and to a first-order approximation,
the right-hand side moves up by /g{(z*). But then on the top set of axes,
we see that loosening the constraint by this amount allows the function f
to rise a bit more; it rises by approximately the amount f'(z*) x (/g1(z*)),
which is Me. That is, the rate of increase in the objective function value
at our candidate solution per unit increase in the right-hand side of
fe + ef (x*) /g; (x*), approximately
x g/g; (x*), approximatel
Figure Ad. Explaining the coincidence.
788 Appendix one: Constrained optimization
the binding constraint is precisely the value of the multiplier on that con-
straint. This isn't special to case b; you could draw a similar picture for
case c. (It might be a useful exercise to do so.) And this isnt anything
special to the case of one dimension either, as long as the problem you're
looking at is well behaved.
Some general comments
All this talk proves nothing. It is meant to indicate how the CSCs
work by modifying the FOCs in the natural way when you are at
a point that is up against a constraint. The pictures are harder to draw
when you move from one-dimensional to multidimensional problems, and
I won't try to draw them here, but the same basic principles apply; com-
plementary slackness says that a multiplier can be strictly positive only
when a constraint binds, and then that multiplier is used to allow the
objective function f to increase in directions that owing to the binding
constraint(s) are infeasible.
Finally, you'll note that everything discussed in this section on in-
tuition (after the review of unconstrained optimization) was about pro-
ducing candidate solutions. Just as in unconstrained optimization, you
might wonder what guarantee you have that a solution to all the equa-
tions and inequalities is really globally (or even locally) optimal. Accom-
panying theory about things analogous to the second-order conditions in
unconstrained optimization gives you sufficient conditions for a candidate
solution to be locally optimal. From this I happily spare you. And a the-
ory analogous to the result in unconstrained optimization about concave f
ensures that any candidate solution is in fact globally optimal. That theory
is actually fairly simple, but I'll spare you that as well. However, I will
assure you that for purposes of the problems in this book, at least until
we get to oligopoly, any candidate solution is in fact a global optimum.
And T'll even tell you how to watch for the exceptions in general: Watch
for problems where the objective function f is not concave and/or the set
of solutions of the constraints is not convex.
Al.4. Bibliographic notes
The cookbook recipe and very brief intuitive remarks presented here
are certainly no substitution for learning properly about constrained opti-
mization. Because constrained optimization plays such an important role
in economic theory, the serious student of economics should study (either
independently or in a course on mathematical methods) this subject. At
a minimum, you should know about the FOCs and CSCs as necessary
es eam or re eer +
rl ee re
oe ps
+ tn ro nin rn ne linn
ar A ev
Al.5. Problems 789
conditions for an optimum and so-called constraint qualifications, second-
order conditions, sufficiency of the FOCs and CSCs in convex problems, and
problems with quasi-convex or -concave objective functions. Any num-
ber of books provide treatments of this material; Mangasarian (1969) cov-
ers much of the nuts and bolts, although this book doesnt explain why
the multipliers are partial derivatives of the value function. Luenberger
(1984) does discuss this and provides much of what one needs for convex
problems but doesnt discuss quasi-convexity. Luenberger also provides
an excellent treatment of linear programming and numerical methods for
solving constrained and unconstrained programming problems.
References
Luenberger, D. 1984. Linear and Nonlinear Programming, 2d ed. Reading,
Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Mangasarian, O. 1969. Nonlinear Programming. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Al.5. Problems
= 1. What is the solution to the dieting consumers problem if his calorie
constraint is 1,650 calories? If his calorie constraint is 550 calories? If his
calorie constraint is 1,600 calories?
= 2. Suppose that our consumer also has a problem with his cholesterol
levels. Each unit of wheat supplies 10 unit of cholesterol, whereas each
unit of candy supplies 100. The consumer has been told by his doctor to
limit his cholesterol intake to no more than 260 units per day. What is
the optimal solution to the consumers problem now, with this additional
constraint (with a calorie constraint of 1,550 calories per day)? Be sure to
compute the value of the multipliers. Then work through the solution if
the consumer (a) is allowed 261 units of cholesterol per day, 1,550 calories
per day, and has $10 to spend; (b) is allowed 260 units of cholesterol per
day, 1,551 calories per day, and has $10 to spend; and (c) is allowed 260
units of cholesterol per day, 1,550 calories per day, and has $10.10 to spend.
In terms of the coincidence we observed before, what happens in this case?
= 3. I've assured you that for most of the problems you encounter in this
book, when you have one candidate solution, you will know that you
have a global optimum. A part of this assurance may be provided by the
following fact: If, in the general problem with which this appendix began,
the function f is strictly concave, and the functions g; are all convex, then
the problem necessarily has at most a single solution. Prove this.
appendix two
Dynamic programming
For the solving of all manner of dynamic choice problems, an important
technique is dynamic programming. In this appendix you will be briefly
introduced to the techniques and basic results. All readers should go
through the material in the first two sections, which concerns finite hori-
zon problems. The material in the rest of this appendix is only used in
optional (small type) parts of the book (mostly in chapter 14), and so can
be regarded as optional as well. But the techniques of infinite horizon dy-
namic programming are becoming more pervasive in economics generally,
and many of you will find that you have to learn this stuff some day. In
case you find the treatment here too cryptic (which is quite possible, given
the small amount of space devoted to the subject here), references to more
expansive treatments are provided at the end of this appendix.
A2.1. An example with a finite horizon
We begin with an example of finite horizon dynamic programming.
(This is problem 3[a] from chapter 4.)
A consumer lives for three periods denoted by = 0,1,2 and con-
sumes artichoke and broccoli each day. We let a; be the amount of arti-
choke consumed on day t, and we let b; be the amount of broccoli. This
consumer has preferences over lotteries on consumption bundles (where
a consumption bundle is a six-tuple (ao, bo, a1, bi, 22, b2)) that satisfy the
von Neumann-Morgenstern axioms and that are represented by the von
Neumann-Morgenstern utility function
Ulag, bo, as, by, a, by) = (agho) + Nab) + Blaby).
This consumer can buy artichoke and broccoli in the marketplace each day.
Because both vegetables spoil rapidly, what he buys on any given day is
his consumption for that day. (He is constrained to consume nonnegative
792 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
amounts of each vegetable.) The price of artichoke is $1 per unit on each
and every day. The price of broccoli is more complex: It begins as $1 per
unit of broccoli at t = 0. But at = 1, it is either $1.10 or it is $.90, each
of these being equally likely. And at = 2, the price of broccoli is again
random and depends on the price the day before: If the price was $1.10
at t = 1, then it is either $1.20 or $1.00, with each equally likely. If the
price was $.90 at t = 1, then at t=2 itis either $.98 or $.80, each equally
likely. At date = 0, the consumer has no information (beyond what is
given above) about subsequent prices of broccoli. At date = 1, he knows
the current price of broccoli and no more. At date t = 2, he knows the
current price.
This consumer has $300 to spend on artichoke and broccoli over the
three days, which he can divide any way he wishes. Any money he doesnt
spend on a given day sits in his pocket where it earns zero interest.
This is a fairly complex problem, because the consumer has a large
number of decisions to make. He must decide how much artichoke and
broccoli to consume at = 0 (and, implicitly, how much of his $300 to
save); given the price of broccoli at = 1 he must decide how much of
what remains of his $300 to save and how much to spend immediately
on artichoke and broccoli, and he must decide how much to spend on
artichoke and broccoli at = 2, given prices at t = 2. Even if we assume
that any money unspent at t = 0 and = 1 is saved (which is certainly .
a reasonable assumption) and that all remaining money will be spent on
broccoli or artichoke at t= 2 (also reasonable), this gives us two variables
for t = 0, four variables for { = 1 (two vegetable amounts in each of two
contingencies), and four variables for = 2 (one vegetable amount in each
of four contingencies). Rather than try to optimize over all ten variables
at once, we will approach the problem in steps.
Step 1. Find contingent optimal decisions for t = 2. To begin, imagine that the
consumer arrives at time = 2 with z remaining to be spent. This con-
sumer must decide how to allocate that z between artichoke and broccoli.
Because his utility function U is additively separable over time periods,
this decision can be made without reference to the earlier consumption
decisions the consumer made. The consumer will solve the problem
Given z, maximize .8(azb,)
subject to a, + pebz < 2,
 eerie srr pn em am, ee +
A2.1. An example with a finite horizon 793
where py is the current price of broccoli. This is a simple maximization
problem, and if you go through the algebra, you'll find the solution
z z
a; = 5 and by = 205
That is, the expenditures on the two types of vegetables are the same.!
From this we are able to compute the value of the objective function as
a function of z for each of the four possible prices of broccoli. Substituting
the optimal values of a, and b,, the optimal value of .8(g,b,)? is
BT
which is (approximately) 540482 if p, = 1.2, 565692 if pp = 1, .568552
if pp =.98, and .598142 if p, = .8.2
We have determined the optimal contingent decisions at time = 2,
so-called because these decisions are contingent on two things: The price
that prevails for broccoli, and the amount of money left to buy vegetables
at t=2.
Step 2. Find the optimal contingent decisions for t =1. Now we step back to
decisions that are made at = 1. Imagine that the consumer has y left to
spend at this point. He must divide this between immediate consumption
of artichoke and broccoli and money left for = 2. From step 1, we know
how tuuch, on average, money left for t = 2 will be worth, assuming the consumer
purchases vegetables optimally at date t = 2. Hence we can use that value in
determining what decisions to make at t=1.
Let us illustrate: Suppose the price of broccoli is $.90, so that next
period the price will be either $.98 or $.80, each equally likely. The con-
sumer must divide his y between artichoke, broccoli, and money left for
t=2. If we let a;, by, and z be these three amounts, the expected utility
lyf you have never worked with this sort of utility function before, and this solution
seems remarkable to you, you should definitely do the algebra leading to this conclusion.
This sort of utility function, which is part of the Cobb-Douglas family of utility functions, is
much used in examples in economics. In fact, you might find it helpful to solve the problem
maxa*bPc? subject t0 pea + ppb + pec < y. Also try maximizing Ina) + In) + yInfc)
subject to the same constraint.
2 These are, of course, indirect utility functions, and you should think of them as such if
it helps your understanding, )
794 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
for the consumer of the decision (a,b, 2) (for periods t =1 and t = 2
together) is
ab)? + [.5(.568552) + 5(.598142")].
This is the crucial step, so let us take this slowly. The first term in the
expression is the utility derived from the amounts of vegetable consumed
immediately; and the second term (everything within the square brackets)
is the expected utility derived from saving z until next period. The two
5s are the probabilities of the two different prices next time, and the terms
inside the parentheses are the utilities derived from 2 in each of the two
contingencies. So at = 1, if the price of broccoli is $.90, the consumer
will pick (ay, by, 2) to maximize the function just displayed, subject to the
constraint that
a +.9+2<Ly.
Similarly, if the price of broccoli is $1.10, so the possible prices of broccoli
next period are $1.20 and $1.00, the consumer will (at t = 1, if he has y
with which to consume) solve
max (aby)? + [.5(.540482) + .5(.56569z")] subject to a +1.1b1 +2 < y.
You are certainly capable of solving these two problems, although
it may take a fair bit of scribbling on some scratch paper. We will give
a trick for solving these two problems in the next paragraph (in small
type), but this trick (while it employs dynamic programming in a perverse
way) will probably confuse you more than help if you are seeing dynamic
programming for the first time. So let us be clear that the key step to
dynamic programming is what you have just seen and not what will follow
in small type. The key step is that we solved the period t = 2 problem as
a function of z and the price of broccoli, and then took the value of the
optimal solution (as a function of z and the possible prices of broccoli)
and employed it in determining what to do at date t = 1. Because we
have already found the optimal way to spend z at = 2, we dont need
to include that explicitly in our # = 1. problems; we only need the optimal
values as a function of z. We proceed to solve the two optimization
problems posed above, by hook or by crook, which then gives us optimal
value functions for consuming from = 1 on to the end as a function of
y and the price of broccoli at = 1; after the small type we will use these
rs A on
A2.1. An example with a finite horizon 795
value functions to solve the = 0 problem facing the consumer. For the
record, if you solve the two optimization problems given above, you get
the following answers:
If the price of broccoli is $.90, set a; = .27822y, by = .30914y, and z = .44355y,
which gives expected utility equal to 87590y1/2.
If the price of broccoli is $1.10, set a; = .27899y, by = .25363y, and z = .44201y,
which gives expected utility equal to .83190y"/2.
How did we get these answers? The trick we employed was to look
at the t = 1 problem in two pieces. Fix a division of the total resources y
between immediate consumption and future consumption, say y z for now
and z for later. Optimally divide the y z between immediate broccoli and
artichoke. This is a simple problem; it shouldn't take you long to see (if
you don't alreay know) that half of y z will be spent on each of the two
vegetables, leading to a; = (y z)/2 and b; = (y z)/(2ps). This means that
y z allocated for current consumption yields immediate utility
Illy 2/(Ap)1 = 9[1/ps]*[(y 2)/2].
All this is for a fixed division of y into immediate and future consumption:
We optimize the split by maximizing
9[1/ps1* Uy 2)/21 + k(py)z,
where k(p;) is a constant which we take from whichever of the two objective
functions we are working with; .58334 for p; = .90 and .55308 for p, = 1.10.
If you do the algebra, youll find these to be particularly simple optimization
problems, leading to the answers we gave above.
)
Step 3. Find the optimal decisions for = 0. Finally we get to = 0. If
we let a be the amount of artichoke the consumer buys immediately,
the amount of broccoli, and y the amount he saves, and if we assume that,
contingent on the price of broccoli at t = 1, the consumer proceeds optimally with
the y that is in his pocket, he will have expected utility
(aobe) + [.5(.87590y) + .5(.83190y)].
Once again, this is the sum of the immediate utility of consumption and
the expected value provided by having y in hand beginning next period,
796 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
where we average over the two possible prices. This objective function
must be maximized subject to the constraint
ag + bo + < 300,
and if you carry out the maximization, you will find that the solution is
ag = by = 61.02 and y= 177.96.
Now that we know the optimal value of y, we can reconstruct the optimal
levels of consumption at time 1, depending on the price of broccoli. For
example, if the price of broccoli at =1 is $1.10, set
a; = (.27899)(177.96) = 49.65, b; = (.25362)(177.96) = 45.14, and
z = (.44202)(177.96) = 78.66.
And with this, you can work out how to consume at date = 2, depending
on the price of broccoli.
A2.2. Finite horizon dynamic programming
We hope that the intuition behind this solution technique is fairly clear.
We compute the optimal thing to do at the last date, contingent on con-
ditions that apply. This gives us the expected value of carrying forward
any amount of money from date = 1 and then proceeding optimally,
which we use to compute the optimal thing to do at t = 1, contingent on
conditions then applying. And this gives us the expected value of carry-
ing forward any amount of money from date = 0 and then proceeding
optimally, which we use to compute the optimal thing to do at time = 0.
This technique works in all manner of problems besides consumption-
savings problems. Here is another typical (and somewhat simpler) exam-
ple. You are searching for employment. You have four interviews lined
up today, and for reasons we will not go into, you will definitely take one
of the four jobs. You know (given your sterling credentials) that each firm
with which you interview will offer you a job; what is unclear is the wage
they will offer. We let w; be the wage offered by firm , for t= 1,2,3,4.
You interview at each firm in turn, and at the end of the interview the
firm offers you a wage. If you refuse the job when it is offered, you cannot go
back to it. You must decide on the spot whether to take a particular job.
Wage offers are all uniformly distributed on the interval [0,10] and are
A2.2. Finite horizon dynamic programming 797
statistically independent of each other. You wish to maximize the expected
wage you will be paid.
This is an example of an optimal stopping problem, so called because
the sole decision you make is whether to stop the process or continue
at each stage. It is used in modeling job search, searching for the lowest
price at which to buy a good, searching for the highest quality individual
among those being interviewed, deciding when to harvest a crop, and
so on. The assumption that you are unable to recall a previous offer is,
perhaps, a bit unnatural in the context we've described, and you might
think of a somewhat more complex model where, if you refuse a job offer,
you can later go back to it, but then there is a chance it will have been
filled by someone else. (See problem 3.) Or you can think of a situation
in which you must pay a cost every time you interview at another firm,
but you can always go back to the best offer made so far. (See problems
1and 2)
We solve this problem using the same sort of technique we used in
the previous section, by going to the last period and then working through
to the first. If you haven't taken a job by the time you will interview at
firm 4, you will be forced to take their offer. This gives you an expected
wage of 5.
Hence when you hear the offer at firm 3, your decision is simple. If
you are offered a wage below 5, you do better to continue on to firm 4,
which gives you an expected wage of 5. But if you are offered a wage
above 5, you do better to take this.
What, then, is your expected wage from following an optimal strategy
at firms 3 and 4, given you didn't take a job at either firm 1 or firm 2? It
is
10
/ max{w, 5}{.Ddw. ,
0
This is obtained by averaging over all the possible values of w; the ex-
pected wages you will receive by acting optimally: If ws < 5, then your
expected wage is 5 (because you continue on to firm 4), while if ws; > 5,
your expected wage is w;.* If we evaluate this integral, we get
10 10
5
max{w, 5}(.Ddw = / max{w, 5}. dw + [| max{w,5}.1dw .
a 0 5
10
=25+3.75=6.25.
5
5 10 2
= / 5(1)dw + / w(Ddw = 25+ 2%
i . +
 The density of a uniform distribution on [0,10] is .1 for all w [0, 10].
798 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
That is, if you turn down the jobs offered at firms 1 and 2 and proceed
optimally, your expected wage will be 6.25.
So now it is clear what you should do upon hearing job offer 2. If
this offer exceeds 6.25, take it. If it falls below 6.25, turn it down and take
your chances with firms 3 and 4. And so proceeding optimally beginning
with firm 2 gives you an expected wage of
10 6.25 10
max{w, 6.25} Ddw= | max{w, 6.25}(Ddw+ / max{w, 6.25} 1dw
0 6.25
0
6.25 10
= 6.25(.1)dw + | w(.Ddw
0 6.25
5 1w? |
= 26.25 + - = 3.90625 + 3.046875 = 6.953125.
8 2 eas
And now it is clear what you should do upon hearing job offer 1. If
this offer exceeds 6.953125, take it. If it is less, then turn it down and take
your chances with jobs 2, 3, and 4. (What is the expected wage you garner
by following the optimal strategy in this case? If you work through the
math, you should find that it is approximately 7.4173.)
Once again, the idea is that we solve the problem from the back. We
work out what the optimal strategy and optimal value are starting from
each time until the end recursively, where the optimal value starting at
t+1 is used to find the optimal strategy and optimal value starting at time
t. We are using the basic principle that
If a strategy is optimal for each point in time at that point of time, given that an
optimal strategy will be used thereafter, then the strategy is optimal.
This is known as the principle of optimality, or as Bellman's principle of opti-
mality, or as the discrete maximum principle.
Underpinning this principle is the following simple bit of mathemat-
ics. Suppose we wish to maximize a function of two variables, f(z,y).
For each z, we can find that value of y that maximizes f(z, y) holding =
fixed; and then we can find the overall maximum by optimizing over z.
That is, first compute f*(z) = max, f(z,y), then maximize frfoverz. In
symbols,
max fl@,y) = max[f*@)] = max[max fz, *)
tr mmr A ee eee =
-
on
ree
A2.2. Finite horizon dynamic programming 799
If we were being very precise about this, we'd worry about whether those
maxima are achieved and we'd worry, as in our first application, about
how to handle constraints on the variables z and y. But the basic idea is
conveyed by (x).
There is nothing in (x) about the decision concerning y being made
after the decision concerning =; equation (x) is phrased for a general two-~
variable optimization problem. So it is with dynamic programming. Most
applications, and certainly most applications in economics, involve decisions
made through time. In such cases, it is natural to work from later dates back
to earlier dates. This is especially true in applications with uncertainty that
resolves through time, because then later decisions are conditioned on more
information. But from the point of view of the optimization theory being
employed in dynamic programming, this isnt necessary. If, for example,
there was no uncertainty in our artichoke and broccoli problem, then there
would be nothing to prevent us from first finding the optimal way to split z
between artichoke and broccoli at = 1, then computing the optimal way to
split y between artichoke and broccoli at = 0 and funds for consumption
at time = 1, and then computing the optimal way to split the entire $300
between the two types of vegetable at = 2 and funds for consumption at
t=0 and = 1. It might not be natural to think of the problem this way, but
the optimization would go through just the same.
We will, for the remainder of this appendix, speak in terms of deci-
sions made through time and the use of dynamic programming to solve such
optimization problems. But you should not be misled into thinking that to
employ dynamic programming it is necessary that decisions have this sort of
temporal ordering.
Things that link the past, the present, and the future
A difference between the consumption-savings problem of the previ-
ous section and the job-taking problem described in this section is that
in the consumption-savings problem, when we analyze decisions made at
later dates, we analyze those decisions depending on the level of money
in the consumer's pocket (z or y) and the current price of broccoli. The
amount of money in the consumers pocket is a variable that links past
decisions with present opportunities, and it links the present decision with
future opportunities, and thus future values. The price of broccoli at any
point in time determines (in part) current opportunities. But it also is
used to predict future broccoli prices, and so it provides a further link
between the past and present on one hand and the future on the other.
In general dynamic programming problems, the opportunities the de-
cision maker has now and will have in the future depend on previous
decisions made. And when there is uncertainty about the future, data
% Is (x) correct if we replace the maxs with sups?
800 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
from the past and present are useful in predicting the future. These links
must be included in the analysis; optimal decisions and values. must be
computed contingent on whatever links are pertinent.
In this regard, note two things about the formulation of the consump-
tion-savings problem used in the previous section.
(1) In general, one of the things that can link past with present and future
is that past decisions can affect the preferences one has over current deci-
sions. It is not hard to imagine an individual whose preferences mandate
that excessive artichoke at t = { lessens the utility derived from artichoke
at t= 1 and = 2. The preferences that we specified did not have this
property; because utility is additively separable through time, the marginal
rates of substitution of broccoli for artichoke at any time beyond-a given
date are independent of consumption up to that date.
What would happen if we had preferences where the levels of con-
sumption at one date affected the marginal rates of substitution at later
dates? Then in solving for the optimal way to spend z at date t=2, we
would have to condition on past consumption levels. That is, we would
compute values of optimally continuing as a function of z and the price
of broccoli as before, and also as a function of the vector (ay, by, a1, 51).
Depending on the exact specification of the consumers preferences, we
might be able to get away with something less than conditioning on the
entire vector of past consumption. For example, if all that matters (in
terms of previous consumption) to preferences for consumption at date 
and beyond is the sum total consumption of artichoke, then we could
condition our date 2 decisions on ag + a; and our date 1 decision on aq
only.
In most applications in economics, preferences are assumed to be addi
tively separable in just the fashion we've assumed here. (Additive separa-
bility is a bit more than is needed, but it is convenient parametrically.) The
point to understand here is that this is a matter of analytical convenience
and not necessity. In theory, one can use dynamic programming without
additive separability as long as all the links between past, present, and
future are properly taken into account. (For most applications, though, ad-
ditive separability is a practical necessity, because otherwise the analysis
becomes intractable.)
(2) Imagine that we reformulated the consumption-savings problem so that
it has four time periods, and so that at = 0, the price of broccoli is $1;
at t = 1, it is either $1.10 or $.90; at = 2, it is either $1.20, $1.00, or $.80;
and at = 3, it is $1.30, $1.10, $.90, or $.70. Imagine sitting at time = 2
with a broccoli price of $1.20 and y in the consumers pocket to spend
A2.3, An example with an infinite horizon 801
immediately or to save for period 3. The expected utility of funds saved
depends on the future price of broccoli, and so the decision taken at = 2
depends on the best current assessment of that future price.
It is easy to imagine a formulation of the evolution of the price of
broccoli where the only relevant data for predicting future prices of broc-
coli is the current price of broccoli. For example, we can imagine a model
where the price of broccoli rises or falls by a $.10 in each period, with each
of those two changes equally likely. In this case, the decision made at time
t = 2 would depend on the current price of broccoli in two ways: This
price determines what bundles of current vegetable are affordable, and
it determines the distribution of the value of money set aside for future
consumption.
But it is also possible to imagine formulations where best assessment
that can be made at time = 2 about the price of broccoli at time = 3
depends on both the current price of broccoli and the price in the previous
period. (Suppose broccoli takes two periods to harvest, and farmers who
planted at time = 1 determined how much to plant in part by looking at
the prevailing price of broccoli.) In this case, in deciding how to split y at
time = 2 between current and future consumption, we have to condition
the decision on the previous price of broccoli, as well as the current price,
insofar as the previous price helps us to assess future prices.
If we had such a formulation, there would be no problem theoreti-
cally in using dynamic programming. Decisions made at = 2 would be
conditioned on previous prices of broccoli, as well as on current prices
and the amount of money the consumer possesses.
As a practical matter, however, this increases the complexity of the
problem by increasing the number of contingent problems that must be
solved for = 2. The analytical practicalities lead economists to formulate
models in which the past is useful for predicting the future in particular
low-dimensional ways. That is (if you know the terminology), models
usually assume that there are low-dimensional statistics of the past that are
sufficient for predicting the future, and these low-dimensional sufficient
statistics become state variables or links in the dynamic programming
formulations. Indeed, in many formulations it is assumed that current
prices are sufficient for predicting the future; the fancy way of saying this
is that Markovian assumptions are made.
A2.3. An example with an infinite horizon
While two examples certainly dont constitute a general theory, the
two examples given will probably give you enough lead on how to use
802 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
dynamic programming in finite horizon problems. A bit more complex is
the use of dynamic programming techniques for infinite horizon problems.
That is, we imagine a formulation in which there is no last decision from
which we can begin our analysis; at each point in time there are always
many more decisions to come. We look at a specific example in this section;
the general theory is discussed in the next.
Consider the following variation on the consumption-savings problem
of section A2.1. (This is problem 3[b] from chapter 4.) The consumer
now consumes at times = 0,1,2,.... At each date, he consumes both
artichoke and broccoli. His utility function, defined for an infinite stream
of consumption (ag, bo, a1, b1,-- J) is
U(aoy boy ar, by) = (95) (ashe)
1=0
This consumer starts with wealth $1,000, which he can spend on vegetables
or can deposit in his local bank. Any funds deposited at the bank earn
interest at a rate of 2% per period, so that $1 deposited at time turns
into $1.02 at time t+ 1.
The price of artichoke is fixed at $1. The price of broccoli is random.
It begins at $1. Then, in each period, it either increases or decreases. Being
very specific, if the price of broccoli at date t is pg, then
_ [11p, with probability .5, and
Pea = 9p, with probability .5.
The consumer wishes to manage his initial wealth $1,000 in a way
that maximizes his expected utility. How should he do this?
We will solve this problem by using the following recipe.
Step 1. Guess what strategy our consumer should follow in this problem. Call
your guess the candidate strategy.
Step 2. For the candidate strategy, compute the expected discounted utility the
consumer will obtain if he follows this strategy as a function of his current level
of wealth and the current price of broccoli.
Step 3. Having computed the value of following the candidate strategy, ask
the question, Can the consumer do any better by a strategy that is completely
arbitrary at the start and then conforms forever after to the candidate strategy?
If the answer is no, the candidate strategy is said to be unimprovable, where we
should really say that it is unimprovable in a single step. If the strategy is not
A2.3. An example with an infinite horizon 803
unimprovable, then it is not optimal. And, for a wide range of infinite horizon
problems (including this problem), unimprovable strategies are optimal.
This recipe is not, to be sure, very transparent, and you shouldn't despair
that you dont understand it until after you've seen it worked out on
an example (which happens momentarily). But it is probably sufficiently
comprehensible so that you can see that it isn't really a recipe for solving
the problem directly. If you have a guess what the solution is, this recipe
allows you to check whether your candidate strategy is in fact optimal.
Now try this recipe out on our problem.
Step 1. Guess what strategy our consumer should follow in this problem. We
guess that the strategy will take the following form: In each period the
consumer spends a constant fraction of his wealth on current consumption,
spending half that amount on artichoke and half on broccoli, with the rest
of his wealth going into savings. We dont know what the fraction is, so
for the time being we make it a variable, namely k.
Where did this guess come from? Since the solution to this problem
is not original to this book, the accurate but not very useful answer is that
it appears in the literature. But if it hadn't, some techniques lead to this
guess; techniques that we will explore at the end of the next section. For
now, assume that this guess is the result of brilliant inspiration.
Step 2. For the candidate strategy, compute the expected discounted utility the
consumer will obtain if he follows this strategy as a function of his current level
of wealth and the current price of broccoli. We perform this computation as
follows: Let us write v(y,p) for the value to the consumer of following the
strategy just described if his initial wealth is y and the price of broccoli
begins at p. (The initial conditions we are given are y = 1,000 and p=1,
but we take a slightly more general approach here) And, to make the
equations a bit prettier, let us write k for 1 k. Then u(y, p) satisfies the
functional equation
25
u(y, p) = 2 2 +.95[.5v(1.02&y, 1.1p) + 5u(1.02ky, .9p)].
This comes from the following considerations. If the guessed-at strategy
is followed, and if we begin with initial conditions (y,p), then the strat-
egy calls for setting immediate consumption of artichoke equal to ky/2
and immediate consumption of broccoli equal to ky/(2p). The immediate
utility from this is just the first term on the right-hand side. This strategy
also means that ky will go into the bank, and so 1.02ky will come out
804 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
next period. The price of broccoli next period will be either 1.1p or 9p,
each equally likely, and since the strategy we are following looks the same
starting next period (as a function of the then initial conditions) as it does
now, the value of following the strategy, discounted back to next time, is
either v(1.02ky,1.1p) or v(1.02ky,.9p), with each of these equally likely.
The second term on the right-hand side is thus the expected value of the
utility of future consumption (if we follow this strategy), where the extra
.95 discounts this expected value back to the current period.
This is a pretty miserable looking functional equation, but now for the
next bit of magic: If the guessed at strategy is followed, then v(y,p) will
have the form Ky*/p? for some constant KX. How do we know this?
Think of it this way: If the consumer's initial wealth is doubled, then
the strategy calls for him to eat precisely twice as much artichoke and
broccoli this period, and his wealth next period will be precisely twice
what it otherwise would have been, so in the next period he doubles his
consumption, and so on. Given the consumer's utility function, this means
that his utility goes up by the factor of 2. Similarly, if the price of broccoli
were doubled, the consumer would spend the same amount of money on
artichoke and broccoli in each period, but he would get half the broccoli
he would have had otherwise, which, given his utility function, means his
utility decreases by the multiplicative factor 1/2%. (These are loose verbal
arguments but they contain the germ of a formal proof; you are asked to
provide a rigorous. proof in problem 5.)
Once we know that this is the form of u(y, p), we can substitute into
the functional equation we had before, and we get the equation
.5 25 Tons ]e5 1. Toss]-5
x 4 2] + 95) SK 2 + 5x 102k]
p=
12m 1p ~*~" Top
This doesnt look too much prettier, but looks are deceiving: It has its
virtues. For one thing, the term y/p can be factored out of both sides,
leaving an equation in the variables KX and k. (Recall that k = 1 k,
so k is not another variable.) Taking that equation, a bit of fairly simple
algebra will allow you to isolate K on one side of the equation; we obtain
(approximately)
(k/2)5
= = (%)
1 .96096132k-
Note what we've done: We considered a strategy of a particular form,
parameterized by k, the fraction of wealth that is used for current con-
sumption. Because of the simple nature of the strategy, we are able to
| A2.3. An example with an infinite horizon 805
prove (or, more precisely, you will prove for homework) that the expected
utility of using that strategy has a particular functional form, up to a
second parameter K. We could also find a functional equation of the ex-
pected utility of using the strategy, and from this we are able to find what
value K takes as a function of parameter k.
It may be worth noting that this function, given by (&) behaves rather
well at the two extreme values of k, namely k=0 and k=1. ff k= 0,
then the consumer always invests all of his wealth and never has anything
to eat. Of course, this leads to K = 0; if you never eat, you never get any
utility. Andif k=1,then =0,and K = (1/2); our consumer spends his
entire endowment on initial consumption and, of course, this gives him
utility (y/2)(1/p)>.
One thing we can do immediately is to answer the question, Of all
the strategies of the form of our guess, which value of k gives the highest
lifetime utility? That is, which value of k gives the highest value of K?
Taking the derivative of the function giving K in terms of k doesnt look
particularly appealing, so we approach this problem numerically. Up to
six decimal points, the K is maximized at k* = .076553, for a value of
K* =2.55565129. Note well: This doesnt show that the candidate strategy
for k* is the optimal strategy overall. All we've shown so far is that among
strategies of this special type, k* is best. (Indeed, it is only now that we
have truly completed step 1. Until now we guessed at the form of the
optimal solution. Now at last we have a single candidate strategy.)
But now we show that the strategy with k* is optimal.
Step 3. Having computed the value of following the candidate strategy, ask
the question, Can the consumer do any better by a strategy that is completely
arbitrary at the start and then conforms forever after to the candidate strategy?
If the answer is no, the candidate strategy is said to be unimprovable, where
we should really say that it is unimprovable in a single step. If the candidate
strategy is not unimprovable, it is not optimal. And for a wide range of infinite
horizon problems (including this problem), unimprovable strategies are optimal.
The last line is the punchline, so please read it again. If the candidate
strategy passes the test that it cannot be improved upon in a single step,
then it is optimal. This isn't true for every problem in dynamic program-
ming; but suffident conditions will be supplied below, and for the time
being you can rest content in the knowledge that this problem meets those
conditions. If our strategy passes the unimprovability test, then we've got
a winner.
Suppose, then, that the consumer begins with wealth y, when the
price of broccoli is p. The immediate decisions to make are how much
806 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
to spend on artichoke, how much on broccoli, and how much to save.
Let a be the amount of artichoke consumed immediately, b the amount
of broccoli, and z the amount saved. Then the utility the consumer ob-
tains from these three immediate decisions followed by conformance to our
candidate solution is
(1.022) 02)
(ab) +.95 55 Gip= TE FE (op |
This is the sum of the utility of immediate consumption and the expected
utility from future consumption, discounted back to the current period.
Note carefully that the candidate solution is buried in second term through
the multiplicative factor K*. More generally, what we have inside the
brackets in the second term is the expected value of the value of the can-
didate solution, which we computed in step 2, averaged over the possible
initial conditions beginning next period, given current conditions and cur-
rent decisions. We wish to maximize this expression subject to the budget
constraint a+pb+z < y, and we hope that the solution to this optimization
problem is
a= ky/2,b=ky/@p), and z= 1 ky.
And, sure enough, if you plug in K* = 255565912, the optimal solution
has a = .076553y/2, and so on. Up to the limits of our computational
ability, the candidate strategy is unimprovable in a single step (And if we
ground through the problem algebraically, we would find that the precise
candidate solution is unimprovable.) Hence, by the test of step 3, our
candidate solution is optimal.
A2.4. Stationary Markov decision problems
This is all very nice, but you may wonder why this test works, and
how we might pose all this a bit more generally. (Also left in limbo is the
question of how we ever managed to guess at the nature of the solution.)
We will not give proofs, but by developing the theory just applied in
greater generality, we can at least give the basic intuition.
Formulation of the general problem
We imagine a decision maker who must take an action a; at each of
a countable number of dates, t = 0,1,2,.... A current state of affairs
A24. Stationary Markov decision problems 807
prevails at each time t, denoted by the variable g,.% The state 0; serves
three functions. First, it determines which actions are feasible at the current
date; we write A(f;) as the set of actions feasible at time as a function
of the state ;. Second, together with the chosen action, it determines a
reward that the decision maker receives at time t; we write r(f;, as) for
this reward. Third, it serves as a sufficient statistic of all history prior to
date t for predicting the values of future state variables. If the decision
maker takes action a; at time , the probability that the next state is fg
(given all information available up to time ) is (Ba), 8).
The decision maker's problem is to select actions at each Hime as a
function of past history to maximize the expected discounted sum of re-
wards he receives; that is, he seeks to maximize the expectation of
oo
3 yr (6s, a),
1=0
where future states (and, therefore, future actions) are random. We assume
that v [0,1).
This sort of problem is called a stationary Markov decision problem. The
modifier Markov is used because the current state is a sufficient statistic
for predicting future states (given the current action). The modifier sta-
tionary is used because the problem facing the decision maker looks the
same (contingent on the state) at each time .
Our consumption-savings problem fits into this general framework
(with one bit of shoehorning). Think of a: = (as; by, 2), where a; is the
amount of artichoke consumed at time %, by is the amount of broccoli
consumed, and z; is the amount of money saved for next period. For
the state variable, think of 6; = (ye, ps), where y; is the amount of money
available at the start of period and p; is the current price of broccoli.
Then:
(1) ABs) = {(as, bs, 2) as + Psby + 2 < Yer ty be, Ye 2 0}; these are just the
usual budget and nonnegativity constraints;
(2) 70s, ap) = (asby) for az = (as, bs, 2); that is, the immediate reward in
any period is the utility of consumption in that period; and
b For reasons of analytical tractability, we assume that there are at most countably many
possible values of 6:. We won't explain why this assumption is made, except to say that we
dont want the mathematical results we will announce in a bit to be incorrect, and without
this technical condition one must worry about the measurability of some of the functions we
define. It is possible to do without this assumption and, as we will note later, we must do
without it to accommodate the example of the previous section, but then we would have to
make a larger number of technical assumptions in footnotes similar to this one.
808 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
(3 0:1 = (P41, P41) is determined by 6; = (yz, 0) and oa; = (a, by, 2) as
follows: yz. = 1.022; with certainty, and py, has probability distribution
(conditional on p;) given by
_ fL1p; with probability .5, and
Pt1=1 9p, with probability .5.
Finally, v= .95.
Strategies and value functions
A strategy for the Markov decision problem is a rule for choosing
actions at each time as a function of all the information available at time
t, namely all previously taken actions and the present and all previous
states. We write o as a symbolic representation of a strategy, which is
really quite a complex animal. Each strategy for choosing actions together
with an initial state f, leads to a probability distribution over the sequence
of rewards the decision maker will receive, and so for each strategy o we
can (in theory) compute a function that gives the expected discounted sum
of rewards the decision maker will receive by following o as a function
of the initial state ,. We denote this expected value by v(6;,).
In general, it will be very hard to compute the expected value of
following a strategy. But for some strategies the computation is not so
difficult. The strategy o is said to be stationary if the action prescribed -
by o at time t when the current state is ; depends only on 6;. The
only here has two parts to it: The action chosen doesnt depend on the
current date per se, and it doesnt depend on anything that happened prior
to time. .
For a stationary strategy o, we can build a recursive equation for the
value function associated with using o. We will write this equation and
then explain it. One piece of notation is needed: When o is a stationary
strategy, we write o(f) for the action prescribed by o when the state is 6.
Then the recursive equation is
(60, 0) = (8, 700) +7 _ v(8, 3)m(6]60, 7(60))-
9
 There is one problem with this. The range of possible values of 8; is uncountable, be-
cause there are uncountably many savings decisions that can be made. For this reason, the
results we announce dont quite apply to our problem. Or, to be more precise, the results
are correct, but it takes a bit more on the technical side to be sure that this is so.
2 Some technical restrictions are needed to be sure the integrals that define this expecta-
tion are well defined. If r is bounded above or below, then the integrals are well defined,
although values of minus or plus infinity, respectively, are not precluded.
A2.4. Stationary Markov decision problems 809
Note that this is a recursive equation because the unknown function v
appears on both sides. This equation arises as follows: If the intial state is
fo and the decision maker employs o, then he takes action o(d,) initially,
giving immediate reward r(6;, o(6,)). Moreover, the state at time =1 is
 with probability w(8]6y, (6). Starting next period, if the state is 6, the
discounted sum of all rewards from next period on, discounted back to
t=1, is just v(f, 0); this is so because is stationary. So the discounted
expected value of all future rewards from using o, discounted back to
the present time = 0, is 3", v(8, 0) (6]y, (6). The recursive equation,
then, says that the value of following o is the sum of the current reward
and the discounted sum of all future rewards. With this recursive equation
and a bit of luck or skill, we may be able to find v(6, o) (as we did in the
example).
Having this recursive solution and being able to solve it are two dif-
ferent things, of course. Moreover, we cant be sure that evety solution of
the recursive equation is, in fact, the value function v. For example, if r is
bounded, then v = +00 and v = oco are both solutions of this equation. In
the theory of dynamic programming, characterizations of solutions are given
for particular special cases. A sample of typical results is
Proposition 1. (a) Suppose r is a bounded function. Then v(-,o) is the unique
bounded solution of the recursive equation. 
(0) If is bounded below, then v(-, o) is the smallest solution of the recursive equation
that is bounded below. If v is bounded above, then v(-,o) is the greatest solution of
the recursive equation that is bounded above.
(c) Suppose the range of possible states is a finite set . Let IT be the X matrix
whose 0,0" term is w(60'|6,5(9)). Then v(-,) is the vector ~(a(-),")- (I ~I),
where I is the appropriately sized identity matrix. (Part of this statement is the
assertion that the matrix (I ~II) is in fact invertible.) f
The optimal value function, optimal strategies,
and Bellmans equation
For every conceivable strategy o, stationary or not, we can compute
v(:, 0), the expected value of using o, considered as a function of the initial
state. The optimal value function is then defined as
F(0) = sup v(d, 0),
* We remind the careful reader that v < 1 is assumed throughout. In treatments of dy-
namic programming where this restriction on + is removed (a) would not hold.
4 If the notion of the inverse of an infinite dimensional matrix is not too much for you to
stomach, part (c) generalizes to countable state spaces as long as r is bounded.
810 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
where the supremum is taken over all conceivable strategies o. And strat-
egy o is optimal if f(8) = v(g,6) for all 6. Moreover, we have the following
recursive equation for f.
Proposition 2. The optimal value function f satisfies the recursive equation
F(6e) = sup = + > FO (860, a) .
acAlby) e
This is known as Bellman's equation or the optimality equation. The
idea it expresses is that the optimal value is obtained if one takes the best
possible action in the first period and then employs an optimal strategy. It
takes a proof (and, in fact, it requires some technical conditions, conditions
similar to those that guarantee all the expectations that make up value
functions are well-defined). But it should not be so hard to believe.
Conserving strategies
Suppose we could find a strategy that attained the supremum in
Bellman's, equation for every state 0. That is, for all 6, o satisfies
60) = 78, 76) +7 Y_, FO)m(6]60,7(B0)-
. 8
Such a strategy is called conserving, because it conserves the optimal value;
if you use this strategy for one stage and then follow an optimal strategy
(which gives you value f), you will get the optimal value.
Proposition 3. (a) Any optimal strategy o is conserving.
(b) If 7 is bounded above, then any conserving strategy is optimal.
In other words, being a conserving strategy is equivalent to being optimal
for a wide range of problems, including all those where r is bounded.
The qualification is necessary, as the following simple example demon-
strates: Suppose @ ={0,1,2,...}, AO) = {#+1,0} for 6 > 0, and AQ) = {0}.
Transitions from one state to the next are very simple; you go with certainty
to the state that has the same label as the action you select. That is, from state
6 > 0 you can choose to go either to +1 or to 0. Once you get to state 0,
you never get out. Rewards are given by
fo ife=f+land
r(f,a) = a/y fa=0,
be ere neem <0
A2.4. Stationary Markov decision problems 811
if 8 > 0, and (0,0) = 0. That is, if you choose to make a transition to state
0 from 8 > 0, you receive a reward whose size grows with 6 in a way that
just offsets the discount rate. In all other cases, you get zero reward. You
can show that in this case f(n) = 1/4"; if you start at = 0 in state 0 = n,
then as long as you make the transition to state 0 sometime, you get 1 7"
(in present value terms). But then one conserving strategy is od) =80+1;
always put off making the transition. It is conserving, because there is never
any hurry to make the transition to 0, as long as you do it. The problem is
that with this particular conserving strategy you never make the transition to
0, so you never accrue any reward.
Once you have digested this example, consider a simple variation in
which the reward of moving from 6 to 0 is (1/7)? 1. In this case, things
get better and better the longer you delay the transition to state 0. But if you
never make the transition, you never get a positive reward. What is f in this
case? Which strategies are conserving? Which strategies are optimal?
The intuition behind proposition 3(b) can now be seen. If is bounded
above, then the value of rewards accrued in the distant future must vanish
(because of the discount factor). So conserving the optimal value does
not mean putting off an ever bigger prize, and (one can prove) conserving
strategies are optimal.
In what ways is the notion of a conserving strategy useful? To apply
this notion, you have to know the optimal value function f. In most
problems, you will not know what f is, and so as a means of finding
a specific optimal strategy, this concept isn't useful. (In a few cases you
can determine what f is from first principles. And you can sometimes
compute f by approximating an infinite horizon problem with infinite
horizon problems; this is called value iteration in the literature.)
But there is another way to use the notion of a conserving strategy.
Suppose you can argue from first principles and assumptions made that
a conserving strategy exists. For example, if each A(f) is finite, then there
must be a conserving strategy, since then the supremum is automatically a
maximum. Then if r is bounded above, you know that an optimal strategy
exists, which is not otherwise guaranteed.?
Sometimes you can argue from first principles that f takes a par-
ticular form. And then you can get a lead on what an optimal strat-
egy must look like. A particular example of this is our consumption-
savings problem. Recall the argument we employed to show that, for
our candidate strategy o, v(-,0) takes the form Ky/p for some con-
stant K. By a similar argument it can be shown that the optimal value
function f takes the form Ly/p? for some L. It may be helpful to
see a bit of the argument sketched. (You are asked to give the complete
argument in problem 5.) Take any y and p and any strategy o that is
9 For example, see the variation sketched three paragraphs ago.
812 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
feasible starting at (y,p). Consider starting the problem with Ay and p
for A > 0, and consider modifying o so that the consumer simply scales
up (or down) all consumption and savings decisions by the constant A.
This strategy will be feasible starting at (Ay, p). And it will deliver utility
Aula, (y,p)). Hence f((\y,p)) > A%v(a,(y,p)) for all o. Since o is arbi-
trary here, f((\y,p)) > Af((y,p)). And since A can be replaced by 1/A
and y by )y in this inequality, we see that f((Ay,p)) = A f((y,p). By a
similar argument, f((y,p)) = f((y,p))/X*. If you work at it, you will
see that these two equations establish that f takes the form we indicated.
(Hint: Let L= f(1,1).)
Knowing that f takes the form Ly/p is extremely helpful in one
way. Once we know this, we can work out the form of any conserving
strategy from Bellmans equation. It should come as no surprise to learn
that if f takes this form, then conserving strategies must be of the form
of our candidate solution. Spend a constant fraction of y on current con-
sumption and save the rest, and divide current spending half each on
artichoke and broccoli. We dont know, of course, the constant k of y that
is spent on current consumption until we know what L is. But we know
that the optimal strategy, since it is conserving, must take this form. And
then we cah proceed to the next bit of technique.
Unimprovable strategies
The strategy o is said to be unimprovable if it satisfies Bellmans equa- .
tion with v(-, 0) in place of f; ie. if for all 6,
v(fy, 0) = sup 1 a) + > 006, a)mw(8)6o, a) ,
ac Al) 9
or, equivalently, if (fy) achieves the supremum in the expression on the
right-hand side for every 6. As noted in the previous section, a more apt
description of this property is unimprovability in a single step.
Proposition 4. (a) Any optimal strategy a is unimprovable.
(b) If v is bounded below, then any unimprovable strategy is optimal.
Here is the canonical example to show why you need to assume that
rewards are bounded below. Let = {1,2,3,...} and let Af) = {C, F}. No
h Perhaps you wish to object: In the problem of the previous section, r wasn't bounded
above. But this objection doesn't hold water. We are using here the result that every optimal
strategy is conserving; once we characterize the nature of all conserving strategies, we a
fortiori have characterized the nature of any optimal strategy.
A2.5. Bibliographic notes and discussion 813
matter what action you take in state 6, transition on the next step is to 8 +1
with probability one. But there is a difference in the two actions: r(, F) =0
while r(8,C) = (1/7). That is, F is free, and: C is costly. Of course, the
optimal strategy is always to choose F, yielding f = 0. But consider the
abysmal strategy o that always chooses C. This gives a total discounted
cost v(d,0) = co. The point is that is unimprovable. If you choose F for
one period and then revert back to &, your expected value will continue to
be co. The only way to do better than is to deviate from it at all but a
finite number of periods (and the best thing is to deviate from it all the time);
since unimprovability only checks one-step deviations, o passes the test of
unimprovability. :
From this example, you may be able to see the intuition behind propo-
sition 4(b). If a strategy is unimprovable in a single step, then (one can show
by induction) it is unimprovable if you change it over any finite time horizon.
It can be suboptimal, then, only if it is bad in the arbitrarily far distant
future. But if rewards are bounded below (and we are discounting with a
discount factor strictly less than one), no strategy can be that bad in the ar-
bitrarily far distant future. Hence unimprovability over any finite horizon
implies optimality.
In the previous section we saw how useful proposition 4 can be.
A2.5. Bibliographic notes and discussion
For the purposes of this book, the functional equation for v(-,0) and
proposition 4(b) are what matters. And when we wish to use these two,
r will be bounded and will be finite so there will be no difficulties
encountered at all.
But the theory of dynamic programming, which is used more and
more in economics, goes far beyond the little we've mentioned here. And
complementary to the theory of dynamic programming, which envisions
decisions made at discrete points in time, is control theory, where the
decision maker is continually choosing actions. We recommend the fol-
lowing for further reading: Howard (1960) is an excellent introduction to
the subject. Ross (1983) is perhaps one level deeper. Whittle (1982) is au-
thoritative. Stokey and Lucas (1989) is another complete treatment that is
expecially useful because it is devoted to applications in economic theory.
References
Howard, R. 1960. Dynamic Programming and Markov Processes. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Ross, 5. 1983. Introduction to Stochastic Dynamic Programming. Boston:
Academic Press.
814 Appendix two: Dynamic programming
Stokey, N.; and Lucas, R. 1989. Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Whittle, P. 1982. Optimization Over Time, vols. I, II. New York: John Wiley
and Sons.
A2.5. Problems
u 1. In the problem of section A2.3, suppose that you can interview up
to 4 firms, where each will offer you a wage uniformly distributed on the
interval [0,10]. Every time you interview, though, you pay a fee of $1.
What is the optimal strategy to follow if you must take an offer when
made, as in section A2.3? What is the optimal strategy to follow if you
can always go back to previous offers?
a 2. Now consider problem 1, but in the case where you can interview
infinitely many firms at a cost of $1 per firm.
u 3. In the problem of section A2.3, suppose that if you turn down a job,
you can later make (costless) inquiries to see if it is still available, but there
is a probability that the job will already have been filled. Because this is
a difficult problem, consider the case where there are only three possible
jobs. And suppose that if you turn down job 1, there is a .5 probability that
it will be filled when you hear the offer made at job 2, and a .75 chance:
that it will be filled when you hear the offer made at job 3; and if you turn
down job 2, there is a .5 probability that it will be filled when you hear
the offer made at job 3. What is the optimal strategy to follow? (Hint:
Suppose you are offered a wage of 5 at job 1 and 6 at job 2. Do you make
inquiries about the availability of the job at firm 1? You may wish to do
so, if not for 5 and 6, then for other numbers where job 1 pays less than
job 2, and you won't have the answer until you understand why this is.)
a 4. (a) Consider the following problem. You are driving down a long line
of parking spaces, looking for a place to park your car. Think of poten-
tial parking spaces at locations 100,99,-98,...,1,0,1,2,.... You are
currently at location 100, which is unoccupied, and you are considering
whether to park there. If you decide not to park there, you will drive a
bit further and see whether location 99 is occupied or not; if it is, you
must proceed to 98; and if not, you must decide whether to park there
or try your luck with 98, and so on. You cannot circle back to empty
parking spots; U-turns are strictly forbidden. Each spot is occupied with
another car with probability a < 1, and whether a spot is occupied is
A2.5. Problems 815
independent of the occupancy of any and all other slots. You know the
value of a. Your objective is to park as close as possible to location 0.
More specifically, if you park in location =, then the cost to you is |n],
and you seek to minimize the expected cost you incur. You are able to
see only the occupancy status of one spot at a time. What should you do?
What is the expected cost to you?
(b) Suppose that when you are at spot 7, you can see the occupancy status
of spot n and the next five spots ahead. What should you do? What is
the expected cost to you? 
(c) Suppose that you dont know the value of a. Being very specific,
suppose a = .9 or a =.7, with each of these two values being equally
likely. (If you know the terminology, this makes the occupancy status of
the spots exchangeable instead of being independent.) What should you
do? What is the expected cost to you? (Use the formulation where you
cannot see ahead. A numerically derived solution is quite adequate. An
important first step is to decide on what links the past to the future
in this problem.
u 5. (a) Give a rigorous proof of the assertion that if in the consumption
savings problem of section A2.3 you spend constant and equal fractions of
your wealth on artichoke and broccoli (and save the rest), then your dis-
counted expected utility takes the form XK y5/p, where y is your current
wealth and p is the current price of broccoli.
(b) Give a rigorous proof of the assertion that the optimal value function
f in this context takes the form Ly/p.
& 6. Suppose in the consumption-savings problem of section A2.3 the price
of broccoli is constant (and equal, say, to 2), but now there are two ways
to save. You can put your savings in a bank, where $1 put in today
returns $1.02 tomorrow. Or you can invest in a risky asset that for every
$1 invested on one day returns either $1.07 or $.99 the following day,
with each of these values equally likely. (The return on the risky asset is
independent from one day to the next.) What is the optimal strategy to
follow in this case?
2 7. Consider the variation on the example given following proposition 3.
Are there any conserving strategies in this case? Are there any optimal
strategies?
