Prisoner's dilemma, right?
So the most commonly studied game in all of social science,
really, really without a doubt.
And again, with many applications.
Of course, when we apply it to the real world,
then you'll notice that even when people appear
to be in a prisoner's dilemma,
it's actually pretty common for people to cooperate
to some degree.
There's not that many people who immediately stab you
in the back in a prisoner's dilemma,
although it has been known to happen.
And again, if you're actually thinking about
ever beating in a prisoner's dilemma,
you're wondering like the best way to play,
especially if it is even a finitely repeated
prisoner's dilemma.
In practice, you may be well advised to cooperate,
if only to create some confusion to your opponent
about whether you have a clue about what the game is about.
But we'll get to that later on.
All right, so prisoner's dilemma,
and now let's move on to coordination games.
Also very high profile, both theoretically
and also in policy.
All right, so here's a standard discussion.
We start with a game where both players
can either play left or right,
and then we say that if they both play left,
they both get three, if they both play right,
they both get five, and if they do different things,
then they both get zero.
That's the heart of the coordination game.
People do different things, then it's bad.
If they do the same things, then it's good,
but doing different same things,
some same things are better than other same things.
So in this one, both people playing right
is better for both of them than both playing left.
All right, and then this is a case
where we very easily apply the concept
of pure strategy and actual equilibrium.
And again, it's three, three, a PS and E.
Is either person gained from switching unilaterally?
No, so that's one.
Is zero a zero, a PS and E?
No, no, no, that one.
What about five, five, is that a PS and E?
That one is two.
So here we've got a game where we've got two equilibrium.
So if you know the other person's playing left,
you wanna play left too.
If you know the other person's playing right,
you wanna play right too, right, and so on.
Now, coordination games are the basis
for the entire literature on so-called path dependence,
which really is just a fancy piece of vocabulary
for when it's a coordination game.
And again, the main idea that gets emphasized
in this area of path dependence is that it's possible,
underscore possible, that in a situation like this,
you get locked into the bad equilibrium.
Not the really bad one, there's no danger of that,
at least in the game, but there's a danger
of getting locked into the inferior equilibrium, right?
One that isn't the best possible one
from the point of view of anyone.
That can in fact happen.
Right, now remember, if you look at this,
is there anything about this game
that says that you naturally tend to go to this?
No, all right, so when people just say path dependence
and that's why things are terrible,
it's like, well, path dependence means
that things could be terrible, or at least,
maybe not so terrible you might think as those two.
And then we say mediocre might be a word
that you might apply, so path dependence
can lead to a mediocre outcome,
but it totally does not have to.
Totally does not have to.
Now, when you take a look at these two at Bolivia,
you have one thing, imagine you're playing this game
with one of the random students in this class, right?
So we both move simultaneously,
and your opponent plays left.
All right, what would your reaction be
if the person just played left out of the blue?
I show you this game, you're paired up with a person
and they play left, and then you say,
wait, why in the world would you play left
if I thought you would play left?
Well, why would you think I would be so dumb as to play left?
All right, so there's something very odd
about starting this game from scratch
and ending up at that equilibrium, right?
If you would be quite puzzled by the response
of I just assumed you would play left,
so was the equilibrium, well, yeah,
but where would you ever get it in your head
that I would do left?
Why?
Why would you even think that?
Now, in the real world, there may be cases
where it's easier to understand what's going on.
For example, suppose that we came up
with a better system for spelling in English.
How hard would it be to come up with a better system
for spelling in English?
I think everyone in this room could improve
English spelling given 30 minutes, right?
I mean, just think about the letters we should abolish.
Q, there's no need for Q.
Q can be wiped off the face of the earth in English.
We never need it again.
Terrible letter, right?
Right, it's just a needless confusion, right?
You're like, so then you just go through,
like other letters, yeah, C, you don't need C.
C is a useless letter, right?
And just go down the line, so it's X, you don't need X.
So we got rid of three letters.
We're like, this is what?
This is like a 10% improvement in just about 30 seconds.
Like so, and then there's so many other things
you need to fix.
You know, so I cannot make all the spelling phonetic.
There are languages that work that way.
Why can't English work that way?
All right, and of course, if you've had to learn English
as a second language, you know how terrible
our system is, right?
Isn't it a terrible system?
All right, and yet, does anyone feel inclined
to switch over to your new and improved spelling system?
Unilaterally?
Right, no one is going to try this.
People would think that you were crazy to do it.
So it does seem like situations like that
can actually occur, but it's interesting to think about
what's the difference between getting stuck
with a crummy spelling system
and just doing a two by two game.
So like, the first one possibility is it's just
when there's more people, it's hard to switch.
Another one is when knowledge of what the better
equilibrium is spreads gradually.
And so we'll talk about this more as we go on.
Now anyway, once you start thinking about
why this equilibrium seems to make so much more sense
than this one, it takes us very quickly
to the notion of focal points,
also known as Schelling points.
Anyone get to see Thomas Schelling speak
a year or two ago at the Public Choice Center?
So he died since then, but he was there.
He was so quiet I couldn't hear him actually,
but people in the front row said he was great.
He was still very young, he was 96, I guess.
Yes, it seems to me from what you're saying
that the idea of time dependence implies
or has this assumption of iteration, right?
Again, yeah, so you could say that, yeah,
because the idea is that since we are already expecting this
then we'll keep doing this, so yeah.
But in a way what you're saying is that as an equilibrium
it's a repeated game, it's not.
Yeah, it could be, so it could be,
although it could also be that it's just
people have expectations that the bad thing will occur
and that just the expectations might lead to that
even though there's no real repeat.
That's another possibility.
Right.
You could talk about time dependence,
you know, one shot thing.
Yeah, yeah, in principle.
Again, like you might say that it's not truly one shot
because everyone brings some expectations
about how people play games with them, right?
Which again sort of takes us to this idea here.
So anyway, Thomas Schelling is famous
for his idea of focal points.
And he began with a case where he said,
all right, look, suppose that tomorrow
you have to meet an unknown person
in somewhere in New York City at an unknown time.
All right, where and when do you go?
And then he had everyone secretly write down their answer.
And he found out an extraordinarily high percentage
of people would have successfully met.
All right, now if we were to go and write down
this game in terms of this, there'd basically be
like four location.
Essentially like the payoff is if you're at the same location
there's a good payoff.
And if you're not at the same location, there's a bad payoff.
But then of course some locations are worse than others.
You could be in the worst neighborhood of New York City,
for example.
Things wouldn't be that bad anymore
if that's what Schelling was writing.
It would be deadly.
Anyway, so you think about it,
you know, so like there's really an infinity
of equilibrium, right?
So like every location, like it's a continuous space.
And then of course time's continuous, right?
Is time continuous?
It's continuous.
So when are people actually going,
when and where would people meet?
And just to guess, when do you think people,
what time do you think people,
almost everybody said they would meet?
Noon.
Noon, right?
So noon pops in people's heads.
Few people say midnight.
But those are the two main ones.
And then where in New York City do you meet at noon?
Town.
Yes.
So that's one answer.
Another one is right into the clock at Grand Central Station
but the most popular one of all was
the top of the Empire State Building.
I think this was before the movie
Sleepless in Seattle came out.
So it's already understood that there's something special
about the top of the Empire State Building, right?
And anyway, the neat thing about this is that
there's an infinity of equilibria
and yet without any communication,
there was in fact a lot of people were able to coordinate.
And so there's something more focal
about some equilibria rather than others.
Right, now if you look at this one,
knowing nothing else about it,
which one seems more focal to you?
Right, right?
Yeah, I mean, and it's nothing about like,
you know, society values,
where you know, prefers right-handed people
over left-handed people,
which is of course true too.
Right.
I have to say.
At least when I was a kid,
they were no longer making left-handed people
learn to write right-handed.
But yeah, but there's just something about it.
Well, it's just a higher payout for both.
So that could make it focal.
But again, of course, if you live in a society
where there's a superstition against the number five,
then it might be, oh my God,
right in the middle of that,
in the middle of the room in a building
where there's no 13th floor.
Hmm, interesting.
Like how do they,
like how would you decide that though?
Given that there's people who avoid labeling floors
in the normal sequence because of the superstition,
people might also be reluctant to play that, right?
And that might actually change the equilibrium.
All right, so anyway, so some coordinate,
so even though we have multiple equilibria,
some coordination equilibria are more likely to occur.
And again, what Schelling said is that they are more focal.
Right, and by that he meant, you know,
like they're more obvious, they pop into people's heads.
And once it pops into your head,
it occurs to you that it might pop
into somebody else's head.
Right, and of course, this is where it's important
to put yourself in someone else's shoes.
Like if you're a very strange person,
and you say, well, the first place I think of in Manhattan
is Midtown Comics on 40th Street.
It's like, well, wait a second,
that wouldn't occur at other places.
Or like, first place I think to be is my brother's house.
Right, so like, would that occur to other people?
No, it wouldn't, unless they knew me.
Then they might say, of course,
that would be a great place to be.
So this is a case where there's a lot of psychology
and sociology that winds up exposing itself
in these coordination games.
And this is, even now after Schelling,
still quite understudied.
I don't know that I've ever seen any really good attempt
to synthesize psychology, sociology, and Schelling.
Although it seems like it's begging for some work.
I've been saying this for like 15 years in this class,
and now I'm starting.
So presumably, there's some reason for that, right?
Maybe it is, maybe people just want it.
It's better than a lot of ideas I've seen people run with.
Does that change then, or would that be the same
if you had people who were from New York City
and people from out of town,
considering how to think of what they would think as well?
Yeah, exactly, assuming like, depending upon what you know
about the other person, that would change the so-called.
Right, and of course, this is a case where if they know
that you know that they're, say, not from New York City,
then this could change their behavior.
And again, in general, there are so many striking examples
of this concept, like if you are ever in a position
to bargain with a total stranger,
you want to reach a decision quickly.
So like, here's a pie, all right?
How are we gonna divide the pie?
What's the most, so there's an infinity of equilibrium.
Like anything that sums the total amount of pie
seems like an equilibrium, and yet,
what would you predict almost everyone would do?
50-50, right, so there's something very focal
about 50-50, right, in this society.
On the other hand, if you're in the world
of Game of Thrones, then it might be,
well, who's highborn here?
Anyone highborn?
If you're highborn, you just get the whole pie,
and then I don't get killed.
That could be the equilibrium instead, right?
So there's, you know, so that might make a difference
as well, so you know, if you're in a caste society,
for example, then there could be a different equilibrium.
All right, so now, what would it actually take
to get people to this Pareto-inferior equilibrium?
All right, so, I mean, first thing,
it seems like you need a moderate number of players.
With two players, then it would seem bizarre to get that,
at least to me, right?
So, on the other hand, if you had 30 players,
and people were told, by the way,
we've always done, we've always gone left-left,
then you might say, but if everyone were to switch,
then that would happen.
So if, you know, if you were to put it that way,
then you might be nervous.
If a single person not switching
would ruin the equilibrium,
then maybe you wouldn't want to switch.
So, you know, so at least having a moderate number of players
but I think it's probably like a gradual dispersion
of information.
There's a gradual dispersion of information.
So imagine that we're just playing the game,
but it's, but, oh, but like in the first round,
only one person finds out what the actual payoffs are.
Which one, you know, so I say, look,
as long as you do the same thing,
then you get an okay payout.
I'm not gonna tell you which the really good payout is
until later.
And imagine if, first, you know, like you said,
like you start off playing left-left,
and then I go and give someone a note saying,
by the way, actually right-right is higher payout,
and higher payoff.
And then I randomly, you know, gradually give,
you know, give more and more notes,
spreading more and more information.
And then eventually, after like turn 30,
everyone has received the notes.
But if, by turn 29, people have not switched,
when you get the last note, are you gonna switch then?
Maybe.
On the other hand, you might go,
hmm, I mean, if no one has switched till now,
do I wanna go and blow this thing?
Right, and again, if you are,
you're not just a good game theorist,
but if you were psychologically strategic,
the first person to go and get the notes
revealing that five-five is better
might want to immediately just play right.
And then when it's like,
and then like everyone gets zero in the class,
but there's one person played right,
everyone else played left,
and then what might you conclude
about why one person did that,
the one seemingly totally terrible thing to the whole group?
That person knows something.
And then, you know,
and in that case, you might go,
like you might hope they go up the next chart,
a few more people will do it,
and then eventually maybe you could tip them, right?
Which in a room of 25 or 30 people,
maybe you think that a good curve.
Anyone think you could tip a room of a million people?
Right, you know, in a room of a million people,
there's always just gonna be some crazy people in there
doing whatever, so you might just look like
a strange person.
All right, so anyway, so moderate number of players,
gradual dispersion of information, right?
And then again, you might wonder,
like what are we gonna set a big memory like?
What are we gonna swipe our memory
about what anyone has ever done before?
Right, and you know, that could work too, right?
So the other week, I was talking to a student,
I was saying, well, history's really valuable
because it allows people to,
you know, it's a light gallery,
like you know the history of racial oppression in the US,
then this lets you go and like build a better society.
And I say, hmm, maybe.
Then again, maybe if everyone in Yugoslavia in the 90s
had their memory wiped about World War II,
they would have had peace.
Also possible, right?
So if no one had any memory of bloodshed ever,
then maybe no one would be very angry
and nothing bad would happen.
Which is also possible.
Will this be your new peace campaign, always forget?
Too strong.
But nevertheless, you know,
remembering the past may make it more likely to repeat
and a lot of other people remember it,
especially some people remember it differently than others.
So some people remember it as your people
killing my people and others.
No, no, none of that happens.
No, it was all the other way around.
Once I listened to two people have a debate
about the Korean War,
one said, like, no, the US didn't bomb
any buildings in North Korea.
The other one said, no,
it bombed every building in North Korea.
And I'm like, you're both clearly wrong.
That's the craziest thing I've ever heard.
I mean, it's like, look,
you're crazy enough to be having this argument.
I'm not gonna get involved.
All right, now for experimental evidence,
you know, not too surprising.
There's plenty of experiments on Shelling Point
showing that there's a lot of Shelling Points out there.
You know, like, again,
another great one was Shelling Point's language.
So, you know, like, there's much better languages
than English in terms of speed of learning.
We can switch to Esperanto,
but anyone feel like switching to Esperanto?
You know, personally doing it?
I do, so it would not be very convenient
for the first person to switch over, right?
There are, you know, there's, of course,
there are plenty of cases of one language
gradually replacing another.
When both languages have some use, right?
So if you're in a country
where people speak both Flemish and French,
then it might be that people
will switch from one language to another, right?
So you may have heard,
what language did the people of Israel speak
in the time of Jesus?
Was it Hebrew?
No, it was Aramaic.
How did that happen?
You started speaking Hebrew,
and then a few centuries later,
they're speaking a totally different language,
related, but still, right?
And it seems like, well, gradually,
there was, you know, like,
more and more people switched over to a different language,
and then you might think Hebrew would never come back,
but then, strangely, it did.
Super rare, but it does, more or less.
So experimentally, you know,
like, you know, if you do an experiment,
you know, if you do something like this,
then obviously, unless you go
and try to make the game strange,
everyone's gonna do that.
And then, as we go, I'm sure we'll get results.
All right, so questions about coordination means?
We will be coming back to this,
because it's worth thinking about more
as we go on with these games, right?
And, you know, so there are some people,
I know, like, you know the blogger Scott Alexander,
there's a whole piece on coordination failures,
and read the piece, you would almost get the idea
that everything wrong in the world
is a coordination failure.
It's like, everything wrong,
that's the only thing that can ever go wrong
in the world is that thing, right?
So, you know, it's odd, because, well, like,
how about prisoner's dilemmas?
That's, prisoner's dilemmas are not coordination failures.
Again, because this is a case where if everyone switched,
you'd wanna switch too, right?
Whereas the whole idea of the prisoner's dilemma
is even if everyone did switch, you wouldn't wanna switch.
So that seems like a considerably more stubborn problem,
right?
All right, so, all right, moving on, right?
Ultimatum game.
Our ultimatum game, another one that has gotten
a ton of academic attention.
All right, so here's the standard setup.
Start with 10 bucks.
Give 10 bucks to player one,
and then you say, give however much you want
to player two.
And then what is player two's choice?
He can either say no, in which case both players get zero,
or he can accept whatever the ultimatum was.
Those are your options.
Okay, so in that case, if you were to go and set this up
as, you know, as a normal form,
and you'd have player one,
and he would go, and he goes and offers an amount, T.
That's, you know, continuous, or we would like to,
in principle, it could be continuous,
or we might say it's limited in pennies,
but I'm not gonna go and write,
what would it be?
Let's see, $10, I'm gonna write 10,001
different numbers on the board.
So, this is obviously now T.
And then player two just has the option of respect reject.
And then if he accepts, then player one gets 10 minus T,
and player two gets T.
All right, so T is the offer.
It's the amount offered to the other person.
And if player two rejects, they both get zero.
All right, on to the next one.
Now, in terms of just pure strategy-equilibria,
perhaps surprisingly, this is a game
with an infinite number of equilibrium.
Because suppose that player one knows that player two will
reject any amount less than $9.
Then what does player one want to offer?
$9.
And if player one is offering $9,
what incentive does player two have to become more flexible?
None.
I'm getting no, so I'll reject any.
I'm going to reject anything less than $9.
And then he always honors $9.
So what does it cost you to be rigid in this scenario?
Nothing.
So you have to give me what I expect.
And then the other guy says, oh, he expects a lot.
I have to give him a lot.
So in terms of just pure strategy-equilibria,
it gives us an infinity of equilibria.
But again, there's something weird about this story.
Because if your player one and player two told you,
I have to get $9 out of $10, you would probably
go and offer a lot less and say, well, you're really
going to pass up $5, or $4, or $3.
And again, if you start thinking about this
in terms of the natural solution concept of the sub-gate
perfect, here's probably the Nash equilibrium.
It seems like if we have discrete money,
so you can't offer an infinitesimal amount of money,
it seems like the sub-gate perfect Nash equilibrium
is to offer your opponent one penny.
And you keep $99, $99, $99 yourself.
Because after you make the offer,
your opponent is choosing between a penny and what?
Nothing.
So sure, take a penny.
Right?
Just leave it to me.
I'll take this one.
All right.
Now, I don't want to over-organize Benji.
I'll say, did we mention this?
No, we're not sure.
So an interesting, like a key part
of why Stalin was surprised by Hitler is he said, look,
he'll definitely offer an ultimatum before he invades.
And why does Stalin know this?
Well, because he always offered ultimatums before you did.
He just figured it was common courtesy, as well as basic
sense.
Look, look, like last thing you do before you invade is say,
look, give me all this stuff or else.
Thought Hitler didn't do that.
Right now, if you think about it in the real world,
there is a good reason to not offer an ultimatum right
before you attack, especially if your opponent believes
this will always occur.
Why might you not want to offer an ultimatum
if your opponent believes that you always offer an ultimatum
before you attack?
And that's a process which worked out great for Hitler,
actually, for quite a bit of time, for a year,
year and a half, something like that.
Eventually, it didn't work out that well for him again.
But you've seen the movie Young Thought.
They don't have fine rates.
A little bit of justice is.
Anyway, experimentally, almost no one acts this way.
Almost no player one ever offers a penny.
And in the rare cases where someone does offer one penny,
it's almost always declined.
So that is a case where, on the one hand,
it seems like game theory gives us an ironclad answer.
And yet the answer's wrong, which is disappointing.
And the most common offer is actually 50-50, again.
The most common thing is even split.
Interestingly enough.
So now, one possibility might say, well, this is bullios.
This might be motivated purely by spite.
So it might be that player ones are always
doing the standard game-theoretic thing,
but maybe player twos are not.
And so that could possibly explain what's going on.
This would still be puzzling, right?
Because saying that player ones do what game theory says
and player twos don't doesn't really actually salvage
game theory that well.
In any case, there is a parallel game,
one of the most boring in all of games, all the Dictator game.
This one is just like the ultimatum game,
except player two must accept.
So there is no option to reject.
So all that happens is player one gets the money,
and then he goes and devises what he feels like doing it,
and then the game ends.
Now, in this game, even splits are less common,
but they still remain pretty common.
In fact, even splits are probably the modal choice.
The single most likely thing to happen
is nevertheless an even split.
So this means that it's not just Biden.
There's also some kind of generosity or fairness norm
that underlies play in the ultimate game, which
we'll be talking about after the lecture.
But again, it's a pretty striking case.
So if you're the kind of person who
thinks that everyone will play the non-cooperative result
in a one-shot versus lemma, just remember,
people don't even do that in the Dictator game.
So you can hand all power to someone and say,
absolute power for up.
All power for up, absolute power for up, absolutely.
And yet, when you deal with Dictator games,
say, well, I'll give them half.
All right, so questions about that?
Are you happy?
It's plausible.
All right, so by the way, there actually
is some real-life data research saying
that one kind of neuroatypical person
does play the subgame perfect pass at equilibrium,
and those are autistics.
So that's a somewhat interesting result.
As to how robust it is, I'm not sure.
But again, the idea is that there's
an underlying theory of mind which
someone who is autistic might not actually have.
And so they're thinking, well, if I were operative penny
instead of zero, I would always say yes.
So therefore, if that's what an operative horse will do,
and if you have trouble understanding
what another person's thinking will be,
then you might predict that they will do exactly what you will
do.
This is one of the easiest heuristics to apply, right?
Is B, everybody will do what I will do.
And if you're a normal person, it's not a bad heuristic.
If you're thinking, well, I like football,
so other people probably like football.
So if I'm watching other people, all the white people
will probably watch it too, not a bad prediction,
because football is, in fact, popular.
On the other hand, if you were a very unpopular hobby,
then just assuming everyone is out today playing
Dinosaurs and Dragons is not going to be a good guess.
Are we full of economic energy, crackling with enthusiasm
for the subject?
All right, just dying to work through the basic materials
so we can ascend the pinnacle and then
achieve true understanding of the nature of society and man?
I forget.
I put a lot of time.
OK, yes.
All right, so now we're moving into repeating games,
as was mentioned back there.
So we are next two weeks.
And then after that, we have a final.
We're not talking midterms.
Oh, oh.
It's a really short class, actually.
I'm sorry that I don't feel like doing this right now.
Midterms.
So we have no snow, so we need four spring breaks
so you can relax on spring break.
Please check with your third place.
OK, all right.
So I'm going to start with a topic that
is relatively understudied and also generally misunderstood.
It's the subject of a finitely repeated game.
So to start, we frequently play games with the same person
over and over.
It experiments, obviously.
And then if you're willing to think
of interaction with other people as being a game,
then we're playing this kind of games with people over and over.
So you're playing the same game with your co-workers
repeatedly, or with your fellow students,
or with other people in your profession, or with your friends.
All right, now the question is this.
If players condition their behavior in one game
on the behavior in previous games, what happens?
So if what you do in any way depends
on what happened before, how does this change outcomes?
And the simple answer is that more equilibria
may be sustainable.
Notice this is a very weak claim.
More equilibria may be sustainable.
So today was the idea of an interview with someone who
said, well, experts are saying that 20% to 60% of jobs
could be automated in the next 20 years.
Like, wow, well, that sounds like a big claim
until you remember that he said could.
Yeah, when an asteroid could hit the Earth 20 years,
and then there won't be any way where if it's big enough,
we won't need to worry about automation or anything else.
All right, not CSO.
They is, again, it's one of those weak words.
So keep that in mind.
Also, anyone starts talking about, well,
this doesn't mean this is necessarily true.
That's really, you know, you're totally right.
You would be dumb enough to think that it was necessarily
true.
But a deliberate distraction from all of these issues.
OK, now, there's two main cases to consider.
So case one is the case of the finitely repeated game.
So finitely repeated.
And then case two is the infinitely repeated.
All right, now, at first glance, you might say,
well, nothing's infinite in the real world.
And so everything is in category one.
We don't need to study category two.
But that's not right, because under the heading
of infinitely repeated games come probabilistically
infinitely repeated games.
So suppose we have a game where every turn there's
a 10% chance it continues.
That, in terms of theoretical classification,
counts as infinite.
All right, do you understand?
So suppose that every time you play a game,
there's a 10% chance you play again.
That counts as infinite because there
is no definite rigid end.
And that is what matters in terms of economic theory,
is whether there is a preordained absolute final end
or not.
In a game that has a 10% chance of continuing forever,
in principle, you go on for a billion turns.
The odds of that happening would be 1 in 10 to the billion,
which is a small number.
But nevertheless, it does not have a final expiration date
and therefore counts as infinite.
So when you put it this way, then you might say,
wow, that case was probably not many finite repeated games.
It would be unusual for there to be a game where you knew
for sure it was going to end, even if you're
like 107 years old.
And someone says, hey, well, you're
going to be dead tomorrow, so you might as well
do what you want.
And you know what?
I might be alive one more day.
Maybe a slim chance, but a lot of 107-year-olds,
in fact, most 107-year-olds who are still alive,
are alive the next day, the next day.
They have an unusually high chance of dying, but still.
And what do you think of the article on the oldest living
people?
It's a great article.
It's really interesting.
So recently, there's only one list.
I think there's a big list, but there's only one guy that
was on the list who was known for anything
other than being really old.
So recently in China, there was the oldest man in China died.
He actually was the guy who came up
with the modern way of translating Chinese words
into Latin alphabets.
So he's the creator of the Indian system
and some other things.
So he was the guy.
You know this guy?
Yeah.
So was it on the national news when he died?
Was it national news in China when he died?
He also, when he was over 100, he
started writing books attacking the government, which is,
we mean, he does seem like he was thinking,
oh, I don't think you're going to punish me now.
103.
I think you'll just wait me out.
Anyway.
OK.
So let's go and, I guess, let's see.
So now let's go and start with a finite repeated game
to see how they work.
So let's go and use the payoffs from last week.
And suppose there's two players who do the following.
First, they go and play Prisoner's Lemma.
And secondly, they then immediately
do a coordination game using the payoffs we see.
So this is the repeat.
So there's only, there's just two games.
That's it.
And then it ends.
Everybody knows this.
It's a finite repetition.
Starts with Prisoner's Lemma, then concludes
with a coordination game.
So one possibility, which is always true when you're
doing repeated games, is there is an equilibrium where you
just repeat whatever the equilibria were
for the one-shot games.
So you could have an equilibrium where people just
don't cooperate in the first round,
and then they both play left, or they both play right
in the second round, the end.
So that's totally fine.
But there's actually a perennial superior equilibrium,
which is now possible.
And this is going to sound like one of the weirdest things
you're ever going to hear in game theory.
But I swear to you, it's actually fine.
So here's what I'm going to propose.
And again, when I propose it, you're
thinking like you're cheating somehow.
You're doing something really weird here.
But yeah, well, it's weird.
It's creative.
It's a creative thing.
I didn't create it.
Or someone else explained this to me,
and I'm just repeating it to you.
But here is a creative way of dealing with a solution.
So suppose, we still have these payoffs out.
Suppose that what we do is we say, look,
if either of us fail to cooperate in turn one,
then we both play left.
As long as both of us cooperate in turn one,
then we both play right.
All right, so and now, once this occurs, what's going to happen?
So if both sides believe this is going to happen,
then both sides actually will want to cooperate in turn one
and will then play right in turn two.
All right, well, wait a second.
The first turn's a prisoner's law.
So just in terms, so never mind experiments,
but in terms of pure theory, how could that occur?
So if we go back to the payoffs, so let's see.
I think it was, I think the original payoffs were for,
let's see, cooperate, don't, and cooperate, don't.
And then it was this one, right?
It was 5-5.
Was it 0-0 for don't, don't?
That's the new thing.
That's right.
Yeah, 0-0.
And then if you cooperate and, let's see.
Or was it, or then it was 1-1, right?
Wasn't it 1-1?
Yeah, it was 1-1.
OK, so that's 1-1.
And then if you cooperate, the other guy doesn't.
So if you get 0, you get 6.
And if it's the other way around, you get 6, you get 0.
OK, so now, we can just repeat this creative way
of getting out, of getting to a better equilibrium.
So it says, look, as long as we both play cooperate in turn 1,
then we both play right in turn 2.
If, on the other hand, either of us
fail to play cooperate in turn 1,
then we both play left in turn 2.
Now, why would you not want to deviate from this?
Well, so as long as you stick to the equilibrium,
what do you get?
You get 5 in turn 1.
And you get 5 in turn 2, so you get 10, right?
So you get 5 plus 5.
All right, now you maybe tend to say, ah, well,
I'll go betray you in turn 1, and I'll get 6 myself.
So that's going to work out.
But then, based upon this equilibrium, you're over here.
And now, since one of you actually played
don't cooperate in turn 1, what should you
expect your opponent will do?
Left.
And if your opponent plays left, what is the least bad thing
for you to do?
Play left.
So then you get 3.
And remind me, which is bigger, 5 plus 5 or 6 plus 3?
5 plus 5.
Yes, so yes, that's actually better.
Now, almost everyone wants to, no, no, no, no, no,
you're not going to trade me with this.
No, I'm going to not cooperate in turn 1,
and then I'm going to play right in turn 2.
Well, what happens if you do that?
Then you get 6 in turn 1.
And then, again, holding constant the assumption
your opponent plays the equilibrium, he'll play left.
And if you play right when your opponent plays left,
what do you get?
0.
0.
All right, and remind me, wait, is 6 plus 0,
is that greater or less than 10?
Yes, it's even worse.
Now, it's like there's some kind of trickery going on here.
Like, how can you do this?
How can you pull this off?
And the answer is that there are two equilibria in turn 2.
So if play in turn 2 depends upon turn 1,
then your opponent can actually punish you
in a way that is consistent with their own interests.
Because if you both assume that you're both going to play,
well, what's expected?
And then one person doesn't, the result for him is even worse.
So basically, you can make your opponent
accomplish to his own punishment by putting him
in a situation where it's like either take your punishment
or you'll get an even worse punishment.
Like, well, in that case, I guess
I'll just take my punishment.
Wait a second.
If I know I'm going to have to take my punishment in turn 2,
I don't want to break the agreement in turn 1
or break the agreement in turn 2.
It doesn't even have to be an agreement.
It can just be an informal understanding.
If you might have never met the person,
never communicated with them, but if, say, there's
just a cultural understanding that the proper response
to non-cooperation in turn 1 is left in turn 2,
then everyone will want to go and cooperate in turn 1
and play right in turn 2.
Yes.
But you could still, if you were on turn 2
and you had not cooperated and gotten to 6
and you were just going to still play right,
your opponent is still in his best interest to also play right.
But remember, you're not doing Nash equilibrium right now,
are you?
No.
Yes.
And that is the key here to why we can get more Nash
equilibrium.
Now, again, you may say that the Nash equilibrium concept
is strange.
And there are some strange things about it.
Just in terms of the logic of the Nash equilibrium
where you assume that everyone else does what sticks
to the equilibrium by yourself, the idea
is there's only one person's behavior you control,
which is your own.
Everybody assumes, so if everyone else is doing this,
why would I go along with this?
And you remember the whole idea of the Nash equilibrium
is one where each person simultaneously
says, if everyone else is going to do what I will too,
then that can happen.
Doesn't have to happen.
Remember the example of if you expect everyone in this room
will be in the seats they're currently in,
where do you want to sit?
You want to sit in your current seat.
Of course, there's other equilibrium
which can happen too, but there is an equilibrium where
everyone is riding the seats that they're currently in.
OK.
So that's like, I guess, I guess I
didn't realize that's a Nash equilibrium because you're
basically saying it's a given that the second part
of the agreement, they're going to do that.
So you can't.
Oh, well, similarly, like I said,
it doesn't have to be an agreement.
It can just be an understanding.
Not necessarily an agreement, but it's like,
they're going to do that.
Because all I'm saying is this is an equilibrium.
So what does it mean to be Nash equilibrium?
It just means that if everyone else thinks it's going to happen,
that if each person thinks that everyone else will do it
and you want to do it too, and it's
true for every single person, then
it gets put into the stack of Nash equilibrium.
Right, OK.
Right, the Nash equilibrium stack.
All right.
So again, so what I'm doing, I realize
it seems like sleight of hand or trickery,
but it is a strictly clean application of the concept
of Nash equilibrium.
And of course, by the way, if you were doing your thing
where you could say, well, if I did that,
he would switch too, you might, you
could also say you get cooperation
in the prisoner's level, right?
You could also say, wait a second,
like if I betray him, he'll just betray me,
so I better not do it.
So again, so if you go down that route,
then you then actually even think,
even in cases where it seems like there's a clear answer,
you might say, it's not a clear answer after all.
All right.
OK, now, so that's what happens when we do prisoner's lemma
followed by coordination game.
What happens if we reverse the order
and we do coordination game followed by prisoner's lemma?
Can we still get more equilibrium then?
Well, how many equilibrium do we have here?
One.
So is there anything you can threaten someone
with if they don't do what you want in the coordination
phase now?
So in this case, if we reverse the order,
then we do have no x-direct equilibrium.
And then the game-theoretical prediction
is people do whatever they were going to do in this turn,
and then they were going to do whatever
they would do in this game, and then they
do whatever they would do in that game.
And the fact that the games are snapped together
doesn't change anything.
OK, so questions about this?
Yes?
So just to cement that last fact that you were just making,
so basically there's no way, no enforcement or punishment
that you would do?
Right.
Yeah, so if the same thing always happens,
then you can't threaten people with anything.
On the other hand, if there's multiple equilibria,
then you actually do have a threat available, right?
Because you could say, well, if that happens,
we'll go to the other equilibria.
And you say, well, why would you do that?
It is our way.
It is our custom that that is what occurs.
That is what we expect.
And again, if you think about real life,
you may notice that there are circumstances
where people go to bad equilibria very naturally.
In the real world, there's probably more psychology
going on.
But suppose that your neighbor goes and blows up
your mailbox.
Now, after the other, you say, well, look,
I've blown up one mailbox.
There's no reason we can't still be friends now.
Look, wouldn't it be better if you lost a mailbox
but kept a friend?
And that might seem like a reasonable thing,
but you have a pretty good idea that's not what would occur.
And instead, maybe you'll blow up his mailbox.
And notice, there's actually something very focal about,
he blew up my mailbox.
I will blow up his mailbox.
Whereas, just in terms of logical retaliation,
it might be that I will go and break one of his windows
or I'll slash his tires.
There's all kinds of other kinds of payback
that you could get.
But it's very focal to think about,
I will do exactly the same bad thing to him
that he did to me.
I for I. Yes, I for I. This is very, very good.
So I think you may wonder, why is that so focal?
It could be that at least one common story about the I to I
norm is that it was intended to limit overreaction, where you
go and murder someone for I. So if you just say,
look, you can do to him what he did to you,
but you can't do anything more.
All right, so questions about finite repetition
and how that might change things.
OK.
All right, so that's finite repetition.
Now, have you ever heard that finite repetition doesn't
change anything?
That's actually correct, as I've just shown you.
And I'm pretty sure that several of you,
if there's a question about this on the conference and exam,
and the question says, true, false, and explain,
finite repetition never changes the outcomes for the game,
I'm pretty sure there's going to be several of you who
will immediately get the wrong answer.
Of course, if I give you the test right now,
you don't get the right answer.
But, right?
And that is because people remember
the garbled, confused half-truth of what's going on,
rather than the actual lesson, which
is, of course, what we don't want to remember,
is the garbled, confused half-truth.
So it's all notes.
All right, so anyway, so even in finite repetitive games,
the set of Nash equilibria expands,
or is what theorists say, weakly expands.
So it either stays the same or gets bigger.
Both things can happen.
All right, but expands less than you might think.
How so?
Well, imagine you repeat the prisoner's slum a hundred times.
All right, could you sink cooperation
by threatening retaliation?
Right, and here we come to a classic argument
saying that the answer, strangely, is no.
Right, and here's the argument.
Well, what's going to happen in turn 100?
Somebody betrays.
Yes, well, in fact, both will betray, right?
Both will betray in turn 100 because there's no tomorrow.
There's not, so like in turn 100, if you say,
if you go and betray me, I'll get back at you.
How?
It's the last turn of the game.
There's no other opportunity for you to get revenge on me.
So you're not going to cooperate in turn 100, and I guess I'm
not.
Oh, whoops, I said it, right?
I shouldn't have said that I wasn't going to cooperate.
Maybe if you had done that, I could have tricked you.
All right, so then here's the problem.
Suppose in turn 99 you say, if you betray me in turn 99,
I'll betray you in turn 100.
Now, here's the interesting thing.
Is it true that if a person betrays you in turn 99,
you'll betray them in turn 100?
Necessarily.
Well, sure, because you're going to betray them in turn 100
no matter what they do.
So if you say, if A, I will betray you, right,
and if you will always betray, then if A betray, it's true.
Right?
Make sense?
All right, so but here's the thing.
If you threaten to do something that you will always do,
how scary is that?
Or at least how motivating is it?
Right?
So if you know you're getting executed anyway for a crime,
and then someone says, if you don't speak respectfully
to the executioner, I'll execute you.
You're executing me anyway.
And of course, then in a really brutal system,
they say, well, we might torture you first.
Oh, whoops, OK, I'll shut up.
But if you know they're already doing the worst possible thing
to you, then in a way, you are free.
Right?
Whatever you do, whatever I do, you're
doing the same thing to me, so why do I care what you threaten?
Ah.
So in turn 99, if you know that your opponent's definitely
going to betray you no matter what you do,
they have no threat to hang over your head,
so you may as well betray in turn 99.
Then in turn 98, you know that you're
going to get betrayed in turn 99, so why cooperate then?
Turn 97, turn 96.
And if you follow the logic back,
the result seems to be that you won't even cooperate in turn 1.
And it seems weird for 100 turns.
How weird is it if it's a game where a million turns long?
Where you say, well, I know you're
going to betray me in turn 1 million,
so I'm going to betray you in turn 1.
Anyone's parent would say, just cooperate with him for a while.
It's probably going to be a lot better than getting
into a big fight in the beginning.
You don't understand game theory.
This is a hopeless situation, and I
may as well protect myself by betraying him
right from the very outset.
So if you push the logic back, then you
get to this odd result that no one will cooperate ever
in the finitely repeated prisoner's lemma.
And there's even a special name for it.
We call it unraveling.
We call it unraveling.
This is a metaphor that you may have experienced
when you were a kid and you had a string hanging
from a sweater.
And you decided the best way to solve the problem
would be to pull the string.
And if you pull it and pull it and pull it and pull it,
and finally you have just a big pile of thread,
and your sweater is gone.
Pull, pull, pull, and the whole thing falls to pieces.
So that's how people often describe a game like this.
They will say it unravels to a totally uncooperative outcome.
Now, how does the finitely repeated prisoner's lemma
differ from this game here?
So notice, this game seems like it wouldn't be good enough,
wouldn't be enough to say cooperation.
It's just like two games.
Like, we play two times, and that's
going to change everything.
On the other hand, the prisoner's lemma
with 100 turns, that's seemingly like 100 turns.
How could that not make a difference?
And yet, actually, here we've seen
there is a way of getting cooperation
using standard game theory.
But with a 100-turn prisoner's lemma,
the theorem is that there's no way of actually getting
cooperation.
So what's the difference?
The difference is that here we end
with a game with two equilibria.
We end with a game with two equilibria, with more than one.
And once you've got more than one, then you've got a threat.
Then the person doesn't know that the same thing
will happen no matter what they do.
Maybe something different will happen,
depending upon what I do.
And if I know that your treatment of me
depends upon how I treated you in the past,
there's at least a reason for me to think twice about doing
something that's bad for you.
I have to consider how you will respond.
So in this game, there's a kind of revenge that's available.
You can't go and commit the kind of revenge
which is maximally bad for me.
Because again, the maximally bad thing for me
would just be to do the opposite of what I'm going to do.
But that is a case where you would be just hurting yourself.
But on the other hand, switching over
to a less favorable equilibrium for both of us,
that's something actually that is believable.
Because if I believe that you believe
that I'm going to do it, I want to actually go through with it.
I want to actually go through with it,
which is the key difference.
So this game allows a sort of revenge,
whereas the finite interpreter prisoner's level really
does not.
What about the financial repeated coordination game?
Oh, well, that's fine.
I mean, in fact, a one-shot coordination game,
you can get the best result.
So yeah, of course, if you're mean at it,
since you can get the best result with one turn,
you can definitely get the best result with more turns,
which is a basic theorem that if something
is an equilibrium for each game to consider separately,
it's also always an equilibrium.
It is one equilibrium for the game considered as a whole.
So where does it end?
So if the game is dominant solvable, or in general,
if there's only one equilibrium in the last game,
then there's no way of threatening anything
in that last game.
Now, remember, in actual experiments
where real humans play these games,
it turns out that people do cooperate
in finite interpreter games to a greater extent
than one-shot games.
OK.
So there's some attempts at theoretically model this.
So the guy who's mentioning economists
was Reinhard Zeltmann, who won the Nobel Prize.
And the basic story that he set up is something like this.
Suppose that you and I are both playing prisoner's level
for 100 turns.
We both know this.
But there's one thing that we don't both know for sure.
And that is whether the opponent understands the game.
I know if I understand the game, but I
don't know for sure if you understand the game.
So suppose that each of us says there's a 10% chance
that our opponent doesn't really understand the game.
In that case, it could be totally in your self-interest
to cooperate in turn one.
Because if you cooperate in turn one,
this creates doubt in the mind of your opponent
about whether you understand the game.
And there's a reason for him to do the same thing, which
is it creates doubt.
And why would you want to create doubt about whether you really
understand the game?
You can't predict what you're going to do.
Yes, and why is it terrible if people can predict
what you're going to do?
And they know what to do.
Well, in particular, in the finitely repeated prisoner's
level, if everybody knows what everybody's going to do,
then cooperation stops.
There's not going to go so every.
They need to, well, of course, no one's going to cooperate,
and we'll never cooperate.
But by sowing a seed of doubt, by creating a little doubt,
it actually does create a totally rational reason
to cooperate.
And you're like, why?
Well, he doesn't know that I understand the game.
I want him to believe that I'm confused, too.
And then he realizes, well, he probably
is doing this in order to make me think
that he doesn't understand it.
He can, just like he probably knows that I'm
doing it for that reason.
But still, Zelty shows that you can work out the math.
And basically, you do get a result with games like this.
We're in turn 95.
People then suddenly stop cooperating.
And they're like, oh, you understood the game.
Well, yeah, of course.
And you understood the game.
Great.
Well, that's what I thought was 90% likely.
Yeah, me too.
But that slight doubt actually provided the grounds
for cooperation, strangely.
And again, you're wondering, how can error or just
a very information lead to more cooperation?
It's very easy to come up with even simpler examples
where this is true.
Suppose that everyone believed that if you committed murder,
your head would explode.
Is this true?
No.
If people believed it, what would
happen to the murder rate?
Probably just disappear.
Maybe a few suicide, murder-suicide people
might still do it.
But what if it were the belief that if you attempted murder,
that you would instantly die?
So it is totally possible for false beliefs
to be socially beneficial.
Just like if everyone believed that pollution would kill
themselves, then this would lead people to not pollute.
Then they would indirectly, they would accidentally
take other people's interests into account
because they didn't understand what's going on.
So anyway, if you put in a small probability of rationality
or just confusion about what the game is really about
into the model, then you actually
can get cooperation in basically a finitely repeated
prisoner's lemma.
Although, again, it's not quite the same game.
You do have to add in some probability
that the other person doesn't understand the game
or that you're just in a different game.
So it's not exactly the same thing altogether.
So questions about that?
Again, realistically, when you look
at how people play one-shot games,
seems like the simplest story of all is that some people are not
going to play jerks.
And so it could be the right way is just to say,
well, that prisoner's lemma, those payoffs there
only capture, say, money in an experiment.
They don't capture the disutility of being a jerk.
And if you put in some willingness
to pay to play fairly, then actually we
are not really measuring what happens in that game.
We're measuring what happens in something
that looks like that game on the surface
but is in fact a different game.
So it could be that.
You also have your subjective probability
would be significantly affected by how much you thought
that person was a jerk.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Absolutely.
And that would be really easy to put into Zeltmann's model,
actually.
Yes, you could just reinterpret his model, in fact,
as the small probability that your opponent is not
a jerk model.
Yeah.
And then, yes.
And even your buddy.
You don't have to be someone you know is a good guy,
whether or not it's like in the right, you don't have to be
in the right circle.
Yeah.
You probably won't cooperate.
I mean, all of us probably know at least one person
where you have near certainty that they would not actually
betray you in a prisoner's lemma.
Yeah.
Right?
You also probably know someone where you're
almost certain they would.
Right?
Regardless of punishment, that was my childhood,
is my brother would not only betray me,
but it didn't matter what the punishment was.
He would just betray as something
he did for the sheer fun of it.
My mom had a rule of if either of you ever bakes cookies,
they must be shared equally with everyone in the house.
And then again, my brother would never do anything.
And if I ever baked anything, he would be there
waiting to claim his share.
And on top of it all, he would also
laugh in my face as he ate them.
I'll never make a cookie.
Ha, ha.
But I can eat yours.
Ha, ha.
I'm like, if you want more cookies,
this is a really dumb thing to do.
But that was the kind of child he was.
Ha, ha.
Sadistic.
Ha, ha.
All right.
So moving on to the infinitely repeated games.
All right.
So of course, there are a few games
that literally last forever.
In fact, so far, no game has lasted forever.
There's never yet been one that has lasted forever.
But many games have a chance to continue
and always have a chance.
In fact, in the real world, like they ever say,
look, we know with absolute certainty that this is the end.
Even if you're in the electric chair,
there's a last minute call from the governor.
There's a blackout.
There's, like, you're the miracle person that
doesn't get killed by the shock.
So like the news breaks.
There's always possibilities.
Like, ah, maybe I will make it.
But you said, so you're saying there's right now,
as of now, there's been no infinitely repeated games.
But before the notes, you said something about games
with no fixed upper bound.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I'm just getting to this point.
There's no game that literally has gone on forever yet.
But there are games that have a chance to go on forever.
And that is actually all you need for game theorists
to classify it as infinitely repeated.
So long as there is the chance it gets called infinitely
repeated.
Now, you sit around arguing about whether that really
deserves to be called infinite or not.
There's no reading of it.
This is the convention.
There's no point in arguing against it.
So in other words, we're in the coordination game
where everyone else besides you is coordinated
on calling out infinite.
So for you to go and deviate from the linguistic usage
in your chosen occupation is pointless.
OK, there are always a few people.
Dan Klein is still trying to fight back
to reclaim the word liberal for himself.
From my cold, dead hands, you gave me,
you have the word liberal.
I don't care how many people are completely confused by it.
But I'm going to keep doing it.
OK.
All right, anyway, so infinite repetition,
this unraveling logic that I mentioned, no longer holds.
Because if it is always possible for a game to go on,
then we are never actually in the definite last turn.
And if you're never in the definite last turn,
then that reasoning I was giving you about how, well,
we know for sure that there's no future,
and therefore there's no point cooperating, is wrong.
There's always the possibility of a future.
And that is the crucial thing.
Just saying, maybe we have another day here.
We don't know.
But just the fact that I don't know
if you'll be able to punish me means
that I have to consider the possibility that you
might be able to punish me.
And the mere possibility you might punish me
is a reason to at least think twice
before I stab you in the back.
That's the idea.
All right, and the most simple example,
this is the repeated prisoner's lemma.
Now, just to start, let's imagine
that we both make the most extreme possible threat.
And what is the most extreme possible threat?
The most extreme possible threat is, if you betray me once,
I will never, ever, ever, ever, ever, ever, ever, ever, ever
cooperate with you again for as long as I live.
All right, so that is a very strong threat.
Anyone of you who were a kid, did any kid ever say,
I will never, ever, ever play with you again?
So they're going for the most extreme threat they can.
So when a finite, or is rather an infinitely repeated
prisoner's lemma, you say, you know how long
this game could last forever?
That's how long I will punish you
for if you betray me.
That sounds pretty bad.
So here's the idea.
By the way, we have a special name in game theory
for these extreme threats.
We call them trigger strategies, which I believe
is because we imagine that we each have a gun pointed
at our opponent's head with the trigger pulled back,
or like with our fingers on the trigger, the gun cocked.
And then if you do anything wrong,
then I unleash my full force on you
and destroy you as best I can, burn you
as much as I possibly can.
OK, all right, so that's what's called a trigger strategy.
So treat me once, I'll never cooperate again.
And then as soon as we start dealing infinities,
we need to have a discount factor for the model
to make sense.
Because think about this.
Suppose that one betrayal would net me,
would give me a gain of $1 billion in that turn.
But I don't discount the future, and then you can punish me by one forever after that.
Would I ever want to do that if I didn't discount the future?
No.
No.
Because after a billion and one turns, I will be worse off.
And if I don't discount the future, then I will just say, well, I've got to get a billion
right now, but I'm going to have a lower payoff overall, so I won't do it.
On the other hand, if you discount future payoffs, then maybe it's going to make sense
later.
So now we're going to see whether this will be a Nash equilibrium, because remember, saying
that there could be a Nash equilibrium is very different from showing that there actually
will be.
It just means that we need to check.
We need to check.
Is there actually going to be a Nash equilibrium or not?
Is that clear?
So everybody understand the rule of difference between saying there is an equilibrium and
saying we have to check?
Yes.
We do have to check.
So we've got these payoffs here.
So we need these payoffs here.
So cooperative payoffs are 6, or we are going to say 5.
So if you cooperate, then you are going to get the infinite sum from period t equals 0
to infinity of beta raised to the period t times 5.
And remember, this is just nice notation for saying you're going to get 5 plus 5 beta plus
5 beta squared plus something to the infinity.
Now, do you remember the time in your mathematical history, your mathematical biography, where
you found out that infinite sums can sum to finite things?
Remember hearing about this?
Did you have a math teacher who told you about the paradox of Zeno?
Well, you'd say, look, there's a turtle who covers half the floor.
First he walks over half the room, and then he walks over half of half, and then half
of half of half, and so on forever.
And therefore, Zeno argued you could never actually cross a room.
And then your geometry teacher may have said, actually, you can cross a room.
Here's the proof of that.
So that the turtle's movement sums to 1.
Perfect.
So let me get my intuitively.
The reason why this works is that while there's an infinite number of lengths between you
and this door, you can cover them at eventually an infinite speed.
And so you multiply an infinite number times an infinite speed, and you actually get a
finite time.
Amazing.
Ever see the proof that 0.333, 0.999 forever equals 1 exactly?
And it's not just a little bit less than 1, but it's in fact exactly equal to 1?
That one's weird.
It's pretty obvious.
Remember, 0.333 forever is definitely equal to 1 third exactly.
So of course, 3 times that would have 3 times 1 third is 1, right?
All right, so anyway, back to the present.
So this is just another one of these infinite sums that you've probably seen a bunch of times.
And though there may seem like something paradoxical about it, there's nothing paradoxical about it
when you really think about it.
All right, and yes, you go through the formula for the infinite sum.
This whole thing comes out to 5 over 1 minus beta is what that sums to.
5 over 1 minus beta.
If beta were 1, then it would be, then this would sum to infinity, right?
Which means beta can't really be 1.
It's okay.
All right, now, what happens if you do an effect?
If you do an effect, you get 6 immediately, but then afterwards you are punished for eternity.
And when you are punished for eternity, you are then going to earn from periods 1 to infinity.
No, because period 0 you get your 6, so that is where you get the temptation payoff.
You get that 6.
But then after that, you are going to get beta raised to t times the punishment payoff,
and the punishment payoff is over here, right?
This is what happens when nobody cooperates.
So, times that.
So to find out whether cooperation is in fact, or cooperation enforced by trigger strategies,
is in fact an equilibrium, we need to see, well, is this thing going to be greater than or equal to that thing?
All we need to do is write it out.
So we've got 5 over 1 minus beta, greater than or equal to 6, plus beta over 1 minus beta.
And again, when you are wondering why is it 1 over 1 minus beta,
it's because here we start the summation of 1 and there we started at 0.
Right, you remember, you guys remember how that works?
So, it's actually pretty easy to see, so, we can imagine that, you know, so, if,
so, here we've got, you know, the sum from 0 to infinity is this.
If we had the sum of the same thing from 1 to infinity,
then it would be equal to 5 beta plus 5 beta squared, plus so on.
So you see how all we've actually done, if we go from t equals 1 to infinity,
it's exactly the same as from 0 to infinity, so we multiply everything through by beta.
Right, we basically delay satisfaction for one turn for all eternity.
So we shove eternity one turn into the future forever.
All right, and when you go through with this, then we can go and solve,
and I am saying, like, when is this true?
So we do this question mark over, so when is that true?
And it turns out it's true when beta is greater than or equal to 1 fifth.
As I said, if you didn't have discounting, then cooperation is always a no-brainer,
and it's certainly intellectually interesting.
So if you didn't discount the future at all, and you live forever,
then what comes around always goes around, right?
Whereas if you discount the future, then it may be that you value the future so little
that you actually do profit by betraying.
Now, questions, questions?
I know that no one is tired.
Therefore, the only reason for silence could be complete intellectual conviction
and full comprehension, right?
Okay, good.
All right.
Okay, now, are other equilibria sustainable?
The answer is absolutely.
Of course other equilibria are sustainable.
So if you can get cooperation by threatening the worst possible punishment,
what if you threaten the worst possible punishment with just a little bit more forgiveness,
something that's just a little bit less bad than the worst possible punishment?
Then you'll be also going to get equilibrium, right?
So if you make the punishment a little bit milder, what will happen to the critical value beta?
Punishment is a little milder, so what happens to the critical beta?
It goes up, right?
So the harsher the punishment is, the easier it is to get an inpatient person to cooperate with you.
And then as you make it milder, then the harder it is to get the inpatient person to cooperate with you.
So if you're dealing with a child who can barely think about an hour in the future,
then if you really want to scare that kid, then you need to go and threaten something really harsh.
On the other hand, if the kid's a few years older, where he cares more about the future,
then you can threaten him with a milder punishment.
So like a three-year-old, you have to say,
if you don't punish me, there will be absolutely no candy. None.
And then that might be enough to get the little kid, the other kid, to say, no candy ever.
Whereas if the kid were older, so the kid were like a ten-year-old,
then you might say, no candy for a week.
Right? And he's like, hmm, a week? Well, that's not nearly as bad as what you threatened when I was little.
And you always scared me, so I never really did that.
Of course, there is the problem that in the real world, if you go and make extreme threats,
and then you don't carry them out, then the kid's in a da.
So this person is a sucker. This person cannot be believed.
And the person is therefore ripe for exploitation.
And this is someone that I should go and direct all of my mischief towards,
because the person does not properly fight back.
If you think little kids can't figure this stuff out, a lot of them are really good at this.
So there are some kids that are really nice, and just don't want to go and take advantage, but here are a few.
Actually, I don't know.
All right. On questions?
So can mild kids be killed? Are there more equilibria?
The answer is absolutely, but we just have to keep raising the value of beta in order for cooperation to work.
Now, there's something called, strangely, the Foucault theorem,
which says that if cooperation is sustainable at all, there will normally be an infinite number of equilibria.
And it comes down to this. So suppose that we're not actually at this exact threshold,
so beta doesn't exactly equal one-fifth.
In that case, if we get cooperation, so the critical value is like a sixth,
but we could, let's see, let's load it up.
Yeah, the critical value is a sixth.
Then we'll have an infinity of punishments, everything that's consistent with a critical value
ranging from a beta being a sixth all the way up to a fifth.
So basically, they'll be on the line from beta equals zero to beta equals one.
So if, say, we start off at, say, beta equals one-fifth.
So if, for example, beta equals one-sixth is enough, then we can say actually all of that,
we'll have cooperation, actually we'll have cooperation everywhere above there,
we'll have cooperation all those other places.
And so basically for each of these points, there are other equilibria
where you can make the punishment milder and still make it work.
Now, I'm wondering why they call it the Foucault theorem.
The Foucault theorem is famous because normally in science,
there are arguments where multiple people claim that they came up with an idea.
Probably the most common thing is people just accept that one person came up with it.
But the next most common thing is people fight for priority.
So like who really invented calculus, Newton or Leibniz?
So there's a fight for priority.
The Foucault theorem is weird because the theorem became known,
but there was no person to whom it was attributed.
Just like a folk song, no one knows who wrote a folk song.
The Foucault theorem is a theorem in game theory where actually it is like it has never really been,
there was no one who came forward and claimed to be the originator.
And so it became widely understood.
And then of course, ultimately people did get papers proving the Foucault theorem,
things like that, or different proofs of the Foucault theorem.
But the general idea was known well before.
So just saying funny, crazy history of thoughts, which as far as I know has never occurred any other time.
So now what happens out of all the endless possibilities?
So like if the critical value is here, and all of these are consistent with that calibrity,
what's really going to happen?
Again, so probably Foucault points matter a lot.
Foucault points matter a lot.
So for example, the Foucault point of I'll never cooperate with you again if you betray me
is pretty Foucault in a lot of ways, right?
So, most of you are a little young for this, but how many people know marriages that were destroyed over one act of adultery?
Yeah.
One single case.
And it's not even a dispute.
Neither side actually says that one was proof of a bunch of others.
Like one thing.
And that's it.
So trigger strategies are used in the real world.
And you can probably think of a bunch of other things that would end marriages with one action.
Just murdered one guy.
Didn't even want to hear my story of why he never let it come in.
So that's what I might lead to.
So you just make a list.
Punched my mother one time.
And then he wouldn't have anything to do with her, though I refuse to have anything to do with her.
So trigger strategies, there is some logic to it.
And in the real world, we do see them occurring sometimes.
So that's one.
But as we've seen, there are other Foucault ones, such as eye for eye.
So you did a bad thing to me, I get to do the same bad thing back to you.
So let's see.
This is probably mostly among guys.
But it's like, look, you punch a guy and then how can you make it right?
Fine.
You can do what?
I'll just stand here while you do what to me?
Punch me.
Sometimes it has to be in exactly the same location.
Like I punch you in the arm so you get to punch me in the arm now.
And then we're friends again.
So that could also be a Foucault punch.
Let's see.
So then there's a famous series of experiments, generally known as the tit for tat experiments.
So this was a prisoner's dilemma tournament, but it's a repeated prisoner's dilemma tournament,
where people go and enter a strategy for how they're going to play a repeated prisoner's dilemma.
And you can put in anything.
So you can put in your strategy is never cooperate, but your strategy is always cooperate.
There's lots of different calls, so you can put in trigger strategies.
But the strategy that actually won this tournament, and again, what do I mean by won a tournament?
I mean a bunch of actual human beings competed.
They broke their strategies down, and then there was a round robin where every strategy played every other strategy.
And then we found a winner.
So in the original tournament, the winning strategy in the repeated prisoner's dilemma was tit for tat,
which means in turn one cooperate, and then in all subsequent turns do whatever your opponent did last turn.
So notice, is tit for tat a trigger strategy?
No.
Not even close.
Tit for tat just says if you go and betray me once, then I will betray you once.
And if you get back and start cooperating again, then I'll get back and start cooperating again.
And so tit for tat actually won, I think there was like 20 or 30 different strategies, and this one actually won.
Now is it a theorem that tit for tat has to win?
No.
This is an experiment showing that it did in fact win, but there's something compelling about it because it was open.
Anyone who wanted to enter the tournament could enter with any strategy they want, and then tit for tat won.
But here's what's really impressive.
The experimenters redid the tournament after reporting all the results, full publicity, and then there were more strategies entered.
So I think it was something like 50 or 60 strategies were entered, and tit for tat won the second round.
And that's really big because then it's like everyone is thinking, well, tit for tat is the strategy to beat.
And so I will find something ideally suited to beat tit for tat.
But the problem was that while people were able to come up with strategies to beat tit for tat,
they did so much worse against the other strategies, that tit for tat still prevailed in the tournament.
My understanding is that Gordon Tullock was in the tournament, and he was the guy who just put in the always betray strategy.
So why don't we go and we'll take our 10 minute break now, and then resume.
So given that the focus here says that there will normally be an infinity of equilibria, which one will actually happen?
Focal points give us a lot of guidance. It's hard to formally model, so again, in order to actually really talk about this,
you need to be someone who combines econ, psychology, and sociology, which not that many people want to do.
So you have to read three whole fields.
I can imagine the burden on someone who wants to figure out what's going to happen in the world,
and have to read three different areas.
My view is if you really want to understand the world, you should read in all these areas.
So far I don't think any students have ever taken me up on this advice.
Of course that means the opposite is going to happen now, with the Gamber's Fallacy.
If I fail so far, then my good luck is coming in dice, right?
So yeah, of course.
Moving on to reputation.
It's very common for economists who see firms appearing to lose money on purpose to say,
ah, well the reason they're doing it is because of reputation.
And you might ask, does that make sense?
Can reputational models be rationalized in the same way that we're doing?
So rationalize using the key to play, and the answer, as you might guess, is yes.
You can actually rationalize profit-losing behavior as, in the short run,
profit-losing behavior as part of a long-run profit-enhancing strategy.
So suppose that when a store decides to cheat a customer,
customers decide whether to buy or not.
So we can have a little model like this.
So we can have a model where firms either cheat or don't,
and then customers either buy or don't.
We can have a payoff something like this.
So if the firm cheats and the customer buys and the firm gets a nice profit,
and the customer's worse off and they get bought,
if the firm doesn't cheat and the customer buys, then they both get some surplus.
And if no purchase happens, then no one gets any surplus.
So you get something like this.
And if you then just apply weak dominance, it looks like the store owner will always cheat.
So under weak dominance, the store owner will always cheat,
because if the customer is not going to buy anyway, then he'll just get a buy, he gets zero.
But if he's going to buy, then when you cheat, you get ten instead of five.
So it seems like people will always cheat, right?
But suppose the customers can condition their purchasing behavior
based upon whether they've seen you cheat in the past.
And notice, you don't even need to have been the person who has cheated.
It can just be that there's a big line of customers, each of whom goes and buys one item.
But each person can go and see whether the last person got cheated or not.
And then they decide, well, do I feel like buying from you or not?
Or, of course, in a Walmart setting, you could look at the reviews,
and if the reviews are worse than, say, 90 percent, then you don't buy.
So something like that.
So anyway, suppose customers have the option of playing buy,
and they don't pass cheating, and don't otherwise,
and then we can see whether we have an equilibrium.
And since I put zeros in here, the math is easy.
So basically, you can either go and get the infinite sum of fives.
You can get the don't cheat, buy, pay off forever.
Or you can rip someone off once and then no one ever buys from you again.
And then you get 10.
And you go through, and if you work this out,
it looks like the critical value of beta, beta star, is going to be equal to.5.
So as long as beta is.5 or higher, cooperation will be possible.
So this is the model.
Now, the applications of reputation are truly endless.
Right here, I'm going to raise the status of Professor Dan Klein.
So what is Dan Klein?
A visionary is what he is.
So he didn't quite invent the Internet.
But before Internet commerce was anything noticeable,
Dan Klein actually went and edited a whole book called Reputation,
writing a subtitle like Studies in the Voluntary Elicitation of Good Behavior.
And in the book, he just put together all of the main evidence
on what reputation can accomplish.
And he said that reputation can do a lot of things
that many economists at the time would have said it could not do.
And in particular, if you go and read it now,
it seems like he's kind of obvious.
Like, wasn't he just writing about e-commerce?
No, because there basically was no e-commerce at the time.
He just wrote a book about what could happen,
and then something amazing happened.
What an economist said could happen, that didn't exist at the time, did occur.
Wow. All right.
So that's basically the gold standard of prediction, right?
To say that something that doesn't yet exist...
as possible and then soon after it does occur.
So what use of reputation?
Well, most obviously, so reputation is a market alternative
to regulation of product quality and stuff like that.
So if you think about the actual ways
that people monitor and regulate quality in the real world,
how is it that you in fact get value for your money?
Has anyone here ever gone and called up a regulator
because you didn't like a product that you got?
Has anyone ever sued someone who sued a firm
only because you didn't like the product?
Has anyone ever threatened to sue?
You have a threat to sue?
Yeah, my wife threatened to sue someone once.
I got the letter, I think.
Yeah, I don't know, it was just that.
But yeah, so very rare to do that.
Instead, the main things you have
are reputational incentives.
There is the threat, like, I'm not gonna come back here.
I mean, very often, you don't even make the threat.
It's more of, look, they know that if I'm not happy,
I won't come back, or maybe I will go
and talk bad about them.
Maybe they'll get bad word about them on top of this.
Now, at the time that Dan was writing,
of course, reputational incentives were all over the place,
and there were lots of ways that you could point to
and working, like Costco already had its
you can return anything for any reason policy
at the time Dan was writing.
And if you're wondering, like, why else?
My dad, often, one of his five economic topics
that he won't stop with is, how can Costco do this?
There's no way people can just buy whatever they want
and then return it for any reason.
How can this be?
He was very angry, like, well,
he's not, how much Costco stock do you own?
You were upset by this.
And my answer is, well, I think Costco knows what it's doing.
I think they've got a pretty good business model,
and they seem pretty successful.
Anyway, if you were gonna tell a yuppie story
about why Costco does let anyone return anything
for any reason, well, reputation, right?
If you know this is true, then how does it make you feel
about buying products from Costco?
Great, I'd love to try something from Costco.
The worst thing that happens is I return it,
and since I love Costco so much,
I'm coming back again anyway.
So it's almost no cost of having to return the product.
It's super easy.
Okay, so you can think of it as, anyway,
so this was already around, of course,
but the internet has supercharged reputational incentives
in so many ways.
So there's improved publicity of reputation.
It's much easier to find out now what the reputation
of almost any place that you wanna buy from is.
So it used to be that, like, suppose that you are
just passing through a town, and you wanna know,
well, what is the best review,
the best-liked comic book store in this area?
If you didn't know anyone personally back in those days,
then what could you really do?
You just try it out and see for yourself,
and then you're never gonna come back again.
And no one's gonna find out what was done to you, probably,
and you don't find out about a treatment anyone else got.
Now, though, you can just go to Yelp or Amazon Reviews,
and you can get a lot of information about it.
My favorite strategy is to look at the really negative
reviews and see, like, what do the people
who hate this product say?
And if they say, like, the post office smashed it,
then it's like, all right, well, it's a book, likely.
You're gonna give the book a one-star review
because the post office smashed it?
Seems like a pretty crummy reason.
And the more you think about this,
the more ways that reputation can be useful,
because, for example,
suppose that you're thinking about medical service,
and maybe it's too hard for you to find out
about the reputations of individual
medical service providers,
but again, in the real world,
there is a different reputation you can look at,
and where you can essentially outsource the job
to someone else of monitoring a lot of reputations.
So, like, in the health insurance industry,
there's three letters that we currently have.
H.
HMO. HMO.
Right, so, you can just know the reputation of the HMO,
and the HMO can worry about the actual quality
of the individual employees,
and then, but then, of course,
if they hire someone who messes up,
it doesn't just mess up the reputation
of that individual employee,
it messes up the reputation of the whole HMO.
Right?
They're just like, if Costco sells one current project,
that can actually hurt Costco,
and if you have ever read the information
about how does Costco decide
what products to put in the store,
they have a very rigorous process when they go on sale.
Especially, there's a whole article about
how a Kirkland product,
which are the Costco store products, come to exist.
Right, and it's a fascinating story.
Of course, the story was in the Costco Connection,
so it's not a corporate propaganda magazine,
but I still said,
look, out of all the corporate propaganda magazines,
that's the best one,
and it seemed like a, you know,
it was a very informative article,
so, you know, maybe it was made up,
but it seemed, seemed, seemed easy.
Right, so anyway, so even things
where people think of it as very hard
for reputation to monitor them,
again, like, how could reputation
ever constrain taxi drivers?
There's just no way that could ever happen, right?
And yet, what has occurred?
Yes, Uber, where you, where, like,
people get rated, and there's thousands of ratings
on an individual, and you can actually see it, right?
And in this way, you know,
you'll create incentives for the drivers
to try to drive a really good service
in a way that other taxi drivers
still don't have to deal with it.
All right, so questions about that?
So, it is pretty striking,
and I think Dan points this out in the book,
how people in their imagination
think of government as protecting them,
when almost no one actually ever uses
government as protection.
And the thing that people actually use
is the thing that at the time he was writing,
people were like, oh, reputation,
oh, it's just hand-waving.
I think it'd be pretty hard today
to dismiss reputation as an important factor.
Seems like you'd have to be extremely dogmatic
just to go, you know, bah, that's lame,
that's not gonna work.
Now, something that I think is even more impressive
is that not only does reputation matter for quality,
also probably matters for price, all right?
So, I am a person who pushes introspection
as something that economists undervalue.
I say we can actually get a lot of information
by introspection.
Of course, often you wanna go and double-check
that your introspection is similar to other people's,
because maybe you're just a weird person.
Bigger issue for me than for other people.
All right, anyway.
So, if you were to go and try to figure out,
like, what is the elasticity of product demand
at the grocery store?
If you do the thought experiment
when you're already there,
I will say you'll probably get an answer of,
if you show up at the store
and the price are considerably higher,
you're probably gonna still buy
most of the stuff on your list,
maybe all the stuff on your list.
So, they could jack up the prices by 25%,
and a lot of people would still probably
simply wind up paying 25% more.
If you do the thought experiment
of what you will do if you're already there.
However, if you go to a store a couple times
and the prices keep being higher than you expect,
what does that do to your mental picture of that store?
It makes you think of an expensive store.
And when you're trying to decide where to shop,
how is this likely to affect your decision?
You very well might wanna go to a totally different store
after a while if the prices keep seeming too high.
So then, this doesn't mean that introspection is wrong,
but it means that you need to do
two different introspections.
There's the introspection of product demand elasticity,
or demand elasticity when you are already at the store,
it's like short run,
versus the long run elasticity
when you factor in not only how much
do you wanna buy that day,
but which store do you wanna shop at.
And of course, if you are running a store,
one of the factors you're gonna keep in mind then
when you say your prices,
is not just what will maximize store profits today,
it's what is our long run profit maximizing strategy.
Because you know that if you raise prices,
this is gonna lead some people to decide
that they, who do show up,
they still don't wanna actually shop at your store anymore.
Now, I had a friend at graduate school
who had a very relevant anecdote.
So when this guy was an undergraduate,
I think it was actually when he was a master's student,
because he was one of the special PhD students
who already had a master's and came in,
he was like a wolf among the sheep
because he knew most of the material already.
Anyway, so when he was getting his master's,
he worked the late night shift at the local 7-Eleven
in the town of Davis, California.
And it was really boring working
the late night shift at 7-Eleven.
So one day he and his friend who worked
decided to play a game.
And the game was, what is the highest price
that you can quote to the customer without laughing?
All right, and this is,
whenever someone came with a product,
they would just make up a price.
And the winners, whoever could go
and just have the most ridiculous prices.
And then, and again, of course,
you don't laugh in the customer's face
when you say it's five bucks for a pack of gum.
Right, so that's all, like five bucks for a pack of gum.
All right, so anyway, they did this for a while.
And unsurprisingly, they were at,
or like, you know, bring in,
possibly surprisingly to some, at least,
they were able to go and make a lot more money
with their pricing strategy
than previously made on the night shift.
They would actually charge them if that was true.
Oh yeah, yeah, no, they absolutely did.
And they weren't stealing it,
they were putting it in the register.
Right, and then everything seemed to be going fine.
Intended, it was a fun game,
and the length of the night was less boring.
Until their manager went to look at the books,
and he said, wait a second,
we have more money in the book,
like in the registers, than we could theoretically have.
Now of course, normally in any business,
the opposite problem would shrink.
Right, you have, we have 5% less revenue
than we theoretically should have.
But they actually have like 105%
of the theoretically possible maximum revenue.
Now you might think that the manager would say,
great, well I don't know what you're doing,
but great work.
But instead he says, like, make this go away.
We can't be over.
This is a problem.
The 7-Eleven Corporation will punish us,
and they will be mad at us
if you don't make this problem go away.
So then my friend and his buddy
decided to switch to the opposite game.
And then it was, what is the lowest price
you can charge someone without, without, without,
without them bursting into laughter.
And so they were able to wipe out their temporary profits.
Right, but the interesting thing about the story
is that the 7-Eleven franchise
is so concerned with the reputation of the firm,
or of the chain, for their prices,
that if one store were to go and start making extra money
by jacking up prices,
they will actually get on your case over that.
And again, it must be that they are thinking
something like, you are actually hurting the reputation
not only of your 7-Eleven,
you are impugning all 7-Elevens.
Anytime someone sucks into your 7-Eleven
and feels like they got ripped off,
every 7-Eleven becomes worse in the eyes of consumers.
Right, so, and then, you know, this, this may,
I would say this, they tell you, like,
this means the reputation is even,
an even bigger deal than it might seem
because it's actually constraining pricing behavior
as well as quality behavior.
All right, so questions?
We can all thank visionary Dan Klein, right,
who, you know, says,
could not quite invent the internet,
but he foretold its rise without knowing it.
I don't think you,
I don't remember the,
well, it's probably some,
some's a little bit on e-commerce,
but this, I think the book came out in like 1998.
So there was very little going on at the time.
This is back when Amazon only sold books.
That was it.
And then there was a,
there was a, you know, if you wanted to buy music,
you went to a totally different online store.
You went to Music Boulevard or CD Now.
But then like Amazon, like, you know, we don't have CDs.
We're a bookstore.
All right, so that was how things were in ancient times.
PC, PC Miller Burger.
All right.
So, and actually, like, even now,
like a common story about Amazon is that
they could get a lot more profitable very quickly,
but they are concerned with the,
with the long run reputation.
And as we're going to see,
probably concerned that if they got a reputation
for high pricing, then in the long run,
there probably would be another Amazon
or a competitor Amazon.
Whereas right now, some would say,
what's the next best thing Amazon?
You know, I've heard people say like,
something like like,
like, like Cotton or something like that.
Something you heard of this website.
So the next best thing Amazon is something
that no one's heard of.
So yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
It's a little bit, but I mean,
there's a ton of stuff that you couldn't like,
like eBay would like,
would like generally not have lots of new stuff, right?
So yeah, so like a lot of new stuff.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So just like I bought stuff from eBay.
So yeah.
All right.
Okay.
Now intuitively,
economists and almost everyone else
tends to think reputational incentives
as something that leads to pretty severe outcomes.
Now, of course, as we've already seen,
this is never literally true
because there's always losers in every possible change.
But you know, like at least you tend to think of it
as good for all participants in the exchange.
Both sides of the exchange are gonna be better off.
But if you know a broader range of historical events,
you will be aware of this as completely wrong.
So there are numerous people throughout history
who've deliberately pursued a reputation
for being horrible, evil, violent,
psychotic, even crazy people.
Like so, you know, like so standard
Genghis Khan operating procedure.
If you don't immediately surrender to me,
I will murder everyone in your town and destroy it.
Right, so this doesn't seem like it's leading
to a more peaceful, happy outcome for all sides.
Instead, this appears like Genghis Khan
is trying to make it possible for him to conquer people
and enslave them with less work.
Right, and it's a pretty good strategy to think about it.
If people believe that you will murder them
unless they immediately surrender,
and if they think that you're likely that you could do it,
then people are likely to just surrender right away.
And then they will become your slaves
without you even having to fight with them.
Okay, so you know, like outlaws
might wanna have a reputation for ferocity.
If you know the musical, the movie, The Princess Bride,
there's a line where the Dread Pirate Roberts,
where he says, once you spare one person after resist,
then it's nothing but work, work, work
after that all the time.
So a pirate has to be careful to murder
anyone who ever resists him.
Right now, there is an old story,
you wanna like save one survivor
and go back and spread the tale.
There is a famous story of the Bulgarians
went and tried to invade the Byzantine Empire.
The Bulgarians lost, and like a massive army
taken prisoner, and yeah, this is a little gruesome,
but it's such a good story,
you have to hear this person's story.
So what the Byzantine Emperor decided to do was,
all right, look, split them into,
split the Bulgarian prisoners into two groups.
One group will have 99% of the people.
Blind them all.
The other will have the remaining 1%.
Put out one of each of their eyes.
Then go and put them in lines where,
there's a line of 100 Bulgarians,
each led by one one-eyed Bulgarian,
leading 99 fully blind Bulgarians and send them home.
And they can decide for themselves
whether they ever feel like invading again.
All right, so obviously there,
you're not trying to get a reputation
for being someone that everyone wants to be friends with.
You're trying to get a reputation for,
do not mess with me, or I will do this thing
that 1,000 years later, people will still be talking about
how sick it was.
Certain logic to it.
All right, and of course,
dictators try to get a reputation for brutality.
This is totally, completely standard
in the annals of history.
So Kim Jong-un, if you know, like his seven-year reign.
So what has he done?
Let's see, murdered his uncle, his brother,
bunch of other people, right?
And doesn't he know that he's getting a reputation
where people don't trust him?
Well, people do trust him
to murder anyone that is his enemy.
Right, and so I remember the day that he gained power,
or actually the day that his dad died,
I went home that night and I told my kids,
right now, anything can be happening in North Korea.
They could be murdering that kid right now as we speak.
He could be killing all of them.
There could be civil war.
There could be anything.
It's totally open, right?
And then when he murders uncle, I said, all right, that's it.
Right, things are gonna be settled.
We're gonna be calm now.
Oh, it's just gonna get, like, the guy's 30,
so, I mean, bad health, diabetics,
so maybe 30, 40 years of oppression
seems like the reasonable forecast at this point.
So, you know, 75% chance that he just dies a natural death.
Right, that's my view.
And then when he murdered his brother,
I'm like, well, all right, more.
Like, he's gonna be like, that's even better.
Right, and like, everyone went,
why did he murder his brother?
Well, his brother had very close ties to the Chinese,
which made his brother the absolute obvious pick
for if the Chinese wanted to assassinate Kim Jong-un
and replace him with someone else they could count on,
that brother was perfect.
And now he's dead.
And now who's perfect?
Now there's no perfect person to replace him.
So, like, this is not only a message of the Chinese,
but it builds up the reputation.
Anyone who becomes the best person
for the Chinese to replace me with dies.
So now you have a country where we're saying,
I'm not the best person to replace him with.
No, no, no, I'm a terrible person.
No, no, no, not me, not me, maybe that guy.
Like, no, not me, don't look at me.
I've got nothing to do with it.
So, and this is, of course,
very normal behavior for a dictator.
Especially for, you know,
for either, you know, like revolutionary dictators
or people who had to fight their way to the top.
For long-serving hereditary dictators
where they have a very stable pattern of succession
is less common because there's so much weight
on the side of it has to be the legitimate heir.
But, you know, like three generations of Kims
isn't nearly enough to get that.
So, you know, like, say,
Gordon Tellock actually has this great story
where he says that as long as you had to fight
your way to the top,
the people at the top are bloodthirsty.
But once you get very secure hereditary succession,
then the selection process gets weaker and weaker
and finally you may get some wuss
who's happy to switch to democracy
if people like it for it.
Yes?
So in your view, regardless of the level of brutality,
is predictability an asset or a liability?
Let's see.
If you're predictably brutal versus just,
you looked at me funny.
Yeah, so it's an interesting question.
So like, many of the most successful dictators
are like, you looked at me funny.
Again, it seems like they're going for something saying,
look, I will murder my best friend for no reason at all.
So imagine what I would do to you.
Right?
And you might, if you were a good marginalist,
say, well, that means the marginal cost
of being your enemy is smaller than it seems.
But there are enough dictators who do this
and rule successfully,
like, man, it seems like it is psychologically effective
as to whether it's actually, you know,
taken overboard by some of the most notorious dictators.
I mean, I have to think that Stalin did take it overboard
because he did things that were very strange,
like he sent, you know, like his right-hand man,
his Molotov, he sent the guy's wife to Siberia,
he's a traitor, and keeps working with him every day.
So.
Maybe it was an unhappy marriage.
You're excited about this, actually.
Immediately, like, you know,
what put you out as a Molotov repeatedly
sort of broke the subject.
Would you mind declaring my wife to not be a traitor
and bring her back from Siberia?
I kind of appreciate that.
And then it's like, oh, maybe next year.
So.
Yeah.
I mean, it's the kind of thing
where it seems like you'd be worried
that you'll push someone too far
and they will just pick up a letter opener
and kill you with it when they get a chance.
But then again, of course,
here there's no credible account
of any remotely successful attempt
of the most funstones like ever.
Of course, for Hitler, there's some of the eight
documented cases where people came pretty close to killing him.
Because do ridiculous actions build kind of a god image?
Yeah, possibly.
So maybe that's what's going on.
Maybe it's just that once you are that powerful dictator,
you have a lot of wiggle room.
And you can do something that is actually kind of foolish,
but the odds that it actually leads to disaster for you
is so low because you have so many other safeguards.
So still, you might say, look, don't make enemies
for no reason at all but for friends.
That seems like pretty sensible advice,
regardless of what's going on.
All right, so anyway, so there is this intuition
that repudiation does make things work better
for all people, at least if all of them are participating.
So how can you rationalize a standard intuition?
So here, probably the best answer
is that if you go and add on free entry and exit.
So if you add on free entry and exit, then repudiation
has the usual effects, or they were the expected effects.
So free entry, free exit.
That makes a big difference.
All right, so then, if there's free entry and exit,
and there's someone who has a bad reputation,
what is everybody going to do?
Leave, go away.
So if there's only one place on Earth
that you can buy food from, they might deliberately
want to build up a reputation for we give you,
we can charge exorbitant prices, we have crummy quality,
and if you don't like it, we will cut you off from our list
and you'll starve to death.
That were the only place on Earth.
But on the other hand, if there's
other possibilities out there that you can constantly
easily switch to, then of course,
if you have that reputation, then you'll have zero customers.
And that problem will solve itself.
Again, of course, if, say, cities
that are threatened by Genghis Khan could just pick themselves
up and move 1,000 miles away, then again,
Genghis Khan would not be doing anything
that would work out well for him.
It would just be pretty pointless.
Now, Gordon Tullock, as far as I know,
only did one experiment his whole career,
but it was a brilliant experiment, one of the best
ones I've ever heard of.
So what Tullock did is this.
He re-ran the standard prisoner of slum experiment
where you get paired up with a partner and play,
but he added on one difference from the rule,
which is you're allowed to change your partner if you want.
And the expected result happened.
First of all, hardly anyone actually
would betray anyone if they knew people could switch,
for two reasons.
So one is, if you did get betrayed,
then you would almost always switch.
Like, why should I stay with you after you're
stabbed me in the back?
And then secondly, once you have betrayed someone,
who are the only people that are willing to have anything
to do with you?
Other betrayers.
And it seemed like players figured this out
pretty quickly.
So even people who were inclined to betray would say, oh, wait.
I've got to go.
If I betray, not only am I going to lose my partner,
I'm going to be thrown into this crummy,
you know, this crummy, lupine proletariat of people
who no one else wants to have anything to do with.
I'll be ostracized.
I'll be an outcast.
And then I'll only be able to deal with other people like me.
People like me are terrible.
So I don't want that.
So Tullock set this up in this experiment.
This was a hypothesis, and it worked great.
So really a pretty amazing experiment,
showing that you could get near total cooperation just
by making it known that if you were not
happy with the result, you could go and fire your partner.
You may have had this in mind any time
that you were stuck on a class assignment
and the teacher just forcibly crammed people together.
And then, of course, there's always a bunch of people
who don't do any work, and then they
get shoved off onto people who actually
want to get a good grade.
You may have noticed this occurring at some point.
But on the other hand, if you were free to form your groups,
then it probably wouldn't happen.
So my kids told me the usual thing.
Teachers actually, if you suggest,
will let people form their own groups.
They'll say, well, then it'll just
be some groups of hardworking kids
and other groups of lazy kids, and we don't want that.
Isn't that how it ought to be?
Isn't that a well-functioning system
where people who don't do work are stuck with other people who
don't do work?
And if you want to turn over a new leaf,
you have to go and prove yourself and pay your dues
and earn forgiveness for your past laziness.
No, that's not a good system.
A good system is where every good kid
is shackled to some freeloaders.
All right.
God, I hate class projects so much.
The model of absolute injustice.
So questions.
Questions about the Talk experiment,
reputation in general.
And again, if you do want to work on anything
involving reputation, you are already in the right place.
So Dan Klein's a great person to talk to.
Anyone who's doing experiments is a great person to talk to.
So I guess the main issue is trying
to go and get credit for doing something not obvious.
Because of course, you can't write a paper on something
obvious is the problem.
Dan Klein wrote about it before it happened,
which I think made it less obvious.
So there's that.
But again, I know he's got a bunch of other ideas
about how reputation can be expended.
So there's probably plenty of other things to do with it.
All right.
So questions about that.
We have had some GMU students who've done dissertations
on the dark web and things like that.
And how can you have reputation with anonymity?
Which at first glance sounds impossible.
So my student, Julia Norgaard, had one on the dark web.
And again, I have to say, I've never actually been personally
on the dark web.
But her story basically was that even though the identity
of a human being is anonymous, but still there
is a reputation of this anonymous entity.
So there's like the anonymous store number one.
And you know that you have previously
had good relations with anonymous store number one.
And so that is where you get the benefit.
So I do remember that when I was in grad school,
I had a bunch of arguments over email with my econ one teacher.
I said, well, I'm a graduate.
I said, my undergraduate econ one teacher
had a bunch of arguments with him over email.
Well, I kept saying the reputation
to do way more things than he thought.
And he kept saying that it was just libertarian fantasy.
And then in the early 2000s, he spontaneously
remembered the conversation, remembered
our respective positions, and set out his right.
Which is like being struck by lightning, right?
So normally the best you can hope for
is that someone changed their mind
without remembering the users of credit for it.
And he said, look, I just thought that the whole asymmetric
information problem would kill this.
I never believed online commerce could take off.
And now it has.
And if you think about what one kind of business
has been absolutely instrumental to the internet working
as it has, so like has anyone ever bought anything
with cash over the internet ever?
You never use cash.
So what has been the key institution that has
allowed the system to flourish?
Credit.
Credit cards.
Credit cards are crucial.
Even PayPal ultimately comes back to credit cards, right?
So credit cards have been crucial.
If you think about how much the modern world owes
to credit cards, not just all e-commerce,
but like rental cars, and like hotels,
and just go down the list of all the things
you can do with a credit card.
Mail order, right?
And again, what credit cards are all about,
I mean, even in the name credit card,
what does the word credit suggest?
You're reliable.
Yeah, yes, we're reliable.
We have a reputation.
So you have a reputation as someone that repays his debts.
And pretty amazing given that it's essentially
possible for you to rack up an enormous amount of credit card
debt and then just declare bankruptcy
and not have to pay it.
So fun fact is that this is doable.
It's also illegal to go and sign a contract waiving
your right to bankruptcy.
So imagine what kind of a great deal
you would get from credit card companies
if you would just waive that right.
So questions about reputation?
Everyone happy?
Inspired?
Great.
All right.
So let's all take out our credit cards
and say a silent prayer of thanks for all that we owe them
and all that they have done for us,
and how rarely anyone has ever written a poem
to the noble credit card, how rarely anyone has ever held it
up and cried a tear.
Said, it was you.
I love you and all you've done for us.
There had never been a motion in the United Nations saying,
let us all have a day of honor for credit cards.
But should there be?
Can't we boldly remember the real heroes, credit card
companies?
All right.
All right.
So then moving on.
All right, so now we got monopoly and congestibility.
All right.
So you've all seen the standard monopoly model at some point,
right?
Standard monopoly model.
So what does the monopolist do?
You all know the answer.
What the monopolist does is they maximize PQ minus TC.
All right, so price times quantity minus total cost.
And when they do so, they wind up
setting marginal revenue equal to marginal cost.
So if this is demand curve, then this
will be your marginal revenue curve.
And if this is your marginal cost curve,
then monopolists, of course, have we seen 1,000 times,
just go to the intersection of marginal cost and marginal
revenue, and then you move up to the demand curve.
And then that tells you what they will do.
So you've all seen what monopolists do before.
OK.
Now, does this make sense in game theoretic terms?
Well, sure, this is one equilibrium.
It's totally one equilibrium.
But there's another equilibrium for you.
How about an equilibrium where consumers refuse to pay anything
more than marginal cost, and then monopolists
set price at marginal cost?
If this is what everybody believes is going to happen,
does anyone have a reason to switch?
If the monopolist believes that no one will buy anything
at more than marginal cost, it has no reason
to charge more than marginal cost.
And if consumers refuse to pay anything
more than marginal cost, and they're
getting at a marginal cost, do they have any reason to offer
more?
No.
So we actually have another equilibrium
at the other extreme.
That's also totally an equilibrium.
So then you would sit back and say, all right,
well, what extra assumptions do we
need in order for this to make sense?
So one thing you might do is, what
would be a sub-game perfection, where, sure, the customer's
going to say we won't pay anything more than marginal
cost.
But when you show up at a store and they're
charging more than marginal cost,
what does the monopolist think you're really going to do?
Buy it.
Buy it.
So you could say, really, sub-game perfection
is built into the standard monopoly model, a concept
that you may have never heard of until last week.
Actually underlies the whole ordinary store monopoly.
Or you might actually say maybe what's really
going on is a reputational model,
where the monopolist is trying to build up a reputation
for charging the monopoly price.
And it's hard, on the other hand,
for the customers to build up a reputation for not doing that.
So customers say, come on, you guys.
Let's all build up a reputation for not
being willing to go along with these store prices.
But of course, every individual is likely to say, well,
I'd like to go and eat some chicken this weekend.
If I just go and pay the monopoly price,
I can get chicken.
Whereas the monopolist, on the other hand,
doesn't have to go and get a whole group of people
together to go along with this plan.
Just says, look, this is what I'm doing.
And every week, I charge this price for chickens.
I've been doing this for a long time.
So if you think I'm going to cut the price,
you're sadly mistaken, people.
So that might be it.
So in any case, the simple monopoly model
actually needs better intellectual foundations
than your intro textbook gives it.
But of course, that doesn't mean that it's wrong.
So it means that, yeah, so you need extra foundations.
But you just figure out whatever foundations are necessary
to make the standard story right,
because the standard story does make sense.
So intuitively, the standard story makes a lot of sense.
Again, especially if we are thinking about the simplest
kind of monopoly, which is where the government goes
into an industry where there's no real reason for there
to be a monopoly.
And then they give a piece of paper to one firm that says,
you are the only one allowed to produce this.
And then they jail anyone who tries to meet with them.
So that is the simplest case.
Notice here how I drew a flat marginal cost curve.
In the real world, how often do you
get a monopolist in an industry where there's
a flat marginal cost curve?
Pretty much never, right?
So instead, the only way you get monopoly
in an industry with a flat marginal cost curve
is something like agri-oil, like when their government organized
agricultural cartels.
Again, why did the government organize the cartels?
Well, because there's very flat marginal cost.
So if the government just looked the other way
while the firm is trying to collude, it falls through.
It's too easy for there to be more entry,
too easy for one old apple to gain production.
So that's not likely to work.
But anyway, if we think about the simple case where
it is a government-sponsored monopoly, where there's
no possible economic reason for it to exist,
other than the government wants to go and help out
the bully in the dictator, something like that.
Anyway, so in that very simple case,
this seems like a fine model of what's likely to happen.
But for all other cases, when it's not just government
going and handing out a piece of paper saying,
only you can legally prove something,
then there is a big real-world problem,
which is the problem of potential competition.
Something can literally be a monopoly
where there's only one seller, right?
Like some mono meaning one, poly meaning seller,
or something like that.
Something like polis or something.
So that's the original word.
There can literally only be one seller of something.
And yet, they might actually act in a way
that's very different from this if they are worried
that they won't remain the only firm if they
change their behavior.
And it's a pretty simple point.
So how can we go and model potential competition?
How can we go and amend the regular monopoly model
to take into account the possibility of potential entry
or potential competition?
By the way, again, this is something where, like in 1990,
you said this thing, a lot of people would still say,
ah, come on, potential competition, no.
In the internet age, I think it's almost crazy
to go and dismiss potential competition
because if you don't believe in that,
what's your story for why Amazon doesn't raise prices?
We think that Amazon would remain the only Amazon
if they doubled its prices.
Why would they double them?
We really think the demand elasticity is that high
that Amazon would actually lose money if they doubled
their prices today.
Seems like they could totally get away with it.
And there's plenty of other firms
that basically work the same way, right?
Plenty of other famous internet firms like Netflix.
So if Netflix were to suddenly greatly increase its prices,
that's why I'm not quite as sure that they don't have high demand
elasticity.
But it sort of seems like they could get away with more.
But Netflix probably is worried about making more Netflixes.
They don't want there to be other competitors.
And that is a reason to constantly be producing
more stuff and to keep prices at a reasonable level
so that customers are so happy they aren't looking around
for anything else.
So basically, offer a better feel
than anyone else on Earth thinks they can make a profit at.
And then you've got a winning business model.
All right, so what can we do?
Well, there's several different approaches
to potential competition.
Let's start with contestability.
Contestability was a model that became big during the late 70s
when economists were talking about deregulating airlines.
And there was the idea of, look, even if there's only one
airline servicing a certain regional airport,
there's a lot of airlines in the world.
So if the one airline that's there starts raising its prices,
this will go into track entry.
And that will prevent them from doing so.
So subsequently, we pointed out this is probably
exaggerated, although the basic point of if an airline is
permanently really profitable in an area,
then they're likely to go and get some other firm that
wants to go there.
But it may not happen that quickly.
People put a lot of points about how planes can
move around really easily.
So yeah, you can move the planes around really easily.
But you're working on the contracts
to get access to the terminal and things like that.
That's probably not going to happen.
Anyway, so the basic set of contestability models is this.
First, you've got an incumbent firm that sets its price.
So normally, you call it P sub i.
So that's the price of the incumbent.
And then a potential entrant looks at the mark
and decides whether he wants to enter.
And if he enters, then the entrant sets the price.
And then customers are scammed.
And if he does enter, then his price is called PE.
And then consumers just buy from whoever
sells at the cheaper price.
Simple point.
OK.
All right, so what's going to happen?
Well, suppose that we got total cost is just
equal to B times quantity.
And then we can set this up.
So if total cost is just B times quantity,
then marginal cost looks like what?
What is marginal cost if total cost equals BQ?
The partial derivative of cost with respect to Q, which is?
B.
B.
So not that.
That total cost.
Yes, yes, yes.
Yeah, total cost is that.
But the derivative is that.
Yes.
Yes, so B. So that's your partial cost.
Partial cost equals B. All right.
OK, so what's going to happen?
Well, so suppose that the incumbent sets a price that
is greater than B. All right.
So if the incumbent sets a price greater than B,
then the entrant will come and take a look.
And he will see, here's the man curve here.
All right, so if the incumbent goes and sets a price here
greater than B, so that's PI.
Now, if you're the entrant, you have a really easy strategy
that you can apply, which will make you money for sure.
And well, so he's charging PI.
What do you want to charge?
P.
Yes, I know.
I have PI.
So PE equals PI minus an epsilon, minus a penny.
Charge the price one penny below the incumbent.
And then the result is that you steal the entire market
from him.
And the incumbent gets no money.
All right, so if the incumbent realizes
this is what's going to happen, then he
must find out and charge a lower price than that.
But then the entrant can go and charge
a price an epsilon below that.
So if you think it through, then you say, all right, well,
so let's see.
It's like, nope, the incumbent can never charge a price
over marginal cost.
Would the incumbent ever charge a price
that's less than marginal cost?
That's idiotic, right?
You're just losing money on everything.
Yes, you do get to run the market, but you lose money.
So if he's never going to charge a price over marginal cost,
never going to charge a price under marginal cost,
how about a charge of price exactly equal to marginal cost?
Is that a possible equilibrium?
And the answer is it is.
So the incumbent charges a price equal to marginal cost.
And then this does not provoke any entry.
And so the incumbent is a monopolist,
but he's a monopolist who acts exactly like a perfect event
here.
And that is the amazing result of the simple contestability
model.
In fact, the only Nash equilibrium
is one where the incumbent charges a price equal to b,
and then there's no entry.
So there it is.
Now, what's so amazing about this?
Well, did anyone ever have, say, an intermediate microeconomics
textbook that says that markets fail
unless there's perfect combination?
Did anyone have one?
There are many intermediate micro-techs that say this.
One side is the referee, for one.
And I went and just pointed out, look,
there's a list of all the statements in the book that
are incorrect.
So anyway, it is absolutely incorrect
to say, as a matter of economic theory, that markets fail,
there is a perfect competition.
Say, how about a contestable monopoly?
What does a contestable monopoly do?
It does exactly what a perfectly competitive industry
would have done.
Now you can say that's not realistic.
Then you say, yeah, well, perfect competition
isn't realistic either.
So it's, you know, it's, but if you're
saying that unless you have perfect competition,
then the market fails, no.
Here's another model, which is actually
about as different from perfect competition
as you can imagine, structurally.
It's like perfect competition, you
have an infinite number of firms.
Here we're down to one firm, but the one firm
acts like there's an infinite number of firms, which is,
I would say, a surprising result.
So it's possible, it is, but it's
possible that one firm could be just as
good as perfect competition.
Monopoly could work just like perfect competition.
Any of you ever thought about Amazon?
Like, is this world with Amazon, is this better or worse
than a world with like 1,000 different online sellers?
I don't know, I kind of like Amazon.
OK.
I never have to think about, who are these other firms,
and what's their deal, and what are they selling?
I have no idea what they're selling, like,
because Amazon, that's a great deal every time, practically.
Would there be an HMO for online sellers?
Yeah, there could be, yeah, that's possible.
Could be that.
Of course, then, do I have to go shop for 1,000 HMOs?
Or it would not be an HMO, it would be like a CMO,
a customer maintenance organization,
consumer maintenance organization.
All right, now, to be fair, it only
works exactly this way if the entering and the incumbent
have exactly the same cost curves.
So what if the entering actually has higher cost
than the incumbent?
Which is a pretty reasonable assumption,
because it explains why is the incumbent the incumbent.
No reason.
It doesn't sound very satisfying.
How about, why is the incumbent the incumbent?
Because he's better than everybody else.
That sounds like a pretty good reason.
Like, in a sporting event, if they're like the Unreturned
Champion, Muhammad Ali, if that's your story,
well, why do you think Muhammad Ali is the returning champion?
Well, there's no reason, just luck.
There's that story.
Or how about because he's the best?
So the greatest of all time?
Greatest, yeah, yeah, the greatest.
So that is another story.
Gee, you might be exaggerated, or of course,
you might not remain the greatest forever.
But still, a pretty good starting place
is, yeah, well, incumbents probably
are there for a good reason, namely, they're better.
So what happens then if we've got a marginal cost
curve here for the incumbent and a marginal cost
curve here for the entrant, and then here is demand?
And again, now here you might say, well,
maybe the incumbent will still just
have to charge a price equal to his own marginal cost.
But that's wrong.
Because here's the thing.
Suppose you're the incumbent, you're charging this price,
and then you get greedy.
You say, hey, let's raise the price by a unit.
Now, when you raise the price by a penny,
does that provoke entry?
No.
No, because you're still below the entrant's costs.
So even though you're making a profit,
he would be making a loss if he entered against you
at a price low enough to win your customers over,
so he doesn't want to do that.
And you could raise it more, raise it more,
raise it more, raise it more.
Each of these places, as you're raising the price,
you are, again, assuming that demand elasticity doesn't
kick in and mess things up for you,
you are actually getting more and more profit out of it.
And then finally, you get to within an epsilon of his costs.
And that is where you need to be.
And that is where you need to worry.
Because if you actually got to his costs,
then the entrant could go and enter,
and he would share the market with you,
and would be no worse off than you,
and would at least break even.
So again, the standard result here
is that if the incumbent has lower costs,
then the incumbent is going to set a price
equal to the marginal cost of the entrant, again,
minus an epsilon.
It's minus an epsilon.
It's minus, say, a penny.
So the incumbent price is just below the entrant's costs.
And then you will look at the end of the incumbent,
and is the incumbent making a profit?
Do you want to make a profit in equilibrium?
Absolutely.
Is there any deadweight loss from what
the incumbent is doing?
Tiniest.
Yeah, yeah, there is.
So actually, it's just the usual thing here,
where his profit will be this rectangle here.
And there'll be a deadweight loss triangle there.
Now, in the real world, you're probably
right that that triangle is small,
although the size depends upon the gap between the best
firm in the world and the second best firm in the world.
So in the same way that if you want to win a race,
how do you win a race?
By being faster than the second fastest racer.
And it's the same idea here.
How do you get the market?
By going and pricing just below the cost
of the second best competitor in the world,
second most efficient producer in the world.
And anyway, of course, again, like in the case of racing,
you probably know how small the gap between the first
and the second fastest person in the world is.
Sometimes measured in like hundredths of a second.
So in business, it may not be quite that close.
But still, how big is the gap?
Or can the gap reasonably be?
That is crucial.
Again, do you have a question over there?
Yes.
So if the incubant stand the price
at the cost of the entrant, then there is a weak dominance.
Yeah, yeah.
There is a weak dominance.
Yeah, yeah.
Yes, so there is weak dominance.
So there is an equilibrium where the entrant still doesn't
produce.
And then you make an infinitesimal amount
of extra money.
Although, of course, there's also
an equilibrium where the entrant enters.
And then you lose half your profits,
which is really bad, right?
Yes.
In that case, you probably want to stay
under a wider margin than that.
Yeah, yeah.
So you're actually like, so in the real world,
where things might bounce around all the time,
or you might make a mistake about the entrance costs,
then you want to have a bigger buffer.
Just like if you are a running champion,
if you know for sure how good the second best person is,
you can just train to be a little bit faster than him.
But if there's some uncertainty, then you
really want to be the champion.
Then you need to do even more than that
to give yourself a margin of error.
Right.
Makes a lot of sense.
All right, now what if there are fixed costs?
So what if we have a cost function that
looks like total cost is equal to A plus B times Q?
And you guys all remember what that cost function looks like?
So we're like, particularly like the associated average cost
function.
So total cost equals that.
Then average cost is going to be equal to A over Q plus B.
So basically, this means that a quantity of 0 is infinite.
Then it asymptotes down to B. So remember this.
That's what your average cost looks like.
All right, so now in here, we go and we put a demand curve here.
Now again, we can go back to the assumption
that both firms have identical costs, actually.
So we'll assume both firms have identical costs.
Right now, notice marginal cost is still going to be B.
So to differentiate that function,
the marginal cost will just be, which is not coincidentally,
the asymptote to which the average cost is going.
So that's going to be marginal cost.
So marginal cost over there.
All right, now here's the question.
If you suppose, so what will happen
if the incumbent goes and sets a price equal to marginal cost?
Well, let's see.
If you go and set a price equal to marginal cost, let's see.
So we've got PQ minus total cost equals profit.
And if you set your price equal to marginal cost,
then that would mean you're going to have your revenue will
be B times Q, and your cost will be A plus BQ.
And you may notice the two terms cancel.
BQs cancel.
And what does that leave the incumbent with?
Negative B profit.
So it means that you are not able to cover your fixed costs
at all, and then you are losing money.
So there is no longer going to have an equilibrium where
you charge a price when the incumbent charges
equal to marginal cost.
So if you were this incumbent, the natural thing to do
is, well, why don't I go and raise my price a little bit?
And if you do raise your price a little bit, what you find
is the incumbent still, the entrant still
stays out because he'll still lose money if he enters.
And you still lose money because you're still
below average cost.
But here's the good thing.
You're losing less money because the quantity is lower
and the price is higher.
And so you're going to be losing less money as a result.
So then you want to keep raising price until you get to here.
Price equals average cost.
And at that point, suppose that you
were to raise your price by a little bit more.
Then what would happen?
So if the incumbent has a steady price
equal to average cost, you raise it a little bit more
so you're there.
Then what would the entrant want to do?
Come in.
Then the entrant says, yeah, I'll
come in and go in between average cost
and I'll go there.
And that's the whole market for him.
So then this gives us a result that if we
have a contestable monopoly and there are fixed costs,
then the result is the market goes to a price of at a set
price equal to average cost.
Is there any deadweight cost when you set price
equal to average cost?
Remember, we talked about this in week one.
Yeah, there is.
As I draw that, you have to take out your microscope to see it.
Because let's see.
So here we are.
So basically, that will be your deadweight loss.
So those are all the units where you're
charging above marginal cost.
And as a result, they are not sold.
Because people only want to pay that marginal cost.
Of course, this is all assuming that you have to have
uniform pricing, right?
All right, now one other thing to note.
So when we say the equilibrium pricing with average cost,
you notice that here, actually, average cost or the demand
curve crosses average cost twice.
So does this mean we have two equilibria?
And what do you think about that equilibrium?
Is that an OK equilibrium?
Or that possible equilibrium?
Is this one OK?
Well, suppose the incumbent is pricing there.
What might you as a vendor want to do?
Price them for lower.
Yeah, or how about just price one penny less?
Price one less.
And notice, this is demand.
That's average cost.
So you are making a profit on every single unit.
So even though there likely is possible for the demand
curve to cross the average cost curve in multiple places,
the equilibrium in the testability model
is given by the lowest price of all the intersections.
Which again is a nice qualifying exam question.
So here is demand.
Here's the average cost curve.
Multiple crossing points.
How many of the equilibrium are there?
The answer is one.
One.
Take all the intersections and then find the lowest price,
the one that's most favorable to consumers.
Because in all this range here, actually, these
are all profitable from entrance.
And in fact, if you look closely,
you'll see that just as I branch geometrically,
this is actually probably a lot less profitable
than say that or that.
Because there we have more units and we have a bigger profit
per unit.
So if you increase quantity and per unit profits,
you will automatically increase profit.
So how do you feel about this?
Happy?
Energetic?
Feeling as good as you can at 9.43 in the evening
about the testability model?
Feeling as much affection as you can for any economic model?
I will say, so this is a model that
has gotten a lot of flack, and yet not only does it,
I think it explains a lot about Amazon or Netflix
or so many of the other amazing new companies that
have come into being in the last couple of decades,
but furthermore, it explains much more mundane things.
Like imagine that you get a letter home tonight saying
that a distant uncle has died in Hayes, Kansas,
and you are now the proud owner of the only grocery store
in Hayes, Kansas.
How many people look at this letter and go,
and I will now starve them into submission.
They will pay any price that I want or die.
Is that a reasonable reaction to finding out
that you own the only grocery store in a small town?
I have no proof that that is not a reasonable reaction,
but that seems like a ridiculous reaction to almost everyone.
And again, testability explains why.
So look, sure, you could go and jack up your prices a lot
the first day you take over management,
but how long is it going to be before someone else comes up
and says, you know, Joe's uncle is a terrible guy,
and we all hate him, and we hate what he's done to the store,
and now I'm going to have a store where things are
the way they're supposed to be.
Ack, what a good old Joe is running a grocery store.
And too bad Joe picked such a bad heir,
because his store is going to disappear.
No one wants to shop there anymore.
And if you just look at how many monopolies
there are in the real world, if you wanted to go and spend,
imagine that you are the car.
So you are on campus, and you want to get a tailor.
So you get a tailor within walking distance.
So I recommend the one at the University Mall.
So very high quality work, a no, a positive attitude,
can you have it done today?
All right, great.
So anyway, is this Taylor monopoly?
In some sense, but does it act like a monopoly
that you would see in a Steven Seagal movie or something
like this?
Right, no, it doesn't seem like it does.
Because they know, if we don't make people happy,
then there are other places that could provide the service,
even though they are invisible.
So this is another great example of the invisible hand.
These are the firms that don't exist that still
have great power in the world.
These are the non-existent, yet greatly influential firms.
If that sounds mystical, it's because you have not
understood the argument.
Once you understand the argument,
of course non-existent things can control our destinies.
It makes perfect sense.
Because non-existent things do not mean never-existent things.
They are things that could exist if conditions change,
which can totally change behavior.
All right, that is fixed costs.
Then we get to another fun case, the case of the sunk cost.
What is a sunk cost?
Suppose there's a sunk cost of A followed by price decisions.
So remember, what's the difference
between a fixed cost and a sunk cost?
Sunk cost can't be found.
Yes, yes, you could recover your fixed cost.
So you could go and resell the factory and get your A back
if you decide you don't want the factory.
Sunk cost, on the other hand, you
have to burn the A to enter the industry, and then it's gone.
So if this occurs, in this case, the standard result
is that the first mover does act like a monopolist after all.
Because suppose I go and I burn my fixed costs.
So I sink a cost, and I'm here.
And at this point, I'm not going to leave just
because I'm losing money.
I'll only leave if the price falls below my marginal cost.
And if an entrant knows this, then he says, wait a second,
if I go in there and we compete, what will the two of us
dry, or we will both sink our costs,
drive the price down to?
We'll drive down the marginal cost.
So if I enter, this is not a way for me to steal his profit.
This is a way for me to lose A. So I don't want to do this.
So the pure strategy Nash equilibrium with sunk costs
is, again, that the entrant comes and acts
like a monopolist, and the entrant has no effect.
But we can tweak this revised version
and get back to a result that looks very much
like an instability.
What is the revised version?
The revised version is that we look at the mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium.
And here, imagine there's two firms,
and the first one says, you better not enter,
because I'm going to go and pay a subcost.
And then there'll be no point for you entering.
You'll just lose money.
And the other firm says, oh, really?
That's interesting, because I'm going to do it first.
And they say, oh, no, you won't.
Oh, yes, I will.
And you can imagine this argument saying, look.
Like, look, I'm crazy.
I do stuff like this all the time.
Well, that's what you want people to believe.
But I wasn't born yesterday, and I know you won't do it.
So imagine this argument between two firms.
Or, of course, it doesn't need to actually be an argument.
It could be two entrepreneurs, neither of whom
even knows of the other's existence,
thinking, maybe I should enter.
But then it could be just another guy like me
spending money on entering, or he's already doing it.
When I enter, I'm going to show up in the town.
And then I'm just going to lose money.
I'm going to be in the middle again.
So it could be that.
And so here we can go and set up the normal form.
So firms can either be in or out, in or out.
And if they both go in, then they both lose their subcost.
So that's a disaster for them.
And, of course, if they both stay out,
they both get nothing, 0, 0.
But then if one firm goes in and the other one goes out,
the one that goes in gets the monopoly profit,
and the other firm gets nothing.
And if you stay out and your opponent goes in, you get 0,
and your opponent gets monopoly profit.
All right, now when you take a look at this,
you'll see that we got two pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
So is minus A minus A an equilibrium?
No.
Is the one where both are doing as badly as possible
an equilibrium?
No.
No, so that's not an equilibrium.
Is 0, 0 an equilibrium?
No.
No, because if no firm is there, then either firm
could go and become the monopolist and wet there.
And by the way, is this one good for customers?
No.
No, that was terrible for customers.
So at least there's a monopolist getting rich out of us.
Yeah, because there's no firm at all.
So you don't get the product at all.
And that's terrible.
We'd rather have a monopoly supplier of food or no food.
I, for one, prefer a monopoly to no food at all.
But then if you look at these two,
and these two are both going to be perfectly nice and fine pure
strategy Nash equilibrium.
Now on the homework, you're going
to get to go and figure out whether there
is a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium.
Hint, there it is.
And then you're going to get to find out what it is.
So what is the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium?
But essentially, the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
means that at that point, due to randomness,
randomization, all four of these things sometimes happen.
So I mean, if there's two firms and say,
A and pi ever equals to make it really easy.
I don't think your homework doesn't make it that easy,
but we can make that easy.
Then 25 percent of the time,
there'll be two firms that are in and they drive prices down to
marginal cost and each firm is there saying,
why are you up to enter too?
I thought I was going to be the only one.
Like, why are you up to enter?
I thought you'd be the only one.
Then 25 percent of the time,
the firm one enters like,
I'm the only one here making money.
The other firms like, no,
why is it that we're in?
And over here, it's the other way around.
You don't enter, oh man,
the other guy's making money.
Then finally, this is the one where both sides are
so scared that neither enters.
For each side said, man,
I don't want to be stuck in that situation, losing money.
So, both firms hold back and the result is
the firm doesn't, there simply isn't a firm doing it.
Which also is a possibility.
Like, sometimes people use models like this for,
when do you want to build the first ski resort in
a developing area?
Right? And the idea is that if it's a developing area,
there still aren't enough people there to
actually make it profitable yet.
But if you can see the writing on the wall,
see the population is growing 10 percent a year,
then you might want to go and build
your ski resort 10 years before it's profitable,
so that you will be the incumbent ski lift or
you'll have a ski resort when
the population finally becomes sufficient.
And then you can have some years of
being the only firm there and charging high prices.
Of course, if the population is big enough,
eventually there will actually be room for
a second profitable ski resort.
All right. So, questions about this?
Everyone happy? So, this one,
if you're confused, not a problem,
because you get to de-confuse yourself on the line.
So, you said that's going to be,
which is perfect, right?
It would be boring to go and do all the problems
where you already perfectly understood at the beginning,
right? Worth the challenge.
So, mathematically it's not a hard problem,
but interpreting it may be a little harder.
Okay. So, questions.
Questions about sub-costs.
Again, the main lesson is that once you go and look at
the mixed strategy and equilibrium,
then the difference between how
the market works and fixed costs and
sub-costs is actually pretty minimal.
It's basically a difference between,
you have more variance with sub-costs,
but it's not actually overall worse for consumers.
All right. Okay.
So, last topic for this evening,
allocated versus productive and efficiency.
All right. Now, I mentioned this,
but worth reviewing.
So, let's go back to that monopoly diagram,
commercial cost, demand,
commercial revenue, monopoly price,
and then we have the deadweight loss triangle,
the trend deadweight loss triangle.
So, I think I mentioned,
when I was an undergraduate,
I must have seen a thousand of these triangles from
the blackboards and described in the most lurid terms.
Then there's a horrible deadweight loss triangle.
The triangles are coming for us.
These horrible triangles.
Oh my God. So, don't tell me that
free markets work when there are triangles out there.
What kind of a fool you take me for?
I've seen the triangles and if you're a fool,
you can't see these triangles too.
All right. Anyway. So, the description of,
like why exactly this is so horrible,
it was never all that clear.
But when I was in grad school,
I finally got to get a really good description from
Steve Landsberg in his chapter,
why taxes are bad, the logic of efficiency.
All right. So, here, just in case
your undergraduate teachers were as bad as mine, maybe.
Just in case, if they say you're here,
of course not, of course they're great.
But on the other hand,
they said, don't go to George Mason,
they're crazy there. Then, now you can see.
Now you'll see one of their many flaws.
All right. So, here is Landsberg's story.
All right. So, let's start with a really simple case
where we've got shirts where
there's an $18 marginal cost producing them,
and then you are willing to pay $20 for a shirt.
All right. And there's no taxes, let's start off with.
So, there's a point of competition.
So, you value a shirt for $20,
they're sold for $18, do you buy the shirt?
Sure. Right? And when you buy the shirt,
how much consumer surplus do you get?
Two dollars. And how much revenue does
the government get when the tax is zero?
Zero. All right. Now, suppose the government
goes and imposes a one cent tax.
Now, the price is $19.01.
Do you still buy the shirt?
Yes. Yes. What consumer surplus do you get?
$0.99.
$1.99. And how much tax revenue
does the government raise off of you?
One cent. One cent. All right.
Fine. The government puts a dollar tax.
How much consumer surplus do you get?
One. One. A dollar. How much tax revenue
does the government get? A dollar.
Government imposes a $1.99 tax on the shirt.
How much can you still buy?
Yes. Sure. And how much surplus do you get?
A penny. A penny. How much tax revenue
does the government get? $1.99.
All right. So, so far, this is so obvious,
you may wonder what the point is.
Then the government goes and imposes
a $2.01 tax.
The price is now $20.01.
Do you still buy?
No. No. How much consumer surplus do you get?
Zero. None. How much revenue
does the government raise?
Zero. None. And that's what
deadweight costs are all about.
So, as long as all the government doing,
doing is raising the, raising,
raising the tax without changing behavior,
it's just shifting the surplus from you to itself.
But if you raise it enough,
then the result is not that it shifts
even more from you to itself,
but that it destroys all of your surplus
and gets no surplus for itself.
And that's why taxes are bad in economic terms.
That's the whole problem.
And that's, and again, of course,
the same goes for, if this were a monopolist.
So if there's a monopolist that
we're going and starts up by
charging marginal cost and it gets no surplus,
you get it all, if it raises
the price on the unit that you're buying,
then it takes away more and more of your surplus,
you're getting less and less.
But then finally it reaches the breaking point
where it's beyond your willingness to pay.
And then you say, I don't want it anymore.
And then the firm gets nothing.
And that's the nature of
allocated efficiency and that's
what this triangle is all about.
This is all the surplus that is lost without it
being a loss to consumers without
being gained by the producers.
All right. So, questions.
Yes. How does that work with things like
syntaxes where you're on the books,
you're making it just to push people away from it?
Ah, yeah, yeah. So, like,
if it's something with a negative externality,
which is often the way that economists think about
syntaxes, although of course
the language suggests otherwise.
But anyway, if and if,
but if that's what's going on,
then the key thing is that there are
some bystanders who are actually
gaining by your non-consumption.
And so, again,
essentially the whole idea of
an efficient Mokovian tax is that you have to
consider the loss surplus to the consumers,
the gain surplus to the government,
and the gain surplus to
the bystanders who don't have to
breathe their smoke anymore or don't get
hit by your drunk drivers anymore or whatever.
So, that's the answer is.
So, when you count basically,
so when you count those people,
then again, it may be that you're
actually are increasing surplus by doing this.
Okay. All right.
Now, so last topic before we go,
there have been empirical efforts
to estimate these triangles.
And almost all of the empirical estimates
turn out to say that they are very small.
And that a whole generation of economists or
two generations were freaking out about triangles,
that turned out to be of
empirically negligible importance.
So, the first big paper on this was written by
a Chicago economist named Harberger.
And as a result, these are now
called Harberger triangles.
And he came up with an estimate that
if you added these all up for the whole economy.
And again, actually made a bunch of assumptions
that stacked it in favor
of thinking that these triangles are bad.
Like basically saying, well,
assume that there's cost-returns scale anywhere,
so there's never any actual cost
reason for there to be a monopoly.
Then he came up with a number of
the sum cost of all these,
American economies and like 0.1% GDP.
Are those just deadweight losses from monopoly
or deadweight losses from monopoly and taxation?
No, no, no, he was only doing monopoly.
Yeah, yes, that's right.
Oh yes, although of course the logic is exactly the same
for it, but yeah.
So, anyway, so he came up with this number
which was microscopic, right?
Like, so, and all out of whack with a bunch of
other problems that economists were working on
as well as a bunch of problems
that no economist cares about.
So, and he basically said, you know,
I like how all of you guys are really worried
about the triangles.
They're actually empirically of almost no importance,
so get over yourselves.
Now, as you might expect,
people didn't generally take the standing down
of their life's work as being validated.
And so there were a bunch of variations on this.
Some of them coming all the way down
to assume the entire economy is monopolized.
And then what can we get it up to?
Right, and in the end,
I think the pretty standard view was that
Harberger did in fact reach a pretty strong result.
And almost the only, like the most memorable
critique of Harberger came from Paul Samuelson
who just said, well, anything is as small
if you divide it by GDP.
So that was his big answer,
but of course he knew better than that
because, like, who spent more time on
deadweight costs of unemployment than Samuelson?
You know, like, there's a lot of things
that aren't small if you divide it by GDP.
Is the Great Depression small if you divide it by GDP?
No, so, you know, yes,
this was actually a greatly overbought problem.
So we'll stop here, and I'll see you next week.
