questions about the exam. Then I will take all questions about the materials for weeks one through six.
This is not your only time to ask questions. It is a time to ask questions. And then if we have no time,
then we will start with the week eight notes. Week eight will not be on the midterm, but time's a-wasting,
and this is a graduate class, so don't end early. All right, so in the last class, we were going over the
coordination game some more. Remember this is a classic case where you've got two strategies of left and right,
and we've got two equilibria of either everyone doing left or everyone doing right. So you certainly don't want
to have people driving on different sides of the road at the same time, because then you're going to get
accidents, but it's possible that everyone driving the left is worse for society than everyone driving the right,
for example, since most people are right-handed. Maybe it's actually safer to do it that way, so maybe the
American way is better than the British way, or it could be the other way around. What is clear is that it is
not good to combine the U.S. and British systems simultaneously on the same road, which is disastrous.
And I've taken lots of applications, so you can think about this as a story of language. Like, why don't we
all have our own language? Has anyone here ever invented a new language just for fun? I said, usually
they do poorly. I kind of do. I've come up with a new system of simplified spelling, which has not caught on
at all, even though it is obviously superior to what we do, which almost anything would be obviously superior
to what we do in English. Let's say we do this for language, as I mentioned, so culture more generally,
what is the correct distance for having a conversation? As long as you have the same idea about how close
together you should be, then you can have conversations of comfort. If you have different views on how
close you're supposed to be, then it can be very awkward. It of course could be clothing. How come no one
here is wearing a kimono? Why not? Why is that what we wear for jobs generally instead of suits? That seems
strange. Why do we wear suits at all? Isn't that an incredibly terrible kind of clothing for people to wear
during the summer in the South? And yet that's still normal, and that's what you're supposed to do.
So that could be there, say. And then it's been used for technology. Since there are many technologies
where you want to be using the same technologies of the people, if someone came up with a totally great
new operating system, you still might not want to use it because no one else is using it, and therefore
there's no software written for it. Every now and then someone does come up with a new operating system
and they try to get it going. Once in a while it takes off, but usually it falls flat. And then location.
So Paul Krugman to this day is bitter that his work on location has not been adequately appreciated.
You get to the point where you have a Nobel Prize and you sit around feeling like people adore you.
That's a problem we should all have. But anyway, the point is, look, why in the world do we need to have
the carpet production outside of Atlanta, Georgia? What is so special about that place that it needs
to happen there? And the best answer seems to be that you want to be there because all the other
carpet producers are there, and the costs are then going to be lower if you are in the same place
where you have the suppliers and the train workers and so on. But if you can move it to a different location,
if everyone can do a coordinated move, that might very well be a big improvement.
Again, just think about the city of Manhattan and why in the world have it there.
What a stupid place to have Manhattan. Why not go and put it in a better room with a better climate,
on a place where you're not constrained by an island for your space? These seem like obvious ways
of improving things, but not too likely to happen.
And again, when you talk about coordination games in the context of technology, as I mentioned,
usually we use this phrase of path dependence. There's nothing really new about this that's added on
to coordination, it's just extra vocabulary. But the idea is that the technology we use today
depends upon the technology that we're using yesterday, and the technology from yesterday
and from the day before that. And why? Because we are trying to coordinate, and the natural way
to coordinate is to just keep doing what we've been doing in the past.
You can imagine a coordinating equilibrium where we alternate every day.
Where, well, since we were speaking English yesterday, let's speak French today.
That could be a rule. And occasionally you will see things like this.
Like if you go to your friends, or you eat lunch with your friends a lot, a common rule would be,
well, we don't eat there today because we ate there yesterday.
So once in a while you do get this as a coordinating equilibrium.
Don't do what you just did, but more normally the equilibrium is keep doing what you just did.
And then probably the most famous example of path dependence in the whole history of technology
has a name, and that name is QWERTY.
And if you're wondering what that is, just visualize typing that on a keyboard,
and you will picture your finger moving along the second row, one key at a time.
Right? Anyone here use a non-standard keyboard?
Once in a while?
Yes, so I know German, so like...
It's got to be for typing in English, yes.
If you type in a totally different language, then...
We have the same alphabet, it's just different.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, so I have typed on a German keyboard, and yes.
So yes, you can go to Germany and still type on it, but it's hard.
Although now, you just press a key and then it switches it back to English.
And then when you're typing...
So the Z gets moved because Z is rare in English and common in German.
So this is probably the most famous example in the whole history of technology, of path dependence.
And again, the story about QWERTY anyway is that back in the old days,
keyboards had physical keys, and you needed to be careful that the keys did not jam.
How many people here have ever typed on an actual physical keyboard at some point?
Alright, so you've seen it.
So anyway, there's a row of keys, and if you do a key from the extreme left to the extreme right simultaneously,
they can cross and mess you up.
So the story is that the QWERTY keyboard was designed to actually prevent that.
But now, of course, have you ever had keys cross on a computer keyboard
where you press two simultaneously and the board jams?
Has that ever occurred? No, that would not normally occur.
That would be a very strange thing to happen.
I mean, there might be a video game where you pretend you're on an old-fashioned keyboard
and try to not cross the keys or something.
But anyway, that'd be weird.
And yet, we still use the same keyboard configuration that was established 100 years earlier
when these keys were first around.
And there are stories of people claiming that there's a better keyboard out there.
Which now that we don't have to worry about crossing keys would actually be far superior.
Now, important to remember, there's nothing about coordination games that tells us that we tend to go to the bad equilibrium.
It just says that you could be there.
What is a game that we've seen where you do tend to go to the bad equilibrium?
Prisoner of Salaam, yes, that's one where you should expect to be at the bad equilibrium.
This is not one where you should expect to be.
It just says, keep an open mind.
Maybe you're in the bad equilibrium and maybe there's something better.
Very different.
But anyway, if someone tells you that they're there and says,
look, this is the QWERTY keyboard, this is the superior Dvorak keyboard.
So, someone may tell you that and on the one hand it's reasonable to say,
well, given that people just want to use the same thing other people are using, that seems plausible.
On the other hand, you might want to go and say, well, who are you, person who says that this is the Dvorak keyboard?
Are you a Dvorak keyboard salesman, perhaps?
Or might you in fact be Admiral Dvorak himself?
Yes, the very man who was responsible for doing the studies claiming this keyboard was so great,
which were then apparently uncritically cited by people who wanted a good example of path dependence.
I'm a little puzzled by how they could not bother to check the author of the study,
so I'm not sure quite what's going on there.
Maybe he did the work and then he had someone else put their name on it.
I don't know what the story is.
But anyway, you might want to go and double check that.
So, in other words, it could very well be that when someone tells you that we're here and we ought to switch to here,
that they are doing what's called special pleading,
where they are trying to claim that what's good for them personally is actually good for society in general.
Like, would it all be better if we switched to Esperanto, right?
Usually this is going to be said by someone who is fluent in Esperanto.
It doesn't mean they're wrong, but it seems kind of suspicious that you would be saying that.
Yeah.
Okay.
And then there's another possibility, like plausible for language,
that maybe if we go back in time and change things and re-run history, that would be better.
But it could still be the case that it's so costly to do the switch that it's just not worth it.
So, suppose that to go from here to here, we have to pay a trillion dollar transition cost.
In that case, you might say, wow, it's going to take longer to recover that than the total cost savings,
because the human race will be extinct by then.
So, better off just sticking with the language that we have got.
Now, this example has been suggesting, has been debunked extensively.
So, there's two economists well known to GMU, Rodolfo Salibowicz,
where they said that the supposed evidence for the superiority or equality is just made up.
And it is striking.
So, a lot of these papers were done in the early 90s.
So, since then, you might think that if there were better keyboards out there, they would have happened,
because it has gotten really easy to turn any keyboard into any other keyboard.
I think that actually, if you right now, in five minutes, you could go to the Internet and download new drivers
and instantly convert your keyboard.
So, has anyone ever, anyone attempted to try this?
Has anyone tried?
They sell little mats.
I used to have a little mat with a German, and I would put it on top of my keyboard.
Right. Has any of you decided to do this?
So, you're doing this now?
No.
I'm not a German.
Oh, okay.
When you're actually in another country, where, again,
what would this model predict about what you're likely to do in another country?
Do that.
Yes.
When in Germany, do as the Germans do,
because then it's much easier just to conform to whatever they're doing.
Right.
Okay.
So, yes, and one of their big points in debunking was to say that the alleged scientific proof of the superiority of the Dvorak keyboard
came from the guy who invented it.
So, it's kind of funny to take that seriously.
I know. That sounds reasonable.
So, does this have implications for, like, Monopoly,
that maybe society wants a certain, like, they all want Windows, so that way you can all have Windows?
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, great point.
Yeah, actually, you're almost to, this is very close to the very next bullet point.
Okay.
Yes, but worth elaborating on.
All right.
So, when are these problems least likely?
So, how about if there's a small number of players?
Or Monopoly.
Right.
If there's a Monopoly, then you're unlikely to do that.
Or it could be there's a lot of players, but there's a few focal firms.
Like, there's a whole lot of Internet firms,
but if Google, Microsoft, and Amazon all get together at a press conference and say,
we are switching to some new system,
it is pretty likely that the rest of the computer world will follow the line.
Okay.
So, it is worth thinking about an alternate universe where there were ten different operating systems,
and imagine how many calls to regulation there would be saying that there's a cacophony of operating systems,
and we need government to go and standardize things, and the market's totally failed.
Right, so, you can visualize this world.
And then, let's see, how many of you guys are old enough to even remember the antitrust case against Microsoft?
Barely.
All right, so, you guys are falling or paying attention to antitrust news from a young age, I guess.
Or positive.
Remember means you have to actually remember what was happening.
It's not like you haven't heard about it later on.
All right, so, I should specify what it truly means to remember something.
You have to have been there.
Do I remember World War II?
No, I do not.
I don't remember World War II, although I know a lot about it, which I've read in books.
All right, anyway.
So, there was a case where Microsoft was under years of antitrust scrutiny for the Windows operating system, right,
and a lot of complaints about how they were monopolizing things.
And the striking thing about it was that if there had been a bunch of different operating systems,
then they would be suing Microsoft, but people might be complaining for totally different reasons.
All right.
Now, some of the most amusing remedies that were suggested for Microsoft.
So, back then there was a big issue that Microsoft did something really bad,
which is they built a browser to compete with the pre-existing monopoly browser, which anyone remember the name?
Netscape.
So, there was Netscape, which had a very dominant market share,
and then Microsoft built into its existing Windows operating system the Internet Explorer browser to compete.
Best browser.
Yes. Yes.
All right.
So, Internet Explorer.
And then one of the proposed remedies that was suggested, which I think Microsoft refused,
is they said, look, we'll settle this case if you just agree to delete the icon, not the browser itself.
They wanted them to delete the icon so that in order to get actually access Internet Explorer,
you would have to go and fiddle with the preferences to recreate the icon.
So, this is the idea of a way that we go and make things better for consumers is to require people like my parents to install an icon.
So, again, it makes total sense that Netscape wanted to protect its monopoly, which, as you may have heard, it lost.
How is Internet Explorer doing these days?
Also not doing too well.
And then there is another firm that Microsoft, Microsoft itself, which is Google, right?
They did, you know, known for the search engine, but came along and offered a free browser.
All right.
So, by the way, one interesting thing to consider when you're ever thinking about predation is that there's almost no economic model that I've ever heard of
for companies that just give away stuff for free forever.
But this is a great deal of the Internet economy.
So, in a way, if you ever wanted a clearer case of predation, you think it would be that.
As to how in the world this is continuing, the obvious story is they're getting advertising revenue and that the customers are not, you know,
the customers are just different people than you think they are.
You're not the customer.
The customers are the people that are going and paying Google for advertisements and things like that.
Although, once you think about it that way, you say, rather than Google having a monopoly over search engines,
it has a small share of the market for advertising.
And then it's very unclear what the problem is supposed to be.
All right.
Okay.
So, questions?
Anyone wondering about this?
Anyone happy?
All right.
One of my favorite stories of coordination is when Bill Clinton had one of his people on trial for perjury or, you know, perjury or obstruction of justice.
He was an obstruction of justice.
There was a juror who showed up every day in a storage ranking uniform, and this was news.
This news was almost as big as the news about the trial itself.
So, again, because it was not, of course, Clinton on trial.
It was one of his underlings, a far underling, who went to jail for him.
All right.
Okay.
So, people happy?
All right.
So, yes.
I mean, I understand probably you're very sad you won't be seeing me for three weeks after this, but still, we'll try to enjoy our time together.
What era of Star Trek uniform?
I believe it was the 1960s original.
Oh, the original one.
Yeah, that's from the original.
All right.
So, moving on.
All right.
So, now let's go look at a model of bargaining.
With bargaining, let's say that we've got two strategies here, hard and soft.
Hard and soft.
Obviously, we could have a continuum, but we can get most of the lessons just from thinking about there being just two bargaining strategies.
Okay.
And then, key point, if both players bargain hard, then there's no deal.
Right?
Like if both say, I want two-thirds of the surplus, then there's no deal.
Right?
On the other hand, if one bargains hard and one bargains soft, then the one who bargains hard gets a good deal, the one who bargains soft gets a bad deal.
Right?
And then, last of all, say they both bargain soft, but they reach a deal, and the sum payoffs are higher.
And why would you think that the sum payoffs from everyone being nice would be higher than from one person being aggressive and one being wimpy?
What might the intuition be?
Well, can you think about people who you know and with whom you deal amicably versus not so amicably?
You choose to deal with them more so.
Yeah.
This is not a repeated game.
So, I think about the experience of dealing with one purchase where it's amicable versus our bargains.
Getting a bad deal is better than proposing a good deal.
Yeah.
That's right.
Why would the sum payoffs here be better than the sum payoffs there?
Yeah.
Is it just because the deal is more pleasant?
Yeah, yeah, yes.
You don't burn up resources fighting with each other.
So, if there's a big dispute and someone makes a big deal about it, then you're suing them.
You may just burn up time, for example.
So, if everyone's soft, then it's like, oh, great.
All right, fine.
You were nice.
Whereas if one person bargains hard and another person bargains soft, then Barbara's like, I want this, and I want this, and I want this.
And the soft bargain's like, gee, really?
You have to have all those things?
Yes.
Uh-huh.
Uh-huh.
Yes.
All right.
So, you burn up some resources that way.
Okay.
All right.
Now, notice.
So, here we've got our two-tier strategy in hash equilibrium, right?
But we also have a mixed strategy in hash equilibrium.
And, again, since I've set this up as a totally symmetric game, then a general good guess
at everything symmetric is that there's two possibilities.
It is that the mixed strategy in hash equilibrium will be?
Yeah, 1-half, 1-half, or 0.5, 0.5, 0.5.
All right, so 0.5, 0.5.
All right.
And so, this is a very interesting one.
So, one thing is that if you plug in some numbers, you notice that it's stable.
What does it mean?
Well, you'll see that if you go up to 51% hard, then there's a higher expected payoff for playing soft.
If you go down to 49% hard, then there's a higher payoff to playing hard.
All right.
So, it's stable in that if you deviate a little bit from the equilibrium, then people want to switch to the opposite.
And that drives you back to this mixed strategy
and Nash equilibrium.
A lot of people like a physical metaphor.
So suppose that we've got a bunch of mountains here,
and we put a ball perfectly at the top.
It's exactly balanced at the top.
Is that an equilibrium?
Yes.
Sure.
Is it a stable equilibrium?
No, because if the ball goes a little to the left,
a little bit right, you fall down to the valley.
On the other hand, suppose we've got a ball down there.
Is that an equilibrium?
Yes.
Is that a stable equilibrium?
Yes.
Because if you happen to get blown a little bit left
or right, you tend to go right back to where you started.
Of course, this doesn't mean that a really big gust
couldn't blow you to something totally different.
But stability is about local stability.
If you just move a little bit either way,
you tend to go back or not.
This is a physical metaphor for equilibrium,
which is of some use.
If you're used to thinking about physical objects,
then that's a useful metaphor.
On the other hand, if you just don't like doing that,
then it's just going to confuse you more.
Now, the intuition about this mixed strategy
and extra equilibrium is that in equilibrium,
both strategies are equally good.
So the hard strategy is better if you
happen to bump into a soft bargainer,
but it's worse if you happen to bump into a hard bargainer.
The soft bargaining strategy is better
if you happen to bump into another soft bargainer.
You bump into a hard bargainer, then you've got a problem.
But still, it's better than bumping
into the hard bargainer with a hard strategy,
where you get nothing at all.
Selenberg had a line where he says,
don't mistake a hard bargainer for a good bargainer.
Again, in the model, hard bargainers are, in fact,
not worse.
They're just mediocre.
It's nothing special.
And again, sort of the Donald Trump style
art of the deal, where there's a whole lot of advice saying,
be a hard bargainer.
This is not, in fact, if it were as easy as that,
then everybody would do it.
And of course, if it is, and if that's
what everybody were like, then there'd be no deal.
So how can that be great?
You might say, well, you want everyone to think
of you as a hard bargainer.
Even that is not clear, as long as people have other options.
So if you're the only possible partner in the world,
then you might want the reputation as a hard bargainer.
Then people will just commission it to you without a fight
because they know it's helpless.
But if they can just say, hey, I don't
want to deal with a person that would write a book like this.
Of course, the marketing of the book itself is contradictory.
If you really believed in the strategy of art of the deal,
you'd be selling the book for $100,000 a copy.
And just saying, hey, this is what you have to pay for
by great advice.
There's no better advice than this than any other book.
So if you don't want it, too bad.
You've got to pay if you want it.
So and yet, the book, of course, is price to sell.
Yes?
You could build a reputation as a hard bargainer
and just give people good deals.
And they'll think that they got one wrong
and they want to make the deal.
There is that possibility as well.
Yet, of course, if they really think
they're not going to get a good deal for you,
they won't even want to listen to your sales pitch.
So you don't want it to be too extreme.
So we're not doing any psychology yet.
My personal view is that probably hard bargaining
is overused in general.
And we're not actually at the mixed strategy
in Nash equilibrium.
And I've just seen too many people fighting
for no good reason.
Where it's like, well, gee, why don't you just
go and cooperate with people?
Wouldn't that be easier?
So I know a lot more cases of people
who have ruined relationships while sticking
to some stupid principle no one else ever heard of.
On the theory that other people are trying to exploit them.
And it's like, look, don't they understand this is the rule?
I've never heard of this rule before.
Probably the people you're mad at haven't heard of it either.
So that's just my personal view of things
that I've got.
We're not presenting any evidence here of this.
But in general, part of my general view
is that we have a bunch of emotions which perhaps
were functional when we were cavemen,
but are now highly dysfunctional, such as rage.
It's like, look, in general, if you just turn your rage down
to one on a scale from 0 to 10, you
would have a more successful life overall.
And yet most people are up at a three or a four.
How often has rage actually accomplished anything for you?
Maybe you can come up.
So no doubt you can come up with some example or other.
But just think about all the times
that your rage has actually caused trouble for you
and achieved nothing.
Or it could be counterproductive.
You've made enemies.
So you lost a deal and you also lost this deal
and you also destroyed the relationship on top of it.
But that's nothing to worry about right now.
Now, this mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is not first best.
First best would be to always be there.
That's first best.
Always be at the outcome that maximizes the sum of payoffs.
But the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
only gives you that outcome 25% of the time.
So it's not terrible.
And as that outcome gets worse and worse,
if we're talking about we both starved to death,
then the probability of that happening
gets smaller and smaller.
And remember, since you only get there
if both people have played the hard strategy,
then if that outcome is really bad,
then it's going to be extremely unlikely that would ever occur.
That's balanced by the fact that when it happens,
it's a disaster.
So keep that in mind.
But again, so people like you to think
they're going to play hard.
But again, the problem is precisely
because this perception is value,
it's very common for people to not really
be as aggressive in bargaining as they say they'll be.
So I remember a couple of times my wife told someone,
I'll pay that not a penny more.
And then generally, so she says that.
But it's her, maybe you should believe her actually.
But other people don't know that.
And so this is not really all the, so people, oh my god,
she said wouldn't pay a penny more.
So well, then let's give her that exact deal.
Or there's no point.
I end up further and further into the discussion.
All right, now what's kind of nice about this model
is that when you do see two people failing to reach a deal
and it's clear that it's mutually beneficial,
it's tempting just to say they're both stupid, which
is a theory we should never dismiss.
You can spend a lot of time in economics,
but don't lose the basic juvenile theory
that people that screw up are idiots.
That's not always wrong.
But it does open up another possibility,
which is that there was something that was socially
unpleasant that, rare and nevertheless,
result from each person just trying
to advance their own interests in a reasonable way.
So that is a possibility.
So anyway, good enough.
And what is the possibility?
Really just bad luck.
So everyone's randomizing.
And then we happen to get in a situation
where both people randomly chose the outcomes which,
in combination, are bad for both of them.
All right.
OK, questions, questions.
I'm happy.
All right, so remember, our energy
is at a very high level despite all biology,
despite the time of day, despite whatever other work we have
done, because if we are here in this room,
there could only be one possible explanation.
No one studies economics for the money.
They study it for the love of the subject.
And therefore, it follows that we are delighted to be here
and are full of enthusiasm because this is the high point
of our week, correct?
Right, OK, good.
All right, now, this bargaining game
is better known as another game, better
known as the chicken game or also named
after two other birds, hock and dub, hock out game.
All right, now, the main change when people represent that game
is they'll usually go and instead of making it zero,
which sounds like the payoffs from just not getting
to a bargain, you'll go and do something like negative 10,
negative 10, showing that when everyone is belligerent
or when everyone is uncooperative,
then you get total and you get a disaster.
All right, so that, we also have slight variation.
But this is only in the interpretation.
This is not changing anything about the actual game.
All right, so again, but kind of then common to go and relabel.
Instead of Harkins off, we can go and relabel this
as war and peace, war and peace.
And then there's a new interpretation
of the same basic payoff structure, right?
Like, isn't the best world one where all countries are
at peace with each other?
Sounds good, right?
And isn't it a total disaster when countries
go to war with each other?
Yes?
So anyone read All Quiet in the Western Front?
Yes.
So now, geez, that's not a sight in high school anymore?
Terrible.
All right, it's one of the few good things
to cite in high school.
The graphic descriptions of World War I hospitals, right?
And the list of all the places a man can receive a wound.
All right?
It's almost a quote.
Almost a quote.
Yeah, so terrible.
All right, yes.
So it remains a line.
The hospital alone shows what war is.
Any case, so when there's a war, then there
is total devastation.
But if you are warlike and the other side abuses you,
then the usual story is that they give you great stuff,
and you don't actually have to fight them.
And then they're better off than if they had fought.
Although still, they are unhappy with getting ripped off.
But too bad.
Too bad.
So we have intuition.
So universal peace is usually beneficial,
but maybe it's not an equilibrium.
So maybe it's not an equilibrium.
And in fact, as drawn here, it's clearly not, right?
So the equilibrium there are war, peace, and peace, war.
Although that still gives us the optimistic story
that actual full-blown war never happens, right?
Because world war isn't in equilibrium either.
So the classic line in foreign policy is,
who will blink first?
Who will blink first?
And blinking is what?
War or peace?
Blinking is peace.
Blinking is like, OK, OK, OK, sorry.
Sorry.
Stop your Berlin airlift.
It's my mistake.
What Berlin airlift?
No, no, no.
What are you talking about?
That's just capitalist propaganda
that we were stopping your planes in the middle of that.
Never happened.
I don't know what you're talking about.
Of course.
Fly the planes you want.
Whatever.
So anyway, so all countries are peace loving.
Then there's incentive for one country
to become the aggressive one, and then
bully the other ones.
Now again, as I was saying, the more extremely bad
those world war payoffs are, the less likely
you are to get war.
And if an individual country's probability of playing war
falls like 1 in 1,000, then what is the probability
that you get two war plays simultaneously?
1 in a million, right?
So this means if that payoff gets bad enough,
the mixed strategy falls to a very low amount.
But it's still stable because each country
is deterred by this small but terrible possibility.
All right.
Now, you may actually be familiar with a theory
of foreign policy, according to which the reason why we've
had more or less little peace since 1945
is because those war war payoffs became totally terrible.
And there's even a special name for this theory,
which is a funny three letter name.
Mad.
Mad, yes.
Mad, which stands for mutually assured destruction.
So if those payoffs are negative trillion,
then the odds that there will ever be a nuclear war
is very low, which is a pretty comforting theory.
It says, look, all we need to go and make
sure the world stays at peace is that both sides have
weapons such that if both sides use them,
it would destroy mankind.
And of course, if you took this really seriously,
then you might have the view that you
should start going around giving nukes to your enemies.
So it's OK.
So at least 15 years ago, Tyler said
he'd be glad if Iran got nuclear weapons.
It would be great.
Sure.
He might even have said, I'd give them to him if I had them.
So this is no violation.
But he didn't do anything, obviously.
He just had the nuclear weapons.
I thought this was a bit odd.
And he did actually bite the bullet.
It was a good thing when Stalin got nuclear weapons.
And I'm like, crazy.
He's like, well, it all worked out.
Yeah.
So a lot of things that are really risky still work out,
like the time I blew up a mailbox with my friend
in eighth grade.
But nevertheless, I could have lost the,
not only could I have lost my fingers,
my friend became a famous concert pianist.
He lit gunpowder with a match.
All right, so look.
Isn't that also a federal offense?
It is a federal offense.
That's statute of limitations.
All right.
All right.
I'm going to get out of here.
All right, so anyway, that's the intuition behind that.
And it does give us an alternative interpretation
about why wars would occur.
And he just says, look, wars occur because of bad luck,
and not stupidity.
So in a normal history of World War I,
will be something along the lines of, God,
what a bunch of idiots they all were.
But this does say there's another story.
And the story just says, look, it was bad luck.
And they're like, yeah, I didn't say it.
How is it bad luck?
Well, there were a whole bunch of other very similar
conflicts to what happened before World War I.
And none of those led to World War.
Instead, in all of those, somebody blinked.
But if both sides are sitting there waiting for somebody
to blink, and then, well, we're going
to declare war in five minutes unless you give in.
Oh, we're declaring war in five minutes unless you give in.
OK, then.
Well, let's just let the clock tick.
Both sides say, when is he going to blink?
And then the alarm rings.
Oh my god!
Well, I guess we're going to war.
And we're killing each other.
So that's the story.
So anyway, just both sides happen
to be playing aggressively rather than sheer stupidity.
All right, now, again, of course,
the more you know about these wars,
the more you can actually say about this.
So if you have a lot of details about it,
now, I'd say the more details I know,
the less inclined I am to just say it was just bad luck.
And the more inclined to, thank god, what idiots they were.
And so much idiocy to go around.
In particular, just think about how many monarchs
lost their thrones or their lives over this.
It's like, look, I can't just back down here.
Yeah, I think you can.
Just back down.
It's not going to be that bad.
It's like, I'll be overthrown.
I don't think so.
Why don't you just go and try a different strategy?
So if I were the czar, for example,
rather than fight World War I, I would have just
got my most trusted men, the secret police.
And so here's a list of all the hawks.
Arrest them and kill them tonight.
And then the next day you wake up.
You say, we've made peace with Germany.
And there's a whole bunch of traitors
who are trying, who are conspiring with our enemies
to destroy our country.
This type of thing has been done before.
It's worked very nicely several times.
Doesn't get a lot of attention.
Of course, I'm not in this position.
But I was like, you just go and kill all the war mongers
in your country?
Not all of them, just the ones that are actually
in a position to do something about it.
So now, all of this is just based upon a single-shot game.
What about repeated play?
Well, pretty obviously, with repeated play,
can we make peace work?
Is it possible, at least?
Totally possible.
And what is the key parameter for whether or not
repeated play will be enough to give you cooperation?
It's got a nice Greek name.
What do we call it?
Not alpha.
Beta.
Yes, beta, the discount factor.
All right, so I don't know why it's beta.
But anyway, it's beta.
So yeah, if you've got beta equals 1,
then you can always sustain cooperation, right?
Because then you could do a trigger strategy where you say,
look, we always play peace.
But if someone ever plays war, then for the rest of time,
the person that played war plays peace,
and the other side plays war.
And then you just need to work out,
what happens if we both betray?
And then, let's see.
Then maybe you alternate forevermore, something like that.
Anyway, you can work that all out.
And you remember, so basically what you're doing
is you're going to be comparing the infinite sum of t
equals 0 to infinity of 4 raised to the beta times t.
And seeing whether that's going to be greater than or equal
to the payoff that you get from betrayal,
from playing war, which would be 5,
and then plus infinite sum of t equals 1
to infinity of whatever the punishment is.
So my proposed one, say, would be 1 raised to the beta.
You can work through that.
You can see that it would be very easy for peace
to be in equilibrium there.
It's like, look, I feel like we have a nice peace here.
But if you ever betray me, then there's
going to be war forever.
And it's going to be war that is disadvantageous to you.
We were going to be the enemy.
And you will be treated as the enemy.
You will be ostracized or what have you.
All right, but there is the possibility
countries just try to build up a reputation for aggressiveness.
Remember what I was telling you about that TELEC experiment
where you can change your partner
to the prisoner of Suleiman?
So again, there's also the possibility,
what about a world where you are glued to your partner?
Or imagine a world where first of all,
there's like five people who are hand-picked.
And they get to go and write down their strategies
for the next 100 turns in advance.
And then they get paired up with other people
who have to move second.
And then maybe those people who are hand-picked
will just say, war, war, war for 100 turns.
And then when that period ends, people are like, man,
the guy's played war for 100 turns.
So I think that he's probably going to keep playing war.
So you might want to do that.
So remember I told you at Genghis Khan,
if a city doesn't immediately surrender,
does it kill everyone in the city and destroy the city?
All right, and then the next time you show up in a city
and say, we demand your immediate surrender,
people don't laugh at you.
Right, they say, oh.
Wait, well, what happens if we do surrender?
We've seen examples of that occurring.
So you don't want to go and massacre everyone when they do
surrender, because then that's bad for business.
But kill everyone when they don't surrender,
and spare everyone when they do.
That one's pretty good.
All right, and now we get to turn
to one of the greatest abuses of game theory
in the history of philosophy, the case of Thomas Hobbes'
Leviathan.
All right, so you guys have all heard of Thomas Hobbes?
All right, yes, so in Leviathan, Hobbes
describes the state of nature in very bleak terms.
And he says that this is not a caricature.
This is, well, there's only a few pages
where he talks about it.
So you can read all the pages and see I am not unfairly
describing what he says.
And so what he says is, look, if two strangers meet
in the forest, they will try to kill each other.
Will.
Right, why?
It says, well, look, first of all, because each one is going to see that the other one
has some stuff they want to take, and so you want to kill them for that.
And then furthermore, even if they don't have any stuff that you want, you'll kill them
preemptively.
It's like, hey, I don't know whether you're going to try to kill me, so I'll immediately
try to kill you.
And the other side says, hey, I had exactly the same idea.
All right.
So now, this is very strange in that most people read Hobbes there, and rather than
saying, who is this lunatic, they normally say, wow, he's a precursor of modern game
theory, and who understood the prisoner's dilemma.
All right.
Now, it's true that the game that he applies to strangers meeting in the forest does sound
like a prisoner's dilemma, because he says they will always turn to violence.
But does that sound like a remotely plausible description of two strangers meeting in a
forest as like automatic violence?
Right.
And we need to look, is there any downside of immediately attacking a stranger?
Can you think of one?
Like getting arrested.
No, no, no.
This is the state of nature.
There's no government.
It's just like, I'm all by myself, and I meet you, you're all by yourself.
Is it clearly prudent to try to murder you on sight?
Yes, back there.
Yeah, so maybe this weapon, so how does that help you, though?
So yeah, well, maybe the next person might be even worse than me.
Still seems maybe I should kill you.
But you're on the right track.
Has anyone here ever fought another human being?
All right.
So what can go wrong?
You can lose.
You can lose.
But, well, therefore, they're just going to kill you anyway, so what was the problem?
So what do you have to lose?
Even if there's a low probability of them cooperating, you attacking them makes that
probability.
Yeah, how about that?
Even if they're likely to find you, you don't need to move that probability to a certainty.
That's dumb.
It's like, why not give it a chance and see whether they want to kill you?
So you're like, are you going to kill me?
Just keep an eye on them.
It's one thing to say trust to verify, but for murder on sight, it's a very reasonable
strategy to deal with other people.
Totally salvagely speaking.
So would another possibility be like, I'll cooperate with you or do whatever you want
as long as you don't kill me?
Yeah, that's a very soft one.
Yeah, you could try that.
So have you ever won a fight?
So imagine you've won a fight.
Now, what's the probability of that?
Usually not, usually you come away injured.
So imagine that you kill another person, but you break your pinky finger doing it.
Even that, it's like, well, wait a second.
If we could just work this out, I wouldn't have a broken finger.
You could be really bad to have a broken finger or a broken hand.
Imagine that.
Think about how vulnerable you are against that.
I just realized, Tom was describing a world where all other kinds of violent crime are
completely impossible because everybody's willing to go to the death.
Yeah, well, not impossible, just like why would you ever stop short?
Right, because as I mentioned, you can't rob somebody, leave and rob them again tomorrow.
You have to kill them now.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, you don't have to, but there's no reason not to.
Once they got you beat, then put you down.
Right?
So you can't just go to the death.
You have to kill them now.
Yeah, yeah.
So you can't just go to the death.
You have to kill them now.
Yeah, yeah.
So there's, well, you don't have to, but there's no reason not to.
So Hobbes' logic, quote unquote, is the logic of prisoner's
lemma, where whether you're peaceful or violent,
it's in my interest to be violent,
and therefore both sides be violent,
and therefore violence will automatically occur.
But this seems like an incredibly obtuse description
of what happens when two people meet in a forest.
I think Hobbes was also talking about, though,
it's like people are very prone to,
like at least in his thought experiment,
that people are very prone to jealousy.
So to some extent, you can expect
people to be violent with you.
Probably, yeah, but how about also they're prone to cowardice?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, so it's, again, like there's another thing in Hobbes
is he'll note one human emotion and then
deduce how everyone acts all the time.
He's like, you know what?
There are multiple human emotions.
Have you ever heard of any of these other ones?
Let me just, let's give a list.
Yes, there's jealousy.
There's also fear and love, and there's loneliness.
And like we could just go on and on.
So I think there is a popular theory that Hobbes
was a severe Asperger's case, which, well, can you read it?
Maybe.
Yeah, now, what would be a much more reasonable game
to invoke when describing Hobbes' situation?
So not to make his conclusion justified,
the prisoner's dilemma is something
like that is what you need to get to his conclusion.
But what seems like a much more reasonable description
of the situation?
It seems a lot more like that one, right?
Like two people meet in the forest.
Like the best thing for both, like the best thing on balance
is for them to just keep the peace.
It's true that if you can scare the other person,
then maybe you can go and make them give you some stuff
and then without a fight.
But if you both fight, then that's
going to be a really bad outcome for both sides.
I mean, even if one person is a lot bigger and stronger
than the other one, in the process of murdering
the weaker person, maybe they'll scratch you on your face
and that will hurt.
Whereas if you could just scare them
so that they give you half their food,
wouldn't that be better than having a giant scratch
in there on your face as you throttle the life out
of this person?
Maybe I'm just selfishly speaking.
It doesn't seem the case.
Now, I mean, I like this Hobbes thought experiment.
It's interesting because most people read it to claim
that he's obviously right.
And I say, what are you talking about?
This is crazy.
But then here's something else.
So how would you want to alter the thought experiment
to make hot and cold be plausible?
So imagine that you are on a desert island.
You're all by yourself.
And then another human being washes up.
The person, as they wash up, they are coughing up water.
They're totally vulnerable for the first five minutes.
So does it seem like a reasonable forecast
that every human being in the situation
will go and murder the person who is coughing up water
before they can get to their feet?
Does that sound like human beings
that you've ever heard of?
It's like, well, again, Hobbes might say, look,
how do you know this person isn't going to try to murder you
as soon as they get to their feet?
OK, I'm not sure, but it doesn't seem all that likely.
And what are some reasons why you might not
want to murder other people?
It's totally selfish reasons, sort.
Maybe they can help you with something you don't know.
Yeah, maybe they can help me.
I'm just incredibly lonely.
I'm almost suicidal with loneliness.
Aren't you comparing these human beings that
are in the state of nature according to Hobbes
to human beings that you know that are not in the state of nature?
What's more state of nature than you're
all alone in a desert island for the rest of your life
and one more person shows up?
Well, you're assuming that the person alone on the desert
island is acting as you think.
You're referring to the people you know,
how the person alone on the desert island would act.
Well, of course, that's what Hobbes has to do, too.
So you could say that if people were in a state of nature,
they'd have totally different emotions
than all the human beings we know have.
That's not very persuasive, although I guess it's possible.
Again, of course, when you put a little more into it,
then you realize, well, human babies can't even
arise that way.
You have to.
A baby cannot do it.
So everyone is raised by a parent or a guardian at first.
And so everyone at least has that kind of social connection.
There's no such thing as someone that raises themselves
from infancy, which tells you something
deep about human beings.
We're social on a very fundamental level.
So anyway, it seems highly unlikely
that you would go and try to murder the person when
they showed up.
And obviously, suppose that these were
two people of opposite genders.
Then can you even conceive of this murder occurring?
Seems absurd.
It's like, no.
A man's not going to murder the first woman who
shows up on the island.
And a woman's not going to murder the first man who
shows up on the island.
It's ridiculous.
So then you'll say, well, how extreme
is the alteration you have to insert into this thought
experiment before the preemptive murder would make sense?
So how about it's World War II, and you're
an American soldier, and a Japanese soldier washes up.
Do you murder him then?
Probably not.
Maybe for some reason.
Yeah.
I say it depends on how long you've been on the island.
You've been on the island for a week.
I think you probably murder him, especially
if you've seen combat already and you've already
killed some people.
If you're completely green, you're a paratrooper.
You've never done anything.
You're a soldier.
Just like you're a paratrooper, you've never killed anyone,
and you landed on the island.
Then, even then, I don't know what you do.
Yeah.
So we're assuming that he's on the island.
That American soldier, he's on the island by himself, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Yes, although that suggests another alteration.
If it's 20 American soldiers on the island
and a Japanese soldier washes up, do they kill him then?
Yes.
Well, probably.
Yeah.
You know what I mean?
Although, even there, it's like, look, if there's three,
I think they kill him.
If there's 100, then they might say,
we're not worried about this guy.
So he's going to say, hey, look, all right, you're here.
And you know what?
You've got a new job as the latrine digger.
You don't like it, then maybe we'll kill you.
So yeah.
If it's a Japanese soldier, though,
he'll pull the pen on the grenade
and you have it in his pocket all the time, though?
Yeah.
Yeah.
So there's that possible concern, of course.
Sorry, let's go check him.
Again, someone might say, well, he doesn't have a grenade now.
Maybe you'll build one.
Or maybe you'll start shoving people off the island
to sleep, or try to kill as many stab people in their sleep.
And how many people do you have to have on the island
before you start saying, eh, sounds far-fetched.
If there's three, then maybe you would go and kill all three
of them in your sleep.
And that sounds like a pretty good argument for killing him,
right?
At least persuasive.
I'm not saying good persuasive.
Anyway, it's persuasive argument for killing him.
It's like, well, how do we know what this guy's like?
Say, well, maybe he's nice.
Yeah, maybe.
You're like, there's only three of us.
We can't watch him all the time, so there's a problem.
Yeah.
The example of a Japanese soldier and an American soldier
washing their feet together, we know they're trying to kill him,
because that's the exact setup to King Kong's skull.
Ah, of course, of course.
We have proof.
Yes, we have cinematographic proof.
Yeah, there's that.
Anyway, you'll say, well, if you were writing the script,
if the guy's been on the island for very long,
that's when people start saying, he's not going to kill him.
I just don't believe it.
He's going to end me like, well, he's like,
well, maybe he'll kill me.
I'm so lonely.
I'm so bored.
I hate this so much.
I'd rather that he kill me than I
have to be here alone the rest of my life.
So anyway, Hobbes, not psychologically perceptive
at all, is a recursive game theory,
but misapplying one game to a totally applicable situation.
But still, again, why are people so eager to give him
credit for this?
It is just the idea of early famous philosophers
must be right about stuff, which is a very silly assumption,
given that they generally contradict each other anyway.
So I guess there is the real fan will just say, oh, that's
just what you think.
You think they contradict each other,
but if you would spend 30 years reading them and desperately
try to reconcile everything they said,
you'd realize they all agree with each other.
Yeah, that sounds more like just reading them a couple times
for literal content would be better than spending 30 years
trying to convince yourself that it's all fundamentally
the same idea.
Right now, while we can further think about this,
we've also got a good story about why things are not worse.
So in the world of not only human societies,
but also animals, we have what we
call territory or property, which
is an important determinant of whether people will fight
or not fight in situations of conflict.
So for example, suppose people are more likely to play war
on their own territory, and this is generally known.
In this case, if you stumble on someone else's territory,
then you're going to run away, probably,
because you expected a fight.
And the net effect of this is that you
don't want to go and invade other people's territory,
because you expected a fight, so you're not
going to get much out of it.
So this is a general idea about how property or territory
works.
So you can see, for example, that changes in national
borders are very unusual.
And again, you might say, well, why can't the US just
go to Canada and say, look, Canada,
we want an extra three feet across the entire length
of the border, and it's nuclear war unless you give it to us.
So the US could try that tactic, but what
seems like a likely reaction from Canada
if they were given this strange ultimatum?
They would say they're sorry.
Yes, sorry, fella.
I don't know what this is all about,
but we're not giving you the three feet.
And precisely because you know that they're not
that likely to give in, even to a modest demand,
like, oh, we just want three feet.
You're three feet, 2,000 miles long, what's the big deal?
You don't even need it.
You don't use it.
And yet, there is a general perception
that if you went and asked a country for this,
they would fight.
And that is a reason not to even bother asking.
And the same thing in so many other situations,
like you just go up to your neighbor here and say,
give me some minor possession you have.
Give me your water thing.
And on the one hand, it's like, gee,
I don't want trouble with this person.
But on the other hand, you expect that a person will say,
hey, no, that's mine.
And if that is the focal point that people
will fight for their own stuff, then
it is reasonable for someone to not even try in the first place.
All right, so anyway, so this expectation
makes the threat to fight if attacked
more credible than the threat to fight if you resist it.
So of course, if there's an overwhelming amount of power,
then you just expect that the other side will give in.
But on the other hand, if it's only a modest difference,
then there is a concern the other side will fight back.
So I have a paper with Eric Hammer.
We go over a lot of different kinds of evidence
along these lines.
There's a really fun paper involving preschoolers.
And the deal with preschoolers is first,
they've got a rank for how tough the preschoolers are,
just like how physically big and strong the preschoolers are.
And in preschoolers, there are big differences.
There's the biggest preschooler, maybe a whole head taller
than the smallest one.
And then they go and have a list of the good toys
versus the bad toys.
And basically, what they show is that if you just hand out
the toys at random, there is a tendency for big, tough kids
to get the better toys.
But there's also a big predictive value
just doing who started with the good toy.
So on average, if you go and give the good toys
to the wimpy kids, to a high degree, they keep them.
And the big, tough kids don't actually successfully take
them, even though these kids are, you know,
big kids tend to be bullies, as we all know.
Never having been a big kid, I can
attest this is an absolute scientific fact.
So anyway, and the story there is
that even a big kid, when they see a little kid has it,
are likely to encounter resistance.
You know, like one of the surest ways to make a little kid cry
is to say, this is your candy bar now.
It's your candy bar.
Do whatever you want with it.
And then they're like, mine?
Then wait two minutes and say, give it.
I want it back.
And very likely, the child will cry.
Whereas, you could have told the child, look,
this is a candy bar.
You may hold it, but you may not eat it,
because it is my candy bar.
Absolutely.
Now, when you ask for it back, the kid may still complain,
but he's probably not going to burst into tears,
because the sense of violation of his territory,
of his property, is not there.
And of course, there are many other examples of this
that you can apply.
And this has nothing to do with any big philosophy of property.
So in our society, can you own another human being legally?
No.
And yet, one good way to provoke a fight with another person
is to go at a party and find out that someone
is there with someone else, and then ignore that fact.
Very blatant.
And someone says, oh, yeah, so that is Brian's wife.
You're like, I don't see his name written on her.
And then you go, and then go, and then go.
And then just like, say, hey, baby.
All right, so that is very likely to provoke a fight.
In our society, it's like, well, that's
because there's a legal marriage contract.
No, it's not.
It's like, it could just be a girlfriend.
There's no legal status of girlfriend.
And yet, if you act like that is this relation that
doesn't exist, you could be beaten.
That is a good way to provoke a fight.
And of course, not limited to men fighting over this.
So keep your hands off my man.
Wait a second.
You're a man.
Are you an advocate of slavery?
Or are you like, what is this system here?
Shut up.
That's not what we're about.
Hands off my man.
Stay away.
All right, so stay away from my sister.
That's my sister.
I decide whether people talk to my sister.
You do?
Again, this is, of course, not recognized by the legal system.
And yet, if you were to pretend white people don't
have these feelings, this could end pretty badly for you.
I'm only a messenger.
I'm not responsible for this.
I've never threatened anyone with any of these accounts.
And this brings us to the heart of the Vichy-Liric-Hammer,
which is black markets.
So there are, so let's see, what's the,
so there's a book by Cass Sunstein and co-author Stephen
Holmes, where they say that all property comes from government.
And when I met him, I said, how about black market property?
That, first of all, is not recognized by the government.
In fact, governments usually say it's illegal.
And yet, what is a really good way
to get a drug dealer to try to kill you?
Take his stash.
Take his stash.
That's right.
It's like, so that's interesting.
So you were saying, look, the law
doesn't recognize your stash, so I can take it if I want.
Well, I recognize it.
And now I'm going to kill you.
This is the time for you to be saying, oh my god, oh my god,
I'm so sorry.
It was totally your stash, not to be having a dispute
and to be being difficult.
Now again, so obviously, if government
were the sole source of property rights,
this whole thing would not make sense.
It would be very hard to have black markets.
And yet, black markets have been known to thrive.
So one of my undergraduate teachers
was a guy named Gregory Grossman,
who was the big expert on black markets in the Eastern Bloc.
By his estimate, the underground economy
added a full third to the Soviet economy.
And so yet, this is in a state where
private property and the means of production
is virtually illegal.
And yet, there's a massive economy going on.
And how is this possible?
It's because these notions of territory and property
are not just legal.
They're also very psychologically rooted.
And because of the psychology, it creates focal points.
And those focal points lead to changes in behavior.
Because again, if there wasn't anything like this going on,
then consider these two scenarios.
One is you go and accidentally destroy $100,000
worth of a drug dealer's cocaine.
And then he says, you owe me $100,000.
You better get me, you better find me, you better pay me back.
There's that.
Or there could be a scenario where he just comes up to a total stranger and says, hey,
give me $100,000 or I'll kill you.
In terms of the incentives, those seem very similar.
But in terms of the focal points, they're very dissimilar.
The first one, there's a common understanding.
Oh my God, I went and destroyed his property and so now he and I both understand that I
owe him.
Whereas if someone just comes and tries to extort money out of you for no reason, that's
one where you're probably a lot more likely to go to the police.
Or of course there you can say, well, I can go and explain the situation, but look at
what we're just, I accidentally destroyed his cocaine.
Look, I'm not a drug dealer.
I've got nothing to do with this.
I just happen to be running my hose when it hit his cocaine.
I don't know.
So even there, it's probably going to lead to two very different scenarios.
Anyway, so interesting.
And again, in terms of how socially disruptive this is, remember there's a paper on preschoolers.
Is it normal to go to preschoolers and sit around telling them, if anyone tries to take
your stuff, you hit them?
Is that a normal thing we tell small children?
What do we actually propagandize kids to do with their stuff?
Share.
So why do we give propaganda to tell them to do stuff that is, what is human nature?
You don't normally do propaganda for human nature.
Things that come naturally.
You do propaganda for things that don't come naturally.
Because the thing that comes naturally is having a developed sense of territory and
property.
The main thing you might say that little kids don't have is the social intelligence to realize
that other people have the same feelings that they do.
Although again, they usually learn that pretty quickly because you try to take another kid's
stuff and then they cry or get mad or hit you.
So questions about that?
Everyone happy?
How did Susskind reply to your point about...
He immediately conceded the point.
Then I talked to another law professor who said, yeah, but the next day he'll forget
that he ever made the concession.
But it was still pretty good.
Better than what usually happens.
Most of the law professors especially are highly disputatious.
And so getting them to concede anything is pretty hard.
So questions about this?
Everybody happy?
All right.
Good.
All right.
So last topic for the exam.
Then seeking and lobbying.
All right.
So remember we already went and talked about two kinds of inefficiency in markets.
And then we first started talking about...
First started talking about a case where say, firm two here goes and charges a price above
its own marginal cost, which leads to this allocated inefficiency.
All right.
And then we talked about the second kind of inefficiency caused by a situation where it's
illegal for the low-cost firm to produce, most obviously.
So it's illegal for the more efficient firm to produce, in which case we also get, besides
the triangle, we get this trapezoid of productive inefficiency.
Now we're ready to go for a third kind of inefficiency, the least discussed of all.
We weren't totally sure.
So productive inefficiency has so fallen out of discussion that maybe actually the outcome
is actually close.
All right.
I need to get a rubber.
It hasn't fallen out because the estimates are small.
It falls out because economists, like most human beings, are subject to fads.
And they want to talk about what other people are talking about, even if what other people
are talking about isn't very important.
And it's a sad, empathetic commentary on academia that people are like this, even the numerate.
It's one thing for innumerate people to get focused on things that aren't very important,
but for supposedly numerate people to get focused on things that are important is particularly
ridiculous.
So of course, you have to be the change you want to see in the world and work on the topics
that are quantitatively important.
At the same time, in order to do that, you need to get a job.
So it's a tough balancing act, but that's what tenure is for.
Tenure is the time to finally become supernumerate in what problems you actually focus on.
Anyway.
Okay.
So a last form of inefficiency has a bunch of different names.
So sometimes it's called lobbying inefficiency or probably most commonly rent-seeking.
And there's about five other names that I won't bother you with directly on productive
activities.
A bunch of others.
So anyway, this stuff arises when people use resources to transfer resources.
When you use resources to transfer resources.
All right.
Such as in lobbying, where when you lobby, you go and hire a team of lobbyists.
And what are you trying to get for yourselves?
Stuff.
Give me stuff because I hired a team of lobbyists.
Rent-seeking is the same idea.
Anything, anytime that you are trying to change the distribution of resources by spending
some resources, you are engaged in this.
Now a great example of this would be trying to lobby for monopoly privilege.
So suppose you are fighting to be the only company in a city allowed to sell cable television.
All right.
So you would go and hire your team of experts and lawyers and consultants and political
analysts and former and friends of people in power.
You assemble your dream team there.
And of course you pay them.
And their job is to get you that piece of paper saying that you're the only firm that
can do it.
Right.
Of course, you're payers.
You're likely to be doing the same thing.
All right.
So firms pressure the government to become the sole leader producer.
And the more that you spend, normally of course, the better your chances of getting your way
are.
All right.
So the nice metaphor of this comes from the game of tug of war.
Anyone ever play this game where there's a rope and there's mud in the center and two
teams try to pull the other side in?
All right.
So if there's people here.
There's a person one here.
There's a person two.
See why I'm nodding our heads.
And then there's a rope and then there's like another person over here on the other side.
And then there's a mud pile in there.
All right.
And if it's two versus two people against one, this guy's probably going to lose.
So he's going to get pulled in the mud.
But he might go and hire a helper.
And then maybe this side will hire a few more helpers.
And this side will hire a few more helpers.
All right.
And in the end, you can wind up burning a ton of resources in this contest, which is
like tug of war.
All right.
Only in the real world, normally, if you win, then you get the policy you want.
You get the favorite policy.
On the other side, winds up having wasted all this lobbying efforts trying to influence
policy even though the government did not listen.
Yes.
I remember only a week or two ago, someone was talking to me about how for all the money
the Koch family spent on politics, it's not that clear what policy changes they've been
able to affect, which might lead you to say that their policy is ineffective, or rather
the lobbying is ineffective.
Another story you could have is you should see what would have happened if we hadn't
done it.
So who knows what that would be.
So there's a whole lot of people who have their hands on the rope, all trying to go
and do it.
OK.
So anyway.
So and of course, if instead of mud, that was a molten lava pit, and people's hands
are tied to the rope so you can't just drop the rope and run away, then people would be
willing to put a lot more resources into hiring people for their team because it's a lot worse
to be pulled into molten lava than to just be pulled into some mud, right?
So and again, similarly, if there's a bigger prize handed out to whoever commits to the
government to get on their side, then naturally, people are going to put more resources in
to try and lobby the government to get on that side.
All right.
So this all makes sense.
Familiar?
Maybe.
Or edified, anyway.
You might be delighted at the intellectual understanding and yet horrified at the strategic
situation.
Horrified to know this is going on.
All right.
Now, Gordon Tullock, who did not actually use this phrase when I was speaking, so that
was Ann Krueger.
But anyway, so but Gordon Tullock actually had the idea before her.
So no, no, I don't think there's any evidence that she actually just stole the idea from
me, it's like she just came up with it independently, because Tullock's great article was published
in the Western Economic Journal.
Does that even exist anymore?
So, well, the answer is that it was used to name these economic inquiries.
Eventually, they realized, wait, Western Economic Journal sounds lame.
So let me call it Economic Inquiry, and that sounds cool.
All right, so just re-branding, but anyway.
So Tullock had this article, and probably, you know, Krueger never read it.
But the deep insight that Tullock had was this.
So you can think about this lobbying or rent-seeking as being an industry, a competitive industry
like any other.
You could invest in putting in more factories into your building, or more or better air
conditioning, or hiring a team of lobbyists, right?
And there's a standard logic about how firms allocate their investment, which is if you've
got one investment earning 5% and the other one earning 7%, what do you do with your resources?
Yes, you reallocate.
You reallocate until you've achieved a quality of the rate of return of the marginal dollar spent.
All right, and that is Tullock's story.
So he says, lobbying is earning 10%, everything else is earning 5%.
Then resources will flow into the lobbying industry until you reach the usual break-even point.
And everyone remembers how when we say zero profits in economics, why is it that this
doesn't mean that it's stupid to start a business if you're earning zero profits?
Yes?
Because economic profits include your opportunity cost.
Yes, yes.
Everyone remember this?
Economic profits are not the same as accounting profits.
Easily forgotten.
It's also one of the things that probably leads economists to think, or leads business
people to think economists are idiots.
Because we say profits are driven to zero.
It's like, we need profits that are driven to zero.
Why would anyone do anything if profits are zero?
Well, we're including the opportunity cost of interest as that.
Yes.
All right.
So anyway, so you expect new entry as long as you're earning any kind of special profit
in lobbying.
And this is actually very similar to this mixed strategy reasoning, which is if there's
any one thing that's, any one kind of investment that's doing better than others, then people
switch over to the one that's doing better or the one that's doing worse until we reestablish
a quality payoffs.
All right.
Now, so if firms keep going into this tug of war, or someone's going to arms race, well
once economic profits are zero, the same as net profits are zero, and if this is what
government is giving away, so this is the freebie that government is giving away, then
how much, what does lobbying have to equal in order to wipe out those profits?
The size of that rectangle.
Yes, it's got to be the whole rectangle.
If government is giving away a million dollar piece of paper, then you'd expect that people
keep fighting over it until on average they're breaking even.
And the way you break even is if the total expense that people are putting in equals
the total value.
All right.
So then this thing, which until now almost everyone's been calling producer surplus,
gets transformed into yet another kind of inefficiency.
It's turned into another dreaded inefficient geometric figure, and this one is called
a tallic rectangle.
A tallic rectangle looks exactly like a monopoly profit rectangle, but it's not monopoly profit.
It's waste.
It is waste.
All right.
And so we get this gruesome story of destruction from three different forms of inefficiency.
We've got the allocated inefficiency caused by price being greater than marginal cost.
We've got the productive inefficiency caused by having inefficiently high cost producers
produce.
And then we got the rent-seeking or lobbying inefficiency caused by competition to get
monopoly privilege.
All right.
So notice we start off with a situation where all of that is social surplus, and we end
up with that little tiny residual triangle.
Yes.
So it seems the lobbying inefficiency is also kind of like a negative inefficiency because
it's transferred to somebody else.
Well, yeah.
So of course, we could just say it's all inefficiency and not draw the distinction, but conventionally
we just go and distinguish these three different sources because we're seeing, so this inefficiency,
this is not caused by price being greater than marginal cost.
Right?
That's inefficiency, price being greater than marginal cost.
This is caused by a different route.
It's caused by people competing to affect the distribution of resources, burning resources
to do that.
Whereas here you're not burning resources to do it.
You just raise the price.
There's no actual expenditure of resources to go and achieve that waste.
Okay?
And if that ever happens, that is called full reticipation.
Full reticipation when there is so much fighting caused by the effort to control the distribution
of resources that it winds up burning up the whole thing.
Now notice, suppose there's 10 firms that all compete.
So is it every individual firm needs to spend that much or is it all the firms put together
need to spend that much to reach the zero profit condition?
All firms put together.
Right?
Because if every firm spent that, then actually you'd be spending the total value of the gain
for a 10% chance of getting it, which would be stupid.
Right?
So what this means is that the winner generally still is going to have a net profit, but then
there's going to be a bunch of losers that would have been better off if they hadn't
even tried.
And then the total social loss to all the lobbying is that triangle, or rather rectangle.
All right.
Now, so let's go a couple minutes over the break and then you'll still get your full
rate just for cohesion.
Okay.
Right, now, very commonly pointed out, the government could instead of awarding these
prizes through lobbying, they could just do it, hand it out to the highest bidder.
Right?
So why not just go and take bids to be the monopoly provider of cable television?
And then that rectangle will go to the treasury of the local government instead of just be
burned up, right?
It's a fight.
But Tullock was very clever in this paper.
And he said, look, suppose the government can go and make money just by creating, handing
out pieces of paper and then saying, let's have an auction on this piece of paper.
Well, this may lead, firms then may very well just bid to get this piece of paper.
But this activates a great slogan from a Mel Brooks movie, which is, it's good to be the
king.
It's very good to be the king.
So, and if the king can go and make tons of money just by putting his name on a piece
of paper and saying the king authorizes you to be the sole producer of X, then this gives
incentives for people to try to get which job?
Which job do you want in a world where the king can go and make money out of his back
pocket?
You want to be the king.
To be the king, right?
And let's see, does anyone have a history that people have fought over who's going to be
the king?
Yes.
Happens all the time, right?
Why?
Well, if you're the king, then you can go and, you know, like, you don't, earlier you
didn't literally have a license for anybody, but darn close.
Anyone who's a king, like, if you're the dictator, even a really dirt poor country, as long as
there's a million people in it, you're rich.
You just go and rob everyone in the country for a few bucks a year and then you have a
great life.
All right, so, like, standard thing.
Okay.
So, yeah, so anyway, so basically people get rich in politics, then they're going to pay
more in order to try to get control of it.
So this could mean that you fight, there's actual violence to get control of the government.
Could mean that there is lobbying for political office, so people pour resources into trying
to become a successful politician.
Right, Talek, who's a big student of classical China, likes talking about the classical Chinese
examination system, where to become a civil servant you have to pass it and get a good
score on a standardized test.
And the story tells us this.
Villages all over China looking around for kids that could go and get a great score on
the test.
And if they find that kid, the village pools money to go and hire him a great tutor.
And what subjects do you need to know to do well on these classical tests?
Confucius, the works of Confucius.
All right, so you hire a great Confucian scholar to go and train your village genius for a
decade.
And then, and of course, villages all over China are also hiring their Confucian scholars.
Right, and then you get a whole bunch of kids who are, have been training their whole life
for this examination.
And then they go to whatever the testing center is and they take the test.
And then what does every village expect if their kid wins?
What is that kid supposed to do for his own village if he wins?
Kickbacks.
Yeah, bring home all the pork.
Right, or whatever you call it in Chinese politics.
Whatever good stuff you're supposed to bring back, you bring back.
All right, and again, so there have been many people who have said, well, this is a great
system.
And Tao Leung's like, I don't think this is such a great system.
Basically, to take the smartest people in the country and have them devote their lives
to going and reading an ignorant dead man from thousands of years earlier.
Right, what do you really know exactly?
It's like, these are the right number of footsteps to take.
Right, that's science.
Science is footsteps.
So you get all the best minds in the country going and reading ancient books that are not
about science, not anything else.
Right, and then what do they do when they get the jobs?
Redistribution to their buddies.
So it doesn't seem like that could have assisted.
So anyway, so even in a dictatorship or a monarchy, the dictator can get rich by awarding
monopoly privileges, strengthens the incentive of upstarts or new entrants to stage a coup,
do a violent revolution, so on.
And again, so most cynics will note that it's very hard to find the revolution where the
revolutionaries don't then go and give themselves all the nice stuff the previous people had.
Right, so when the Tsar was overthrown, were the dachas distributed to the people of Russia?
No, they go to the high-ranking Communist Party members, who of course do have a whole
theory about why it's very important for all Russia for them to have dachas.
Right, and if you've read Orwell's Animal Farm, you know the theory.
Look, we need our rest if we're going to do our tough job.
If you've read Animal Farm, even if you haven't read it, reread it, it's so good.
So, one of the pigs says, we pigs are brain workers, comrades.
Surely you do not want to deny the farm the benefits of well-rested brain workers.
No, of course not.
Now, could repeat play fix this?
Theoretically, yes.
What can repeat play not solve in principle?
Principal repeat play can solve any problem.
It's possible.
It depends upon what the discount rates are.
In principle, imagine that we all live forever.
And every human being lives forever.
And then we have a system where if we ever
catch another human being doing anything uncooperative,
then that person is ostracized by the rest of society
for eternity.
That's one where repeat can go and get us
to a cooperative outcome if we've
got all the other information and everything else.
That's what we need.
So yeah, it's possible that repeat play could solve this.
But again, remember that repeat play doesn't have to do it.
So maybe firms are just bargaining really hard
to get a reputation for toughness.
Maybe every, so you can actually get greater than 100%
rent dissipation.
Every firm could go and spend 10 times as much on getting it
as it's worth to scare off other firms and say, look,
when we set our mind on getting a privilege,
we don't back down.
So you better back down next time.
So you can actually get really extreme equilibrium
where you burn up more than exists.
Anyway, the key thing to remember
is we've actually got three different kinds of inefficiency.
The triangle that gets so emphasized
for undergraduates especially, empirically,
is the least important.
The other stuff, certainly the productive inefficiency
trapezoid, almost never discussed.
And again, probably just because people have some a priori idea
of there's no way that productively inefficient firms
can stay in business.
How about if the government doesn't allow other people
to compete with them?
Can they stay in business?
How about if it is illegal to go and build a building
with more than two stories?
Will it then be the case that firms, that builders will go
and build buildings with 10 stories
because that's more productively efficient?
Of course not.
You just get your building torn down by the government
if you do it the way that is technologically better.
What good does that do you if the government just
knocks your building down?
So Alex Tabarrok has this great story of in India,
there is a building that has been built and knocked down
repeatedly.
Why?
Well, because the people on the land cannot get the permits
no matter what they do.
And the rent is so high in this area
that you can actually recoup all the building costs
if you can just legally stall the demolition for a few years.
So basically, they have a team of lawyers
and they've got a team of builders.
And every time it gets knocked down, basically the next day,
they've got the builders there to clear the rubble
and start building the building again.
And then in order to demolish it,
there's a three to five year process.
And while that's going on, the building
gets built and rented to people.
And they make back the costs of production.
And then it gets knocked over again.
And then it resumes.
So great system, right?
OK.
All right, so this is everything that we
need to know for the midterm.
Now we will go and take a 10 minute break.
And then we will turn to items three or two through four.
OK.
All right, so we finished week six.
And now we'll talk about the exam.
I'll tell you a bunch of bureaucratic things about it.
And then I'll take other questions
just about the bureaucratic parts.
And then we'll have another section
where I take actual substantive questions about what we learned.
So the exam.
First of all, general content.
So something like 50% from lecture, 30% from homework,
about 20% for readings.
Remember how there are readings for this class?
This is where we see whether you've in fact read
and understood them.
Very important point.
The exam is totally open book and note.
So you are free to bring any non-electronic materials
you want.
However, you may not use an electronic device of any kind,
even a calculator, because of the internet and the possibility
that someone is actually feeding you the answers.
So I realize that is pretty unlikely.
But nevertheless, it's just too hard.
When I first started teaching this,
it was just a theoretical possibility.
Now someone really could.
You could photograph the exam.
Someone could do it and then photograph it back.
And you could be transcribing it pretty quickly.
But if you were stuck on one or two questions,
it would be really easy.
You just move on and wait for your accomplice
to send you the correct answer.
So anyway, it's fully open book and note.
But this means that you are free to print off
your entire hard drive if you want.
You can bring a dictionary if you want.
So all this is perfectly fine.
So remember, you're only going to have 100 minutes
to do the exam.
So this is plenty of time for you
to double check something that you have forgotten in a panic.
It's not enough time for you to learn the material,
not enough time for you to read the papers.
That's just my guess.
Maybe you want to write one.
That's fine.
Let's see.
Now, other advice.
So what's the best way to study?
So there are now something like 17 old midterms
on the class web page.
So the best thing to do would be to take those old midterms
under time pressure.
That's the best way to practice is by doing.
So I have thought this for a long time.
But then I started reading Educational Psychology
and found out I was correct, namely
that merely rereading notes to yourself
does not actually teach you very much.
You need to actually do problems, working problems.
Because if you're reading notes, it's very easy to say, yes, yes,
of course, I understand.
Of course, it's also obvious, of course.
And then you're given a problem asking
you to apply it to the notes.
And that's where many people will flounder and say,
realize, wow, I don't think I know where to start.
So working problems is the best approach.
And the time pressure is important, too.
The fact that you can work problems successfully
given unlimited time doesn't mean you can actually
do it under test pressure.
So that's very good to do as well.
Let's see.
More general principles.
This is one that goes beyond this class,
but it's a great principle.
And it's called answer the question.
This might seem really obvious, especially given
how far you've gotten.
But I was just grading some homeworks today
from another class.
And, wow, most of them just didn't answer the question.
So for example, if there is a question that
says give an original example of a coordination game
and discuss how you could move from a worse
equilibrium to a better one, should you
begin by saying a coordination game
is a game with the following properties, blah, blah, blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah?
No.
No.
Because the question did not ask you
to explain what a coordination game is.
It asked you for an example.
So if the question says give a novel example of a coordination
game, what would be a great first sentence
for that question, for your response?
A novel example of a coordination game is?
Yes.
That's a wonderful, wonderful first sentence for your answer.
I know you're under test pressure.
You don't need to be eloquent.
But if you just get to the point immediately, this is great.
Now, I try to read every word students write.
But if you go and spend half your time not answering
the question, what are the odds that your answers
are going to be competitive with those of people
who got to the point?
It's just hard.
If you spend most of your energy giving me back story,
you're like, economics is a subject which we can.
With the sped scholastics.
And then, page after page, and then finally, oh, yeah,
what was the question again?
So don't do that.
And I'll even add in, how about answer the literal question?
The exact words, even better.
So once in a long while, someone answers a question
even more literally than I intended,
and I always give them credit.
Because I say, wow, they were even more literal
than I had expected.
But usually, the problem is people
don't answer a literal question.
Instead, they try to say, well, what
is the general spirit of this question?
And then they talk about the spirit.
And again, not good.
Because if someone answers the spirit of a question
while they've not answered the question,
this leaves me wondering, did the person
know the answer to the actual literal question?
So I do try to figure out whether you do or not.
But again, the easiest thing is just to remove all doubt.
Don't give me any room to wonder whether you
know, because you immediately did answer
an exactly literal question.
So if it says, discuss the reason for x
and give two examples.
So here's the reason for this.
Here's example one.
Here's example two.
Literally answered.
Done.
Great.
OK.
So that's very useful.
And then there's one other thing.
This is a intellectual failing that people generally
acquire in economics.
Almost no one has it until they come to economics.
And then many people never lose it.
So it's bad.
So again, I was just raising hallmarks
where there's some experienced economists, more advanced
than you, who still seem to not understand
questions that involve the real world.
So there's a question that says, give a real world
example of rent seeking.
That's kind of easy, but anyway.
So would a good answer then be saying,
assume that there is a widget company which produces
and it is seeking a monopoly privilege for widget
production.
Is that a good example of a real world example of rent seeking?
No.
Exactly.
So if you just make up something, or you invent numbers,
or you start saying, talk about the real world,
and then you say, well, assume zero transactions costs.
It's very hard to give people a rich credit
for answers like this, because again, what
could be a good real world example of rent seeking?
Just remember, just a few minutes ago before the break.
Comcast.
Comcast.
Yes.
All right, yes.
So Comcast, trying to do that.
Or the Chinese examination system.
Or just anything like that.
Of course, again, in general, if you give an original example,
that's a bit more convincing.
Usually, I will actually say, give an original example.
Because if you just spit back my own example to me,
then I do have to wonder, does the person actually
know how to apply the concept?
Or are they simply using what I taught them?
Now, on the other hand, this is one kind of phrasing.
There's another kind of phrasing that says,
in a Bertrand model, then would it
be relevant to say that real firms don't
do marginal cost pricing?
No.
So if it mentions a model, talk about what
happens in the model.
Talks about the real world, talk about the real world.
And yeah, so normally, they'll say,
as a general rule, if it doesn't say,
talk about this particular model,
or a particular assumption in a model,
then the question is actually about the real world.
On the other hand, if I go and give you a payoff matrix
like this, then of course, you're
supposed to work with a payoff matrix.
So in general, on the true-false explained questions,
you're more likely to have models,
and on the essays, you're more likely to be
about the real world.
But that's not a hard and fast rule.
It could go either way.
Let's see, so I think those are new things now.
And again, like I said, so if you are in any way troubled,
there are hundreds and hundreds of old exam questions
that you can access.
Once in a long while, I recycle one,
although normally, I change a few words.
Sometimes changing the words changes the answer.
Other times, it does not change the answer.
You are totally entitled to print off every old exam
and then bring it to the exam and desperately
try to fumble through them.
But once in a while, that works.
Once many years ago, I had two undergraduates
who I thought had cheated off of each other.
And then they pointed out that I had, in fact, directly
recycled an old exam question.
And they had both simply copied it,
which is totally within the rules.
And I thought, oh, so sorry to have accused you of something.
I was puzzled as to how they were opposite ends of the room.
So I was a little puzzled.
I thought a cheating had occurred.
But what are the odds that they would both
use exactly these sentences?
At the time, I refrained from directly accusing them
and just said, can you explain this?
Afterwards, I are even more cautious in my accusations.
So I say, look, I'm just quickly explaining.
I'm just trying to be very gentle because I realized,
wow, even when I thought it was a clear-cut case of cheating,
I was wrong.
So that's my general thing to say.
Oh, yeah, the other thing is that when I go and select
questions, I am playing mixed strategy and Nash equilibrium.
So I am trying.
I am not.
There is no predictability.
Or I am trying to avoid predictability
in what I will ask you about.
I am trying to be unpredictable to give you incentives
to learn all the material.
Perhaps I am not as good at randomizing as I think.
And you can discern a pattern in old exams.
And then you can exploit this to not learn the subject
that you were trying to become a doctor of.
And that's up to you.
All right, so other purely bureaucratic questions.
Yes, please.
I just want to make sure.
So you said no calculators.
Correct, because a calculator now can have internet access.
Oh.
And then a normal scientific?
Yes.
And then a master, will you assume?
So some scientific ones have them.
And again, it's too hard to verify which ones do
and don't at this point.
The world is just too confusing now.
So yeah.
So this does mean that you weren't expected
to actually use a calculator.
So that's nice.
Yes, back there, please.
Like, are we having class after the exam?
What's that?
Do we have class after this exam?
Oh, so you mean next week after the exam?
No, no, no.
So I'm not that psychotic.
No, I've done the exam.
Now I'm going to learn more.
Shut up.
Did you just call Dr. White psychotic?
Yeah.
So no.
So the class will end, and you will go home and begin
spring break, or I guess if you have some other midterms,
then spring break will have to wait.
Oh, yeah.
So one other thing, and one that I forgot to mention.
So the exam will be proctored by my teaching assistant, Anthony
Good.
Sometimes students are upset by the fact
that I'm not there, because they want to ask me
questions about the exam.
All I can say is if I were here, I
would be just as useless as Anthony will be.
Because part of what I'll tell you either way
is that a lot of what the exam is testing
is whether you understand the question.
So if you ask me what the question means,
my answer will generally just be that's
part of what we're testing.
So I'm not going to give further explanation of the question.
So anyway, so don't be mad.
Certainly don't be mad at Tony for my not being here.
But anyway, just know that however frustrating it is,
it will be just as frustrating.
Perhaps more so if I were here stonewalling you.
So anyway, so just expect that.
OK, now, any other totally bureaucratic questions
just about the structure of the test, how the test will work,
anything like that?
Yes, please.
Do I need a blue book?
No, you should.
Yes, you must not have a blue book.
No blue books allowed.
You must write directly on the exam.
There's a certain amount of space allocated
for each answer on the exam.
And the amount of space you are given is all you need.
And if you think you need more, you are incorrect.
Don't have any more than that.
So it is a sign that you are talking too much if you
think you need more space.
You include no scratch paper?
So there's, again, there is all the scratch paper
you would ever need right on the exam.
So you're fine.
So again, normally there'd be no lengthy calculations.
There is a blank page on the back
in case you decide an answer is completely wrong.
And then you do the full scratch out and then say,
see back for real answer.
This happens usually like once or twice per class, actually,
as someone goes full, like, complete error.
I can't believe how wrong I was.
But now I've got it right.
Other bureaucratic questions?
Purely bureaucratic.
So everyone, so going once, going twice,
going three times for that.
Good.
And oh, yeah, I guess just one other thing is,
like you'll notice this if you look at old exams,
given that it's open book and open notes,
there are very few row memorization questions,
especially since it's a graduate level class.
A lot of questions.
Testing comprehension.
What is comprehension?
It's being able to apply an idea to at least a slightly new
situation.
So it shows that you understand something.
So now, part three.
Now I am opening up the doors to any question
about anything we've covered in this class so far.
This is not your only opportunity.
So you're welcome to go and come to my office hours,
come to my office during non-office hours, email me,
call me, Skype me.
These are all different options for how
you can go and communicate questions to me.
But if you have a question you'd like to ask now, yes.
Could we go over Bayes' rule again?
Yeah, we'll go over Bayes' rule.
Now it's eerie because it feels to me like it was last week,
but I know it was five weeks ago.
We're actually going to four weeks ago
because we didn't do it until the beginning of the next class.
Right.
OK, yes.
All right.
Bayes' rule.
So it is a rule for relating the probability of A given B
to the probability of B given A. And this
says that the probability of A given B
is going to be equal to the probability of B given
A times the probability of A. Let's see.
But I originally did it.
Did I do it as A given B or B given A?
OK.
So it would still be valid either way,
but I don't want to confuse you by flipping the page.
So probability of A give you B is equal
to probability of B given A times probability of A
plus the probability of B given not A
times the probability of not A, which all of this of said
let's see why.
I feel like I'm losing my board 
Yes, yes, yes.
So that's just time mover.
Probability of B given A times the probability of A
plus the probability of B given not A
times the probability of not A.
to be able to specify.
All right.
Now, so this just looks like a lot of math at first,
but it actually has a lot of great applications.
So anytime someone is trying to infer
what's going on in the world, A, given some information B,
Bayes' rule applies.
Let's say you could use it for scientific hypothesis testing.
So you have an hypothesis about the minimum wage,
and then you're trying to figure out, well,
given that we're going to have a minimum wage,
Once study came along, what should I conclude?
Yeah, so this is a totally new example.
So after my education book came out,
there was a new paper out about what
happens in one university in Columbia
when they reduce the graduation requirements for economics
and business.
And I can't tell you how many people,
as soon as this paper came out, were waving it around virtually
on Twitter saying, see, Brian's whole book is wrong.
Because of one paper about Columbia,
about one school, about two majors in one school in Columbia
shows that everything else is wrong.
And then my reply to this was, well,
if it came out the other way, would you
have been saying this is the paper that proves me right?
I don't think so.
Then you'd be saying the common sense thing,
which is it's just one paper about one school
with two majors in Columbia.
So how should we think about this in terms of basic rules?
So we have probability that Brian is right about education.
So Brian is right, given the Columbia paper.
I did learn how to spell Columbia across this board.
I had forgotten.
I used to know it.
All right, so and that's going to be equal to.
So the probability of the paper.
So the paper's finding.
So Columbia paper, given if I'm right.
That's right, say.
Right times the probability that I'm right.
All over, same thing.
Probability that you get the Columbia paper,
given that Brian is right, times the probability
that Brian is right, plus.
Now here's the fun part.
Yes.
Plus the probability that you get the Columbia paper
if I am not right.
If I'm not right.
Well, I mean, you can do either one, of course.
So yeah, I mean, there's nothing wrong with what I've done.
I've just been reversing it.
So the probability that I'm right, given this paper.
That's fine.
That's probably, yeah, no, no, no, actually, wait.
No, this is fine.
Probably, yeah.
Yes, the probability of Columbia paper, if I'm right,
times the probability that I'm right.
Yeah, so over the over, probably,
you have the probability of the paper,
if I'm right, times the probability that I'm right.
Plus the probability that you'll get the Columbia paper
if I am wrong.
And then times the probability that I am wrong.
All right, OK, so here.
OK, so this.
All right, now, of course, there are
a bunch of these probabilities which
are just subjective probabilities.
You can have whichever ones you want.
But Bayesian rule still does control
how we're supposed to update.
Right?
Yes.
So just to clarify, is B's finding
supposed to reinforce A?
Well, the point is it can reinforce or undermine.
Yes.
So in this particular case, this was a paper finding
that when they cut graduation requirements
in economics and business, that the wages went down.
And in particular, the paper was very good and careful
in that it went and said, well, there
hasn't been any change in the selection.
So it doesn't make sense to say signal is worse.
So you don't need to know the details
to understand the general points.
All right, so anyway, so then there
are a couple probabilities here that are necessarily
related to each other.
Probability of them right and probability of them wrong,
that is the sum to what?
That is the sum to what?
All right, but the other stuff actually
is something where people can come up with anything they want
initially.
But still, there is a logic to it.
So again, so suppose that we start off with the view
that there's a modest and a sedible.
So I suppose I'm right generally that, oh, so I guess I,
just to do a quick, real quick version.
The reason my book is that the main reason why education pays
is not that you're learning useful skills in school,
but rather that you are jumping your hoops to impress employers.
So that's the backstory.
OK, now, if I'm right, what are the odds
that you would get this result?
And so I would say, well, so just
slightly, again, for any random curriculum reform,
that is usually at least less likely to have.
Although since I said, look, there
is plenty of useful education out there,
it's in no way to be unexpected.
And on top of it, of course, as we
discussed in the beginning of week two,
if you just think that econometric methods are just
not that good and you're the best ones,
then there's another reason to think
that even if a theory is true, the results may not
fit your theory.
So again, so we start off filling this in.
So suppose we think that that first probability is, say,
1.3.
And then we think that the probability that I'm actually
right, well, that should be 1.
What do we think about that?
Well, let's see.
Since they're throwing it at my face,
we'll throw the paper at my face.
So it's just that I should be drastically changing my mind.
So in that case, I think there's a 90% chance
a writer would write a book if I thought it was 51%.
And then we go and look what's there.
Times 0.9.
And so then those things are the same.
And then the probability that you get it if I'm wrong.
So then we'll go and come up with something like, say,
maybe 0.6.
And then this one here has to actually be 1 minus 0.9, right?
Times 0.1.
And we get this.
And what do we get?
Let's see.
So someone here does have calculators.
So 0.27 over 0.27 plus, what is that?
0.06.
So what does that reduce us to?
Let's see.
0.27 over 0.33, which is roughly what?
80% or something?
No, excuse me.
Where is that?
Let's see.
So that's 88.
OK, so 88%.
All right, so given all this, I need to adjust.
Given these numbers are right, then I
have to move from 90% right, then
a 90% chance of them right to 88% chance of them right.
So totally devastating, right?
And there'd be an even smaller update, of course,
if I thought that the methods were by far less convincing.
And so when I was discussing this on Twitter
with the author, her story was like,
I don't see how you could possibly say that there could
be a, let's see, what was her thing?
Oh, yeah.
So I was saying, look, she said, how can you
say this doesn't generalize?
And I said, look, you're looking at a form that
reduced statistics requirements for people
that go and work in the major financial institutions.
That sounds like a case that is unusually like job training.
And then it's like, oh, yeah.
So not so surprising.
All right, let's see.
Now, so was there some more you wanted to base this rule?
I guess it was just like, because you
said we didn't have to memorize formulas or anything.
Is the Brian is right, the Columbia paper,
would that be a problem that looks like a possible exam
question?
Yeah, so any problem where you're trying to figure out,
what probability should you shift true from one to another?
Start off with this probability.
If I just give you those numbers, then it's really easy.
If I could make it a little bit harder and say,
what is the maximum prior probability
consistent with something?
Or, again, this is one where it also
lent itself very naturally to a short essay
and to say, all right, so what would
be a non-Bayesian reaction to this?
And let me contrast this with a Bayesian one.
So I know this sounds like a strong bet,
but the impression that I very much got on Twitter
is that even very smart people often
think that your beliefs should be based entirely
upon the last published natural experiment.
And whatever that is, you should believe that is
the way the law works, which is not only a strange view,
but it also means that your view has to oscillate a lot,
because the last natural experiment often
gives a different result than the previous one.
And then to be convinced of something,
even though the historical record tells you
that a new study will come along and require
you to change your mind, it's pretty silly.
And again, it's just intuitively just the question of, well,
what would you have included if the study came out
the other way?
And I think what a lot of people want to do is to say, well,
if it comes out my way, it shows you're wrong.
If it comes out the other way, then everything's possible,
and therefore, I don't need to change my mind.
What Bayes' rule said is that does not make any sense.
There's no such thing as a heads-high-wind,
tails-hard-break, even bet in Bayes' rule.
Instead, anything that could raise your probability
to something, if it comes out one way,
must lower your probability if it comes out the other way.
It's absolutely required.
Otherwise, the math doesn't work.
So again, people often want to have this argument of, look,
if the experiment comes out this way,
then my opponents are wrong.
But otherwise, we just have to do more research.
We can't say anything.
It's like, no, we can say something.
You're a little bit less likely to be right
than you initially thought.
Other questions about anything we've done?
Yeah, Tucker?
Could you review the proof that core no firms
want to split for all n?
Ah, OK.
So that, let's see.
So this was on the latest homework, right?
OK.
So, hmm.
So one where I wished I had brought the answer key.
So I think I've got it locked until I have to go and unlock
it.
Let's see.
So, I don't know.
Maybe not, actually.
Let's see.
It's not as bad as it seems, though.
Let's see.
All right, let's see.
So we don't want to re-derive it.
Let's see.
So does anyone have the Cornell profit formula?
You can give me that, and then I can do it.
All right, you got it.
Cornell profit formula.
Yeah, no cost.
No cost.
All right, that's fine.
So profit under Cornell.
Let's see.
This is for duopoly, right?
So I think that 9 becomes n plus 1 squared.
OK, great.
All right, so Cornell profits are given by, so then let's see.
And then c is the cost, right?
So, yeah, c is the cost.
So that's 0.
So yeah, so then it's just going to be a squared over n
plus 1 squared.
So that is, that's just for one firm.
So that's just going to be pi of n.
And then all we need to do to show the firms who
want to split is to show that pi of n, so 2 pi of n plus 1
is greater than pi of n.
So that's what we're trying to show.
So pi of n, that's showing the profits
for an individual Cornell firm.
So what do we need to do?
So over here, we've got the easy part.
So we've got a squared over n plus 1 squared.
And then over here, we have 2.
So notice, so the numerator does not have n in it.
So that's going to be the same, right?
So we'll have 2a squared.
And then what is the denominator going
to be for n plus 1 instead of n?
If n plus 1 is the denominator of n plus 1 squared, yes,
then it will be n plus 2 squared there.
All right.
So all right, and then question mark over the greater than
sign, because that's what we're trying to show.
All right, so how can we start?
Start by canceling the squareds.
We don't need those, right?
OK.
And then we've got, so 2 over that.
So n plus 2 squared.
So n squared plus 4n plus 4 greater than 1
over n squared plus 2n plus 1.
And then you might remember that if you
take reciprocals of things, if you take reciprocals
of both sides, what does that do to the inequality sign?
Flips it.
Flips it, right.
So then what we've got actually is
we're seeing whether n squared plus 4n plus 4 all over 2.
Is that less than n squared plus 2n plus 1?
And then what have we got?
So then we'll just go through.
So we got 1 half n squared plus 2n plus 2.
Is that less than n squared plus 2n plus 1?
And you'll see that we can cancel, right?
Cancel, that cancels.
And also this is going, and then we
can go and do a little more canceling here.
So we can subtract 1 half n squared from both sides.
And we subtract 1 from both sides, right?
So we got this left, and we got that left, and that left.
Everyone happy?
So then what we're going to have is 1 half n squared.
1 half n squared.
And it's got to be, then again, greater than 1.
And n squared, that is going to be greater than 2.
All right.
And so n, this is going to be true as long as n is
greater than the square root of 2.
And that n, so let's see, if there's only one firm,
will you want to split that?
No.
How about two firms?
Yes, because 2 is greater than the square root of 2.
And we permit.
Thank you.
Sure.
All right, so this is, so again, highly unlikely just
to ask you to reprove this on an exam.
So especially now.
Actually, the exam's already printed.
So if you just so happen to ask the right question,
then maybe everyone will get this one right.
But we shall see.
OK.
Other questions?
Yes, please.
A very specific question.
What was that?
A very specific question from the note.
Sorry, I didn't understand the first thing you said.
It's a very specific question.
Specific.
I see a very specific question.
Sorry.
Oh, a very specific question.
Of course.
Great.
It's from week six.
Week six.
OK.
Part two and three.
There is a same equals n over n plus 1.
Hold on.
Let me go and call up those notes right here.
Since week six, section two?
Yeah, g.
2p?
g.
2g?
Yeah.
Oh, OK.
Same equals n over n plus 1.
I don't know where it is from.
OK.
I know where is the same equals 0.5 from.
OK.
All right, yeah, so I can go and do that problem for you.
Let's see.
Where should I do it?
Let's see.
So this is the voluntary cooperation
in a public good problem.
So section two, or begins with 2f.
So remember, in this problem, we've
got every individual utility function
is going to be equal to his own consumption times d.
And d is going to be equal to the summation of all
the individual donations.
And remember, we have a budget constraint
that ci plus di equals 1.
So everyone starts off with one unit of a good.
And then you go and divide your resources
between a donation and your consumption.
OK.
All right.
So this is going to look almost exactly like a Carnot problem
here.
Set it up.
And it's going to be like this.
All right, so for an individual person,
ui is going to be equal to ci times.
And then here we have, so it's the summation of this.
But it's going to be, so your own di
plus the summation of, let's see, so let's see,
all j not equal to i.
So in other words, so this here is just d.
So that's your donation plus the donation
of everybody but yourself.
So we've got this.
And then we've got ui is equal to ci times.
And then remember, di is just going to be equal to 1 minus ci.
That's di.
So we put that in there.
So 1 minus ci plus the summation of all those other people.
So all j not equal to i.
All right.
Now, do you see how that looks almost exactly like Carnot?
All right.
OK.
So then all we have to do is, all right,
so here we've got a ci minus ci squared plus ci
times that summation term.
We won't bother writing that out.
And we can then go and move the terms.
So we've got minus ci squared plus,
let me here have a good one, plus that thing times ci.
Good.
And then we want to go and take the partial derivative
of utility with respect to ci.
So that's going to give us minus 2 ci plus 1 plus that thing
is equal to 0.
Continue here.
So that means that we've got ci is going
to be equal to 1 plus that whole thing over 2.
Actually, do we want to do that?
We don't even actually have to do it.
That's true, but we don't need to do it.
And now, the last thing.
So now we have a reaction function.
So we know what we want to do.
So we want to set this thing equal to 0.
But then, since we're looking for a symmetric equilibrium,
we have a symmetric equilibrium where
everyone's doing the same thing.
Then an equilibrium, all remember,
how many people besides you are there?
There's n minus 1.
Yeah, there's n minus 1.
And then we add in the 1, and it becomes n.
So we're going to have an equilibrium is going to be
minus 2c plus n.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, hold on just a minute. So, let me just make sure. So, yeah. So, I'm going to
make a space over here. 2C. It's not going to get any of this. Yeah, it's fine.
So, we've got 2C. Yeah, 2C plus. Let's see. Then we've got N. So, that's going to be 1
plus N minus 1. Hold on just a minute. Let me just work it through. So, yeah. So, yes.
We've got 2N plus. So, 2C. And then we've got. Oh, okay. Okay. I see what's going on.
So, it's because that this is. Hold on. Let me just make sure. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Wait,
wait. So, I think I messed one thing up earlier.
The summation should be equal to N minus 1 times.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yes. So, hold on. So, there's one problem back here. This was okay. Yes.
So, that's going to be 1 minus that. So, that one's there. So, we've got a minus CI plus
that. Let's see. So, hold on. So, we've got. Let's see. So, we've got a CI of that. And
then plus that times. Let's see. Hold on. Ah. So, let's see. Everybody's summing those.
So, let's see. So, let's see. So, you guys. Yeah. So, yeah. Summation of those. That's
going to be N minus 1 of those. And then we've got another N. Yeah. So, that actually looks
like should be N. Yeah. Looks good. Okay. So, N times. Let's see. So, wait, wait, wait.
Hold on. There's another problem. So, let's see. Because that's summing the 1 minus CI's.
Yes. Yes. I already got it. Yes. Oh, yeah. You already got it. So, everything's right.
Yes. But nevertheless. We all know that the summation is N minus 1 times 1 minus CI. So,
we go up. Okay. But given how far we go, we should finish this. See, he says I'm right.
So, everything's good. But, let's see. So, it wasn't right. So, we got the 2CI. And then
we've got. Let's see. So, we've got symmetric. So, 2CI or 2C. And then we have plus. Let's
see. So, 1. And then that thing is going to give us N minus 1, 1 minus C's. Right. Plus
N minus 1, 1 minus C. Yes. And let's see. Does that all work out? Yeah. Right. That's
going to work out. That's going to all work out. Right. So, C equals 0. And so, then we
have. Let's see. 2C plus. Hold on. And should. Now, is that. What is that? Should that be
times anything? Or is that. That's fine the way it is. Is this all good? Yeah. Okay.
So, plus. And 1. Yeah. 1 plus. And then. Yeah. So, N minus 1. And then minus N minus 1C.
Okay. Right. And then we have. Yeah. We combine N. Yeah. 1 and N minus 1. And that thing comes
to N. Yes. So, then we've got all that equals 0. So, then we've got. We're going to have.
So, minus 2C. Hold on. I guess we can just go. Move this over to the other side. So,
we've got 2C. Move that over to that side. It's going to be equal to N minus N minus
1C. And then. Yeah. So, move that back over to that side. And then we have. Let's see.
2 plus 1. 2C equals N. And C is equal to N over N plus 1. Alright. So, any other major
derivations people want me to redo from memory? It's all fair. Let's see. Of course. Or any
other easier question? Any other question where I have zero doubt that I can correctly
answer it? Yes.
Can you run this through a general idea of a mixed strategy Nash Equilibrium?
Sure. Sure. The general idea of a mixed strategy Nash Equilibrium. So, good example of this.
So, I'm saying if we've got. So, we have the game where you want to do the opposite of
what your opponent is doing. So, like left, right, left, right. And then if. So, one person
wants to do the same as the opponent. One wants to do the opposite. So, this is a classic
case. Like if you're following someone. What do they want to do? Not be followed by you.
What do you want to do? Follow them. Right. So, to follow them you want to do the same
thing they're doing. But to not be followed they want to do the opposite of what you're
doing. Right. So, you want to follow someone they turn left. You want to turn left. Right.
But if you want to escape someone and they're turning left you want to turn right. Right.
So, in this case we have player one who will go and play the player wheel. So, spade ten
is the good result. So, player one doesn't want to be followed. So, let's say if they'll
have payoffs like that. And then player one does want to follow. So, they'll pay off like
this. Okay. Right. So, now this is a game where there's actually no pure strategy Nash
Equilibrium at all. Right. Because no matter what you're doing or what's happening one
person wants to change. Right. Because if you're ending up in the same place then who
wants to change? The person who doesn't want to be followed. Right. And if you're ending
up in different places who wants to change? The follower. Right. Okay. But we can go and
find a mixed strategy Nash Equilibrium where they're both randomizing. Right. And if they're
both randomizing then they can each be going and playing left or right with odds such that
they don't want to change the odds. Right. And again the way that you do that is you
in order to have an equilibrium each person must be making their opponent indifferent.
Because if everyone is indifferent then everyone's happy to randomize. Right. Make sense? Okay.
So, in this one mixed strategy Nash Equilibrium it's just going to be both players play left
and right with probability.5 and then no one can actually benefit by changing. And
that gives us the equilibrium. Now in terms of the intuition the best game I know of for
teaching this is rock, paper, scissors. Right. So you all know rock, paper, scissors. You
can either play rock or scissors or paper. Right. And you may notice the game is set
up to be intransitive. Right. There isn't any one strategy that wins automatically.
Alright. And then what do you want to do in order to win the game? Well everybody wants
to be unpredictable. Right. And when everyone is trying to be as unpredictable as possible
what is the predictable pattern? One third. Every strategy is played with probability
of one third. So and again like the deeper intuition is there are a lot of games where
you just don't where you if what you're doing is predictable then there's a very
easy response to it and you will lose. Like if you are playing tennis and you always stand
on one part of the court or then people will just go and hit the ball anywhere you are
and they'll win easily. Or if you go and hit the or if you go and always hit the ball
in the same place your opponent will just wait there and knock it back very easily.
So the idea of mixed strategies is that you can avoid these situations by being unpredictable.
Make sense? Alright. Other questions anyone might like to ask? Anything else that's
at the time of 9.42 you feel is optimal to learn or re-learn or master or double check
your understanding. Anything at all. Yes please. So there will only be. Sorry can you speak
up it's hard to hear. I mean so there will only be mixed I'm as a national equilibrium
only when there is no pure strategy national equilibrium or there will be two pure strategy
national equilibrium that there will appear. Yes or more than one anyway. So yes so if
there's only one pure strategy national equilibrium can there still be a mixed strategy one?
Yes. So I can't remember if there's a theorem about that or not. So I mean like a good rule
is to check. Let's just check for it. So I feel like I have seen examples where that's
let's see so could that be true. We're saying it sounds plausible but I don't want to say
that it's true because I'm not sure. Let's see so yes so if there's only one pure strategy
national equilibrium can there still be a mixed strategy one? Maybe. If I don't know
so I'm going to give you a metagaming test. If I don't know it's not likely to be on the
test. But so that's something where intuitively what you're saying seems right but I would
want to double check it. Yeah but in the exam if there is you will let us derive the mixed
strategy national equilibrium but if you don't let us derive maybe we don't need to consider
whether it's. There's only one way to say it. If it says name all the equilibria then
we need to name all the mixed strategy pure strategy and mixed strategy. If it says find
the mixed strategy national equilibrium you need to do it. If it just says like how many
are there then again for the games that we covered so you know like so in the prisoner's
lemma how many pure strategy national equilibria are there in the prisoner's lemma? One. How
many mixed strategy national equilibria are there in the prisoner's lemma? Zero. Zero.
Prisoner's lemma does not have a mixed strategy national equilibrium. Right so in the prisoner's
lemma you don't want to randomize between cooperate and not cooperate. How about in
the coordination game? So you like simple coordination game with only two options so
how many how many equilibria will there be then? Two. And how many mixed strategy national
equilibria will there be? One. Right and then how about in like those bargaining or hawk
dove or war peace games? How many pure strategy national equilibria will you only have if
there's two strategies? Two. And then a mixed strategy national equilibrium on top of that?
One. Yeah so one more. So this should be obvious now although I will tell you by the time you
take the comprehensive exam at the end of the summer a lot of students will mess up
those questions. So that's super. It's a little depressing for me but I think it would
be very depressing for the students that are missing those questions because they're would
have taken them three minutes to have reviewed the table of how many equilibria each game
has. Yes. So in the homework there was a question where we were supposed to use trigger strategies
but the deviation strategy that was proposed it was not a communion strategy. It was something
like a seller would cheat or not cheat and the buyer would decide to buy or not buy and
for some reason this buyer would buy with a 50% probability. So in that case I think
the equation was wrong because in trigger strategies you cannot deviate to something
that is not national equilibrium. Let's see. So did it say it was a trigger strategy or
just said it was punishment? So I'm pretty sure I remember the question that you're asking
and I think that the answer key, many years ago I think the answer was actually wrong
in the answer key. I think now it got corrected and it should be okay. So when I unlock the
key tomorrow morning I'll try to double check that or if there's a question you can email
me. Yes, so of course if you're not punishing maximally then it's not really a trigger strategy
but it could still be punishment. But it could be that it's just an ineffective punishment
and then you just say this would not actually be an effective punishment for any beta.
Yeah, which we want. Yes, then that should be fine. Let's see. Other questions? Anything
else? Everyone happy? Everything happy is weeks one through six. That's all I'm going
to be happy with at this point. Let's see. So just to repeat. So this is not your only
chance to ask. So I am going to be around almost all the time until the midterm.
I was going to ask before we jump into week eight. Understanding the welfare theorems,
what kind of questions can we expect from that?
So in principle anything is fair game. I'm highly unlikely to ask you just to reprove
it or something like that. So if you look at old exams the kinds of questions I like
about the proofs are ones where I ask you if one of the assumptions is violated, what
could go wrong or what will go wrong. So again, which to my mind shows whether you really
understand the proof is knowing why the assumption is actually necessary. So again, anyone can
just memorize the proof and copy it. But to say it's important that you have no discontinuities,
why does that change, why would that matter? But again, the best standard of what kinds
of questions likely to appear is old questions, which again now there's a lot of them. I think
I did actually combine all the old exams into one giant file. So can you see this?
It's more of a general question. Do you have a combined file that doesn't have the answers
in it also?
No. So, yeah, so I don't have that one. Yeah, so I guess there is the issue of can you pretend
you don't know the answer if you haven't seen it. Can you just cover it up I guess?
Let's see, other questions. So questions for weeks one through six are going once, going
twice, going three times. Alright, so you can still ask, but now we move on to our next
topic. So this is not going to be on the mid-term. The topic is symmetric information, not asymmetric
information, symmetric information. How many people ever had a lecture on asymmetric information?
Yes. How many people ever had a lecture on symmetric information? Very unusual. But of
course, symmetric information comes first and then you think you would go and add on
asymmetric information. There are a bunch of models of symmetric information, it's just
normally they aren't packaged that way. So, just starting with expected utility theory.
So this is a long-standing model that tries to answer the question, how do people choose
between gambles? Like how do people choose between gambles? So, and what's the relationship
between the value that you put on having X with certainty versus having X with probability
less than one? So, either you can go and have X with probability equals one, or you can
have X with probability less than one, and how much worse is that, is this the ideal,
than that deal? Now, we can start off with a really simple theory. It's wrong, but it's
simple. And the theory is expected value maximization. So just maximize whatever the expected value
is. So this says that if you're choosing between two bundles, X1 and X2, then you'll go and
choose one over two if the expected value of X1 is greater than X2. So like if this
is a one in a thousand chance of a trillion dollars, and this is a hundred million for
sure, then expected value maximization says that you will go and choose the one in a thousand
chance of a trillion dollars. Because one in a thousand chance of a trillion dollars
is what expected value? A billion, right? And which is a higher expected value than
500 million for sure. Is there anyone here who would choose the one in a thousand chance
of a trillion rather than getting 500 million for sure? So, one in a thousand chance of
becoming the most important person in history. How important is that? If you already were
a multi-millionaire, I can see why you might actually like that other one, because what
else is going to change your life? But anyway, so you've got that. So you say people choose
whatever option is the highest monetary value. Super tractable theory, but highly unsatisfactory
because almost no one would do this. Almost no one would do this. So in general, if you
make the amount large enough and the probability low enough, you can get people to say, I don't
want that. That seems like a really bad bet and I'm not interested. And it's even harder
to say, well, how about if I give you like a trillion raised to the power of a trillion
with a one in a billion chance? That's an enormous expected value, but what would I
do with all that money? No, I don't want that. So because of problems like this, there is
another theory which is much more popular, which is expected utility theory. So instead
of expected value maximization, you're maximizing expected utility. And this has a special Germanic
name. It's also called von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility. Von Neumann-Morgenstern,
von Neumann was the inspiration for the character of Dr. Strangelove in the movie Dr. Strangelove.
In case you're ever wondering, who is that guy? He's John von Neumann. So anyway, the
intuition is people don't maximize expected wealth, they maximize expected utility. Now
how could they do anything else? Well, first, let's figure out what's the algorithm. So
there's a three-step procedure for applying expected utility theory. So first procedure,
step one, you need to assign numerical weights to different outcomes, how good or how bad
they are. Higher numbers, means they're better. Then, next step, you want to linearly weight
outcomes by the probability. This is super important. So whatever the probability is,
you just put that probability right in front of the value. Then you choose whatever gamble
you want to apply to that. So you want to choose the highest linearly weighted outcome.
So application. So I start off with a numerical weights of your outcomes given by this function,
utilities equal to the square root of my wealth. Where does that come from? That could just
be my preference. You're allowed to have any preferences that you want there. Although
almost always expected utilities express the function of your wealth. So anyway, that's
our function. And then suppose I got a 50-degree, I even thought it might be 50-degree, but
I didn't get it.
50% chance of 10,000 and a 50% chance of zero.
So this is one ticket.
That's one lottery ticket that I have.
Gives me 50% chance of 10,000, 50% chance of zero.
Or I could have a different ticket.
I have another ticket that has 100% probability
of giving me 2,000.
Different ticket.
All right, do you want to have this ticket or that ticket?
Well, so inspecting utility theory says
that you do or act as if you do,
is that you go and take the probability
of the first outcome, 50%, times the value of that.
So that's going to be square root of 10,000,
plus.5 times the square root of zero.
And you're going to compare that to,
so greater equal less than,
to one times the square root of 2,000.
So notice, we've got the value function,
which comes in here, here, and here,
where we just take the square root of the wealth.
And again, this is just reflecting
our attitude towards risk.
But then when we go and put in the probabilities,
we don't do anything special with those.
We just put those in linearly.
50% chance means we multiply it by.5.
100% means we multiply it by one.
One in 1,000, then we multiply it by.001.
And then we just compare.
And if we take a look, then we'll see
that this has an expected utility of 50,
for the first one, that's 50.
This has an expected utility of 44.72.
So we choose the higher one.
The higher one is 50.
So given these assumptions, we will choose this.
So that is the procedure.
That is the procedure.
Now, there's something very important about this,
which is easy to overlook.
Namely, people first hear about this,
and they say, of course, duh, everybody does this.
There's a lot of evidence people don't do this either.
How so?
Well, suppose that you're moving from a 1% chance
of a bad outcome happening to a 0%.
In, with expected utility theory,
this is just gonna be a,
this'll have the same little change
as moving from 2% to 1%.
And yet, normal human beings seem to really like
going from 1% chance of something bad to 0%,
but don't seem to care very much
about going from 2% to 1%.
According to expected utility theory,
moving from 2% to 1% is just as valuable
as going from one to zero.
According to normal human beings, not so.
That 1% really bothers them.
But you say, hey, I can reduce your risk
of a really bad thing by one percentage point.
It's like, well, how much is the risk?
Like, well, what's the difference?
It's like, well, if it goes from one to zero,
then I can finally sleep easy,
knowing there's a 0% chance of a bad thing happening.
If it goes from two to one, who cares?
Well, you should care,
because it's a one percentage point reduction
in a terrible thing happening to you.
All right, so that is one of the most unrealistic things
about expected utility theory.
At the same time, it's one of the main things
where if you take it seriously, you might repent and say,
other human beings are crazy, but not me.
I'm gonna start worrying about moving probabilities
from one to 0% more than moving them from 2% to 1%.
Now, if you think about the way that people deal
with the kinds of very dramatic risks
that you see in the news, there is some idea.
If we just banned assault rifles,
then it couldn't happen anymore.
Right now, that's another error.
It's like, well, yeah, it could happen.
There's countries that do have them where it still happens.
But again, the error expressed in there is like,
well, even if we could only go and reduce it
from a little, we'd have the risk, but it's still there.
Isn't that a noticeable improvement?
Right, but again, for a lot of people,
it's like, ah, it could still happen, so who cares?
It's like, well, we've reduced it,
so that's a reason to care.
Yes, the other question?
Does the example mean that rich people
have different purpose?
Ah, so, well, it doesn't mean,
so, I mean, if you look at that utility function,
so, as we're gonna see,
we don't have time to prove it tonight,
but what we're going to see is that this does mean
that as your wealth goes up,
your risk aversion becomes less, normally,
so, which, again, is not so surprising,
although, as we're going to see after the midterm,
this is also a little bit odd
because when millionaires gamble
at low-stakes slot machines,
they seem to actually get upset
when they lose a little bit of money,
so there's something about just being called a loser.
It seems to bother people,
even if you're super rich,
you're like a billionaire,
what do you care if you lost five bucks?
But an actual billionaire's like,
that was my five bucks.
It's like, you know,
she's been pleasing some people.
All right, so we continue with this
three weeks from tonight, actually,
because next week's the midterm,
and then there's spring break,
and only a week after that do we resume,
so see you guys in three weeks.
