Okay. All right.
So we're just going to finish these up and then move on.
All right.
So last regular topic, the winner's curse.
Another example of asymmetric information at work.
All right.
Now, just for a brief review of auction theory,
if you participate in auction websites, you may be able to go
and connect your actual experience to the basics.
But real quick, a first price auction, that's one
where the person who bids the highest wins
and they pay their bid.
All right.
Well, what else can you do?
Well, a second price auction is one where the highest bidder
wins and then they pay the bid of the second highest bidder.
Okay. So, and again, if you think about this a bit more,
you realize, well, let's see.
If we're supposed to have an auction
where they raise the price in pennies or tenths of a penny,
that is for all practical purposes a second price auction,
right?
Because what do you wind up paying?
If they started at a low price
and then raised the price just by a penny every single time,
you wind up paying just a penny above the value
of the second highest bidder
and that's approximately a second price auction.
Right. There's all kinds of other fun auctions.
One of the funnest perhaps is the all pay auction.
That's one where everybody goes and bids
and whatever you bid you have to pay whether you win or lose.
And then the highest bidder wins.
All right.
And if you start thinking about the incentives
in such an auction, if you know that you have
to pay whether you win or not, what do you think that's going
to do to your bids?
Yes. The bids go way down if you know that you have
to pay whether or not you get the object.
So that's, I don't know of any website
that uses the all pay auction.
But, yeah.
How can there be an equilibrium there?
Because if you expect everyone else to put their bid really low,
if you put yours high, then you win, right?
But then you pay your bid.
Yeah. But if everyone, so yes.
Yes. Everyone else is bidding low.
I mean like if you knew exactly what everyone else was bidding,
you'd want to just go a penny above what everyone else is
bidding and then you get the object for a penny more
than everybody else.
Right? But there's no problem with the equilibrium here.
You know, so like we could even do it right now
if we really wanted.
I could auction off a dollar right now.
But with an all pays format
so that whatever you bid you have to give me.
Right? And I've actually known some professors to make money
off of this, but that's out of equilibrium of course.
To be able to make money by auctioning off a dollar
at an all pays auction.
Anyway, so the auctions that we're going to be thinking
about right now are second price auctions.
Right? Again, remember this is one
where the high bidder wins as usual.
But you don't have to pay what you bid.
You only have to pay the bid of the second highest bidder.
All right.
Now, so imagine we've got a second price auction
where we've got N participants.
Right? So we've got N bidders.
Right? And then further imagine
that every single bidder has rational expectations.
Right? So everybody's got rational expectations.
So everyone estimates the value of the object.
Right? As being the value that you estimate is going to be
as your personal VI.
So that's the value you estimate.
Will be equal to V, the truth.
That's the true value.
Plus a random error term epsilon I.
And then epsilon I is just normally distributed
with mean zero and variance sigma squared.
All right.
Now notice, since you have rational expectations,
your estimate is unbiased.
On average you are neither too high nor too low.
And it seems very intuitive to almost everyone
that you should just go and bid your true valuation.
It seems intuitive to just bid your true valuation.
In fact, if you think about it, this seems
like a weakly dominant strategy.
And on homework you will get
to prove it's a weakly dominant strategy.
It's like why would that be weakly dominant?
Well, just to give you the quick version.
But to not deprive you of the fun of proving it to yourself.
Remember, so in a second price auction, you know,
if you bid, suppose that you have a really high bid
and you bid the true amount, does that mean that you're going
to have to pay the really high amount?
No, you only pay the really high amount
if the second highest bidder also has
that really high amount.
Now if that is actually on average correct,
you don't want to shave your bid because either it won't matter,
in which case you still pay the bid of the second highest guy.
Or it does matter.
And so if shaving your bid does actually matter,
what just happened to you?
You lost the auction.
Even though you valued it at more than you'd be paying.
So that's not a bad outcome.
All right.
So, but, but, when, given the way
that we have set this problem up,
bidding your true value will actually be a disaster
on average.
Why? Because if the average error is zero
and everyone sees the truth in the ads on an average error,
who's going to win the auction?
Yes, the one with the biggest error.
Right? The one, and particularly the one
with the most positive error.
So every single person in the room gets a random, you know,
you all get a random error, right?
And then I go and auction it off.
Everyone believes the truth plus a random error.
But then there's a little problem.
The person who wins is going to be the one
who has made the biggest positive mistake.
And conditional upon winning is your average error zero.
Conditional on winning, you probably, you should expect
to have a big positive error.
You can imagine there were, that is a million.
In that case, my God, who, like what is the winner going
to be, someone who's a one in a million overestimate
of the value.
And you go and bid that, and then what do you pay?
You bid the two in a million overestimate.
Or rather you pay the two in a million overestimate
because you just have to pay whatever the second highest
bidder paid.
All right, so the average estimate is zero.
The average winning estimate is positive.
So given that you win, you can expect
to have overestimated the item's true value.
Of course, it's possible that just by sheer coincidence,
everyone will overestimate and then there's no problem.
But that's highly unlikely, of course,
that everyone will overestimate.
All right, now this problem has a very special name.
It's called the winner's curse.
The winner's curse.
And the more serious your error,
the more likely you are to win, right?
And the more likely you are to win, the more likely you are
to have made a serious error.
And remember, winning at an auction can be really bad.
So true story.
So you may have heard that Orly Ashenfelter at Princeton,
I think he founded the journal, like, not Winonomics,
it's like, I don't remember what it is.
But anyway, it's like the first big journal
in the economics of wine, right?
And also, this is back when David Carver was there,
he's also a big wine collector.
There was, this is back in the old days
when internet bidding is still very novel.
So anyway, there's a big wine auction.
What they would do every year is fax in a list
of super lowball bids on every bottle of wine,
figuring that they would then go and win a couple bottles
at bargain prices.
But that one year, there was,
for some reason the live auction was greatly disrupted.
So they were not able to hold it for some reason.
I don't know whether it was an earthquake.
I don't remember what happened.
But anyway, the regular in-person auction,
which is 95% of the bids, didn't happen.
And then under state law, they still had to go
and give the wine to whoever it was who sent
in the highest bid they received.
So Ashenfelter and Card wind up getting like 100
or 1,000 bottles of wine, all at bargain prices.
But they didn't want that much wine.
They won by accident, right, which was,
and it was a problem, right?
An auction is not the kind of thing
that you necessarily want to win.
You only want to win if you're getting a good deal.
And they had no idea that there would be any possibility
that they would be capturing most of the bottles
that were auctioned that day.
And yet they did.
Okay. All right.
So this is an odd strategic situation.
Now, what can you do about it?
Well, so suppose that you know all the VIs.
So suppose that you know your VI,
but you also know everybody else's.
Then there's a really obvious solution.
So, and what would that be?
Take an average, right?
Because your error, there's nothing special
about what happens to Bill Adams
that seems likely to be true to you.
You want to go and get an estimate that's likely to be true
to everyone, and then you are, you just go and take them,
sum them, take the average,
and then you actually will be very, or will,
with a large N, be very close to the true value.
All right.
So that would be a very good approach.
Now, if you're thinking, well, this doesn't make sense to me
because people just have different values.
The winner's auction, or the winner's curtsy,
or the best thing of it is something like bidding
over an oil well, or oil fields,
where there is a common value to anyone on earth
who buys it is basically going to be worth the value
of the oil minus the extraction cost.
All right.
So, you know, the idea of the winner's curse is
when there's actually some true thing in the world
that you're trying to estimate.
That's when the winner's curse comes into play.
If, in fact, what we call random error is just your taste,
then there's no problem again, because then if you happen
to be the person who just loves this thing more than anyone else
on earth, then, of course, you want to go
and bid your true value, and the fact that you win,
all that means is that you happen
to really like this thing, which is not a problem, right?
It's not a problem to like something more
than everybody else, but it is a problem to be trying to,
to be bidding on something
for its actual regular market value,
and then to have a false belief
about what that market value is.
So, that is the key distinction of mind.
All right.
So, anyway, all of these are common knowledge
that it's really easy to solve the winner's curse,
but even if you only know VI, there's another solution.
So, remember I was saying,
what do you do in the all-pay auction?
You?
Underbid.
Underbid, because if everyone bid their true valuation
in an all-pay auction,
typical person just loses whatever amount they bid.
That doesn't sound like a very good deal.
All right.
So, similarly, in a winner's curse situation,
the sensible thing to do is to bid less
in your true valuation.
That way, if you do win, you'll want to win,
because you have put your bid down so low
that actually now winning is a good deal.
All right.
So, in other words, if you find
out that the winner normally overestimates by 80%,
then you only want to bid the reciprocal of that.
So, actually, I think that's so, yeah.
So, then you want to bid, so underbid.
Actually, I wrote 80%.
I think it's actually 83, right,
because if the winner usually bids 6 5ths of the true value,
then you'd want to go and bid 5 6ths of the true value.
Right. And that way, if you win, you don't get burned.
Right. Now, a funny application of the winner's curse.
Now, for things like moral hazard, as I was mentioning,
these things have been known to people
in industry for centuries.
It doesn't require any brilliance.
It's not like economists really figured anything out here.
But the winner's curse, actually,
economists did seem to figure something out.
How so? Well, when economists started looking
for empirical applications of the winner's curse,
one thing they did is investigate things
like bidding on the value of oil fields.
And here was something that they often noticed.
You go and you get the geologist's report,
and then they go and calculate and put in the world price
of oil, blah, blah, blah.
I'll go through all the pages of math, and then you get
to the second to last line, and then they'll just be
like minus 40%, and then they come up with the bid.
And when the economist said, well,
why do you subtract 40% off your estimate?
And all they could say is, well,
if you don't do that, you lose money.
But they didn't actually seem to have figured
out what the problem was.
All they had was a rule of thumb that allowed them
to avoid losing money.
So there I would say
that economists actually really did add some insight,
where they actually were able to come up with a theory
that explained what was going wrong with the seemingly correct
approach of just getting the best geologist,
having them find out the amount of money, and then bidding that.
So anyway, here is a victory for economics.
We're at least able to rationalize a major existing
business practice that could not be rationalized
by the people doing it, other than just to say it works.
So, kind of cool.
All right, questions?
Questions?
So I think I actually assigned Landsberg's chapter
on the winner's curse.
He actually, I think he actually understands all this perfectly
well, but he tries to get a little bit cute
and say the very fact that you're reading this book shows
you probably overestimated its value, but that would only be
true if you hadn't done the proper discounting.
So, basically, like if you really understood the model,
then you'd be about to reach for a book, and then say, well,
the very fact that I'm about to reach for it suggests
that I probably overestimated,
and then you would do the adjustment, all right,
so subtract off 20%, 30%, whatever,
and then if you still pick it up,
then on average you should get the benefits.
So that is the idea.
All right, so questions about the winner's curse?
Right, and as you can see,
this does involve asymmetric information
because it can be solved very easily
if everybody knows exactly what everybody thinks.
Then there's no longer any winner's curse problem.
Yes?
Yes?
For bidding on the dollar bill, what's the error there?
Ah, so bidding on a dollar bill, yes,
what would be the error on that?
So, maybe not understanding what's happening.
I mean, it's a weird auction, like, let's bid on a dollar bill.
I can easily see a lot of people saying, what?
What do you mean bid on a dollar bill?
You can't bid on money, right?
So if you're confused by it,
that could lead to some error, for example.
You know, there's also just people accidentally taking the
wrong money out of their wallet or opening up their mouth
and saying the wrong thing, right?
How many of you, have you ever been thinking, okay,
don't say the wrong thing, don't say the wrong thing,
and then you open up your mouth and say it anyway?
It's like last week's speaker, the day before, okay,
don't call him Mark Bills, who's an economist
and a totally different guy.
And then I'm introducing new people, and then I say, oh,
everyone meet Mark Bills.
It's actually David Bills.
Oh, my God, it's kind of embarrassing.
It makes it sound like I invited you to come out here,
and I don't know your name.
And if I hadn't thought about it,
maybe I would actually have gotten it right.
But, yeah, so, anyway, he was very gentlemanly about it.
It happens all the time, sure.
People just invite you out and forget your name,
mix you up with other people.
Yes?
I happily pay $3 to win a dollar in an auction sometimes.
You're the winner.
No one wants to be a loser.
Right. Yeah, there's something to that.
And actually, let's see, I don't think we're going to talk
about this specifically, but that is, so, you know,
we're moving into psychology and economics very soon,
and that is a general observation that I think deserves
to be studied more, which is that people don't like losing.
Even if losers are well-paid, there's something bitter
about losing, which causes people to resist.
So, you know, like we were just going over return to education.
So, you suppose you convince people
that it's still financially very rewarding
to be a D student and just finish.
And look, D student still makes a lot more than an F student,
so just finish the degree.
Right. And yet, what is it like to have to go
through four years of receiving D's?
It's unpleasant.
All right.
So, last topic, efficiency implications
of asymmetric information.
So, like we already said,
if you ever had an undergraduate class
or even a high school class where you were taught
that imperfect information implies market failure,
you were taught incorrectly.
It is not true that imperfect information implies
market failure.
Say imperfect information implies the possibility
of market failure, but implying something
and applying a possibility are two radically different things.
Right. It's possible there's a clown
in the room is a very different result
than there is a clown in the room.
You know, it's sort of possible there's a clown in the room,
but I wouldn't get all worked up over it.
It's just a mere possibility.
Maybe he's hiding under a desk somewhere.
All right.
But so, all right, fine.
It's possible.
Who cares?
But on the other hand, if there really,
if we knew there were a clown in the room,
now that would be interesting.
And same for many other possibilities
versus actualities.
All right.
So anyway, it is not true
that imperfect information implies market failure.
You say imperfect information implies a possibility.
Very different conclusion.
Now, as we've already seen,
symmetric imperfect information does not imply,
it does not imply market failure.
Right. In fact, you see,
symmetric imperfect information implies no market failure,
is a better way of putting it.
There's no market failure caused
by symmetric imperfect information.
If everyone is equally in the dark, then the idea
that it's just a matter of information is a scarce good,
it's no different from anything else,
that whole argument goes through perfectly.
All right.
Now, if all, now what about the case
where all market agents are equally informed,
but the government knows more?
So is that symmetric or asymmetric information?
Asymmetric.
Asymmetric, because somebody,
somebody on earth knows more than other people.
Even if it's just one organization.
So everybody is equal except the government,
which is more equal than others.
I mean, knows more than everybody else.
But in that case, there is a very simple way
to solve this market failure.
The government's the only organization
that knows better than others.
Everybody else is equally in the dark.
What very light-handed measure can the government take
to solve the problem?
Well, if I were a bureaucrat, I'd drop out of the government
and use my knowledge to make a lot of profit.
Right. There is that, although that does not
by itself solve the market,
and it does not solve the market failure actually.
Then every time someone offers you a deal, it's like,
are you that guy who quit the government
and is trying to make money off of this?
Maybe I don't want to sell to you.
All right.
So again, public interest in the government.
They want to solve market failures
in the cheapest possible way.
They know stuff.
Other people don't know.
What can they do?
Tell people.
Hello, everybody.
Opioids are dangerous.
Other people don't know this.
You're all equally in the dark, thinking it's safe.
But the government scientists have figured
out they're dangerous, so everybody listen up.
They're dangerous.
Here's how dangerous.
Okay. Our job's done.
All right.
That's it.
Then there's no more drugs.
All that you have is a big government announcement.
If new people, new ignorant people are coming along all
the time, then you could periodically announce it.
Just want to let everyone know, or you can imagine you're
like at a wedding, and the government takes a fork
and starts digging the champagne glass.
Ding, ding, ding, ding, ding.
Opioids are dangerous, people.
Just thought you ought to know.
All right.
So that is the extent of the remedy.
All right.
Now, of course, governments do this kind of thing
with public service campaigns and so on,
as well as public education curricula.
But very rarely do governments limit themselves
to just saying, you-hoo, I've got some information.
I'll let you know if anyone's interested.
Right? So, but that would be all that would be required.
All right.
Now, anyway, so asymmetric information sometimes has
efficiency implications, which we've seen.
But even when the market outcomes are inefficient,
government may be unable to improve matters.
So take moral hazard.
All right.
So what can government really do about moral hazard?
There's not very much.
If there's going to be any time there's insurance,
there's automatically going to be moral hazard.
If the government is, so if industry is saying
that if you get sick, we take care of the cost, you don't,
then what law could government possibly pass
that would preserve your incentive
to take care of yourself?
Right? I mentioned if you really start thinking hard,
you can come up with things like how
about punishing insurance fraud?
That's a pretty severe kind of asymmetric information
if people just go and deliberately shoot themselves
in the foot and then go and demand assistance.
Things like that.
that. So, you know, that's actually a better example, of course, is the double indemnity
one where you go and take out life insurance on someone and then murder them. That's already
illegal, of course, but you can also pile on insurance fraud charges, on top of everything
else if you wanted to do that. So you can do things like that. You can imagine things
like government going and passing laws requiring people to be healthy. So requiring healthy
lifestyles in order to mitigate the moral hazard problem caused by insurance, that sort
of thing. Right again, but you can imagine that, but of course that's almost never done.
Normally, what happens with the moral hazard problem is insurance causes it and government
just says, well, what are you going to do? Now, the last case is really what's most interesting.
There are a bunch of instances where government demonstrably could improve matters, but a
lot of actual regulation does the opposite. So again, the fact that government could actually
solve a market failure doesn't mean that it does, doesn't mean that it will, doesn't mean
it's even going to leave well enough alone. Government might actually go and amplify a
problem, might go and create a problem where none existed. So, you know, just to take the
most obvious examples. Limiting contractual punishment. So, as I was saying, if when you're
signing an insurance policy or anything involving risk sharing, you could sign a contract saying,
if I am caught going and abusing this risk sharing, I owe you some money as punishment.
If you catch me playing Tetris when I am working on a job with a wage that does not vary with
the amount I produce in a given day, then I owe you five or ten thousand dollars. If
you catch me going and smoking when you find out that someone just died and you try to
collect life insurance policy, turns out they were a smoker and they lied and said they
weren't, then you can cancel the policy or you could actually go and expropriate the
estate and say, well, since you lied on your life insurance policy, not only does your
family not get anything, they actually lose the house that you were leaving to them. So
maybe you shouldn't have lied. Right? Again, people always get nervous and say, what if
people agree to a really horrible punishment? Don't sign if you don't like it. Usual rule.
If the punishment is too draconian, don't sign. Right? And this is something that the
person that is sharing the risk with you needs to consider. Well, I don't want to make the
punishment too bad or else no one wants to do business with me. But on the other hand,
I want it to be bad enough so they don't rip me off. And then what is the incentive of
the person who signs that contract to do so? The person who agrees to the punishment. Why
would you ever agree to be punished?
You can get a lower price.
Yeah, you get a lower price of the insurance. You get a higher wage from your employer.
It's the same reason why you agree to any concession in a contract. Because that way
the other side is more interested in doing business with you and going and giving you
a better deal on everything else. So it makes perfect sense. And yet, as I mentioned, under
Anglo-American law, normally they refuse to enforce a punishment clause. Sometimes you
can get away by just denying that it's a punishment clause and say, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
the damages are enormous. You don't understand my industry, man. There's just immense damages.
It's so huge I couldn't even explain it to you. They're so big.
And sometimes the court might let you get away with that, but other times not. And you've
got to worry that they won't let you get away with it.
Now something else that we see in regulation. Restricting risk-adjusted premiums. So when
there is an adverse selection problem, the natural thing to do is to find out who's high
risk and low risk and then do what with the premiums?
Adjust them.
Yes, adjust them. So who gets the high premiums? High risk people. Who gets the lowest premiums?
Low risk people. Real simple. All right. So this is the way that industry would solve
the problem if they had information. If you take the adverse selection problem, literally
this is impossible because why?
Yeah.
They've just left with high risk people.
Well, no, no, no. So again, so why is it that it would be impossible for insurance companies
to do this in a very simple model?
They don't know.
Yeah, they have no idea who's high risk. Oh, no, are 90-year-olds more likely to die than
90-year-olds? Who can say? It's all up in the air. No one knows these things. All right.
So if you're really in that world, then this isn't a solution. But if you're in a world
where the profession of actuary exists, people go and try to calculate risks for all sorts
of different groups and then come up with an insurance premium that would be profitable
to offer them given their risk, then this problem is pretty easily solved.
All right. Now, what does regulation normally do? Regulation normally tries to make it harder
to do this. They try to squeeze premium and then reduce the amount of inequality. And
again, not to solve any market failure. Rather, they're doing it because of public opinion
because the public opinion doesn't like charging high risk people high rates and low risk people
low rates.
They're like, what's their argument?
It's not fair.
It's not fair. It's not fair that I have that, you know, I expect more money to go and provide
services for expensive customers and less money for less expensive customers. That's
not fair. All right. How is that not fair? That seems like the definition of fair. That
seems super fair.
It's like, well, it's fair if someone has to pay more for a mansion than they do for
a shack. That's fair. So why is it that insurance, everyone's supposed to go and get equal rates?
Right. As I said, sometimes it's because the people that are very high risk, it seems like
it's through no fault of their own and people feel sad for them. Right. And reasonably so.
On the other hand, though, sometimes it's really weird, like when the state of New Jersey
says that you can't charge people who have gotten into multiple danger of multiple at
fault accidents have to be charged a rate barely, barely higher than normal.
Like, well, who sympathize with these people? Like, I mean, never mind utilitarianism of
don't you want them off the road entirely? But then on top of it, like, do you sympathize
with people who eventually get into accidents? I mean, even if it's like your 90 year old
grandma, she's super nice. Still, it's like poor grandma can't get insurance because she
keeps running into people and cars and stores and animals. I mean, that's where like, grandma
needs to lose the keys, but grandma will be sad. Grandma's got to be sad. She's going
to lose the keys. That's it. That's it. Yeah. All right. And then the last example. So remember,
well, you know, signaling is all about asymmetric information as well. So the efficiency of
the policy recommended by economic efficiency in a signaling model is to tax the signal.
Discourage the rent seeking of just trying to get more and better signals so you look
better than other people. All right. Now, how many governments on earth tax education?
Virtually none? Maybe none. Right? How many governments on earth subsidize education?
Almost all. They pour money on it. And how careful are they to only pour money on stuff
that looks like you're building human capital rather than just showing off?
Not at all.
Yeah. Barely at all. Barely at all. In fact, whenever you start saying, well, maybe government
shouldn't subsidize the majors that are basically just hobbies like art history, things like
that, people flip out. Who are you to dismiss art history as a mere hobby? Like, look, I
mean, no one subsidizes my hobbies. There's no Department of Role Playing Games. So like,
why is it that their hobbies are better than mine and they're entitled to subsidies and
I'm not? It's like, well, because it's been that way for a long time. All right. Yes.
So I know a guy who has written several books on the history of comic books, which in my
mind just as works of literary analysis compare very favorably to some of the books that English
professors have gotten tenure with. Very favorably because this guy writes books where he interweaves
the actual history of the real world that's happening alongside the comic books. He knows
all the stories of the authors and their relations. He knows the business side. He knows the themes.
You know, like, so he knows a vast literature. And I've seen people get tenure based upon
books about one stupid poet no one's ever heard of. Look, who cares? One poet. This
guy knows thousands of comic books and can relate it to the world and to history and
the Cold War and everything else. This guy's awesome. But does he get a job as an English
professor? No. Why? Because of your bigotry against his hobby. I think his hobby's way
better. Yes. The original X-Men. That's poetry. All right. So any case. Now I am happy to
admit that there are some regulations on the books which if enforced would actually go
and reduce asymmetric information problems. But there's also a lot of others that amplify
the problems. And again, as I think I was mentioning, the whole idea of Obamacare. Remember,
Paul Krugman described it as a stool with three legs and it needs all three legs to
stand. Right? And he explained it very clearly, too. Right? And the three legs were the, let's
see, what's the right way of putting it? So approximately equal rates. So with some adjustments
for age, things like that. But basically you can't charge risk adjusted rates. Like heavy
limitations on risk adjusted rates. And that includes, of course, the ban on pre-existing
conditions clauses. You can't go and charge somebody more just because they wait until
they're really sick in order to get insurance. Okay? So you have the ban on equal rates.
Then you've got the mandate. And the mandate is there to solve the problems caused by the
equal rates. Because if everyone can be charged equal rates and there's no ban on pre-existing
conditions clauses, that if you are free to buy insurance whether or not you like it,
what is the obvious strategy? Don't buy until you get, until you really need it. So the
mandate is there to go and say, no, no, you don't get to decide whether you want it. Everybody
has to buy it. And then the final leg is the subsidies, which is designed to solve the
problem caused by the mandate. Because if you have a mandate, there'll be some more
people who can't afford to buy the policy. And then the subsidies are there to give them
the money that they need to buy it. Okay? So there is an internally coherent model of
insurance regulation. Although it seems quite possible, actually, that if there is any change
in healthcare regulation, that the government will just get rid of the one part that people
actually hate. And there's only one of these three legs that is unpopular.
Mandate.
The mandate. Right? And then you have the two-legged stool and it falls over and is
end, and if it does, I have no doubt that a bunch of people will say the free market
has failed. Even though you had a regulation which you would expect to cause adverse selection,
even if it didn't exist before. All right. So why don't we then move on to our next set
of notes. So now we're doing two weeks on behavioral economics and irrationality. There
are many names for behavioral economics. It's also called psychology and economics, psychological
economics. All right. Just for background, has anyone here ever taken one or more classes
in psychology? All right. So that's more than usual. All right. Now, and what exactly is
it psychologists study, you know, in a sentence? Right? Of course they study tons of different
things, but the quick version, what is psychology, Danny? What is it?
The human mind.
Study the human mind. All right. So you're about, well, it sounds interesting and important.
And yet I can't tell you the number of times that I've heard economists say the word psychology
with the most palpable sarcasm. It's like, so like a psychology. Then I've also heard,
well, if you want to be a psychologist, then, you know, like what's so funny? What is so
contemptible about studying the human mind? And in particular, I mean, I can understand
maybe if you're a physicist, you would say the human mind is nothing compared to the
great neutrino or something like that. But if you're an economist to go and without even
bothering to open up a textbook to go and dismiss the entire field of studying the human
mind, it sounds to me like a combination of the most severe intellectual blindness, ignorance,
stubbornness, willfulness, just I don't even like the words fail me for how odd it is that
a person would say they want to understand economics, but they have no interest in the
contents of the human mind. So it would seems like there would be a lot of synergies between
economics and psychology. And the next two weeks, we're going to look at a lot of these
synergies and this, the field of economics and psychology has grown a lot. If you look
at empirical articles in top journals, I think at least half of them at least consider psychological
theories of what's going on, which of course is, you know, psychological theory is not
contrasted with an economic theory. Rather, you're trying to go and put the psychology
into an economic model, marry them together and get some real insight by combining both
fields. All right. Okay. Anyway, so about half of empirical articles probably do contain,
at least entertain psychological hypotheses for what's going on. Right. You can decide
for yourself whether or not the, what the quality of those articles is. And of course,
the fact that there are some crummy psychological theories or that there are some crummy psychological
papers that have gotten published. Well, do we want to dismiss entire fields on the basis
of that? It's a little close to home, right? Right. If you can dismiss an entire field
because it's got a few crummy papers, where does that leave us? What? You think all papers
in economics are great? So sometimes I'm sitting around wondering, huh, when does the replication
crisis for economics come over here? There's been a lot of pressure on psychology. And
partly it may be because they do experiments with very small numbers of observations. And
so maybe that's really what's going on and that's the problem. And maybe it's because
they don't have a lot of, they're so open-minded that they are open to almost everything. Right.
So maybe economists have some advantage that theory makes us a bit skeptical of weird results,
which then perhaps goes and weeds out wrong results. Maybe. All right. Any case. So next
two weeks we're going to be talking about interweaving economics and psychology. And
then after we do this, we're going to spend three weeks on applications where one of the
main things that I'm going to try to get you to do is to consider, well, maybe there's
something that psychology has to teach us as we go over the applications. So, you know,
for the last three weeks, my idea is that we'll go and take everything that we've learned
and try to understand things in the real world. All right. A scary and confusing place, but
still it is the final place that we aim to explain, I think. That's what interests me
anyway. I mean, I have met economists who will even admit, like, I don't care about
that so-called real world. All I'm doing is publishing articles in the Journal of Economic
Theory for other people who publish in the Journal of Economic Theory to read and critique.
All right. Those people are out there, but I mean, I would just avoid them if I were
you. Why, like, why they think what they're doing is valuable or, like, what the point
of it is, I really have trouble understanding it. I think in their minds there's some kind
of division of labor theory of, look, we theorists go and do nothing but theory, totally divorced
from the real world, but then the empirical people will sometimes find some value in what
we're doing. All right. I guess it's possible, but don't you think they might find more value
if you tried to theorize more about the real world and tried to look at some facts first?
It would seem to be well advised. All right. So, questions before we get started? Yes?
Just on the replication crisis in economics, the economists had a paper on this a couple
of years ago where they said that they did look at economics experiments and they found
them to be way more replicable than any other field. And they said the theory was because
economists have been so hesitant towards experiments that the experimentalists had to try much
harder. Ah, interesting point. Of course, most economic research is not experimental,
right? So, how well does that stuff replicate? Right? There's the lowest standard replication
where if you use the very same data set and the very same methods, you get exactly the
same results. So, that's one. For very good stuff, I found that tends to be pretty true.
But if the standard is if we get a new data set and use new methods, say better methods,
if we get better data and better methods, do we get the same results? That's one where
it's much less clear. All right. So, and then, you know, economists also are often fond of
using a more complex technique that does not actually seem better than the other technique,
but it's just harder to do. And require, you know, so you have to be smarter to do it.
So, my view is there are a lot of papers where the best research is actually just ordinarily
squared, ordinarily squares, but it's too easy to do and the results are too obvious.
And then people go and come up with weird instrumental variables estimators, which are
harder to do and there's more room for rationality. But as to why people believe those results
more, I have no idea. It seems like, well, you assume that thing's exogenous. Why would
anyone think that's exogenous? Well, I mean, it's like we can get like a bunch of papers
out of it. So, I guess that's the reason. All right. Okay. So, just for background,
right. So, behavioral approach and choice theory. It is rare for economists to think
about empirically testing fundamental micro choice theory. So, you know the stuff that
we do in the first few weeks of economics? Very unusual for someone to say, let's go
and empirically test that stuff. All right. Why? Well, first of all, the very elementary
stuff seems almost true by definition. Like when you say that preferences are transitive.
It's like, so if you prefer A to B and B to C, then you prefer A to C. It's like, doesn't
that kind of have to be true? Sort of seems really obvious. Like why would you bother
testing something like that? All right. Now, if we assume that preferences are stable,
which is what we almost always do in empirical work, then there's a lot of testable implications.
So think about this. Suppose that you want to go and test the law of demand. All right.
So, you say, all right, well, here's the law of demand. Right here's the demand curve.
And then we go and we find out the price started off here and then it moved to here. Then you
might want to see whether the quantity that people can sit and respond. All right. So
that sounds like a good approach, but there's just one problem. If preferences are not stable
and you appear to see that, you could also say something else that's totally consistent
with basic theory. What can you say if, you know, so in other words, suppose that, let's
see, the price goes up and instead the quantity demanded does that. All right. So first observation
here, low price. Second observation here, high price. What can you always say about
a demand curve if you don't believe in stable preferences?
Well, if you think it's not stable, then the demand curve should be.
Yeah. So you can say, no, no, no, no. Theory is still totally true. That. All right. So
now I fit both data points. Okay. So theory is great. That's actually not empirical testing
at all. Right. That's just going and drawing a line through every point and saying the
theory is sound. Right. So that's CSO. In practice, then economists normally will assume
stable preferences when they do empirical work. Because otherwise it's too easy. Otherwise
you just go and see what happens and then say, well, clear.
what occurred is there's a shift in demand and a curve.
Okay, so usually we economists don't like to just go
and assume that preferences randomly change.
Now if you're talking about supply there, they can go
and look at things like input prices and say, ah, well,
we'll only like we could say the supply chains
of input prices change if it's demand.
Then if you've got some very clear predictors of demand
like demand for skiing in the winter,
then you might say, okay, that's fine.
We'll go and we'll put in shell
like these identifiable weather shifters into the model
and then we can go and test it.
But the idea that someone might just wake up and say,
I just don't like skiing anymore, man,
or that a whole country could wake up.
We don't like skiing anymore.
That idea is one that economists normally resist
and empirical work in economics usually doesn't say stuff
like that.
All right.
So once you put in stable preferences,
then we can definitely go and empirically test, basic theory.
And then another thing, another assumption,
so besides the assumption of stable preferences,
if we go further and assume
that people have selfish preferences,
then we can go even further towards testing basic micro.
So if we assume that people are selfish, then we can go
and test theories like what will landlords do if you go
and impose rent control, right?
Because suppose that landlords were totally unselfish
and just wanted to help people.
So all they do is they wake up and say, I want to go
and provide housing for people who need houses.
If that were the way that landlords thought and then you go
and impose rent control, there's no reason for them
to withdraw units from the market.
So normally economists are assuming selfishness, right?
And if you think about that Adam Smith quote
that economists love to invoke,
not from benevolence does the baker bake his bread, but from?
Yes, his own regard to his own self-interest.
Economists love quoting this.
And yet I've seen the very same economists I think,
some when accused of assuming selfishness say, oh, no, no,
no, I don't assume selfishness.
No, economists never do that.
What are you talking about?
Then why are you always quoting Adam Smith, right?
And furthermore, if you don't assume selfishness,
then a whole bunch of the things
that economists normally say don't even follow anymore.
You know, the idea that if you don't,
that if people don't get paid for making food,
that they'll just give up on it and won't do it.
Does that actually make sense?
I mean, don't you need selfishness to make that work?
Yeah.
This might be a question for after class,
but I've always understood self-interest and selfish
to be separate things.
You're using the terms of.
Yeah, I mean, I would say that they're, you know,
I would say the relationship between selfish and, you know,
selfish and self-interested is like the relationship
between being frugal and being cheap.
One has a negative connotation,
but they're fundamentally the same thing.
So if you were to say this person is completely
self-interested, but he's not at all selfish,
I don't know what that person is like.
I would just say that like, what does that mean?
Just like you said, the person is totally frugal,
but in no way cheap.
So, yeah, that's my view.
Again, so I know that, you know, so like the dictionary,
again, I think it will basically just add
on the negative connotation.
So selfishness is a negative term that we use for someone
who is being too self-interested.
But, of course, if you as economists assume complete
that you're completely self-interested, there's no room
to be any more self-interested than completely self-interested.
So if anyone is selfish, it would have
to be a completely self-interested person, I think.
Yes?
So I think, so by saying selfish, you have to give some kind
of content to that to make it appear.
Yeah, yes, yes, of course.
Well, so.
You have to have some sense
of narrow material self-interest or money.
Right, right.
Well, so like what did Adam Smith have in mind
when he said that?
He might have had in mind some kind of material self-interest.
Yeah, seems likely.
I mean, in fact, might.
Like, almost certainly.
Like, what else would you mean by, well,
why is the baker getting up at 5 in the morning to bake bread?
A, because he wants to make some money.
But the quote is saying that it's not in the interest,
it's not the interest of the person buying the bread that's
at stake.
That person may have someone else's interests,
not his own material self-interest.
And he has a, he's not doing it for the person buying.
Right.
But he might be doing it to help his church.
Yes.
Or some poor person on the street.
I mean, anything's possible, but normally not.
Right, you know, if you said his child,
that would make a lot of sense.
And we're going to get into the, like,
sort of narrowing down self-interest.
But again, there's, you know, there is,
there's a normal English word,
normal English word, self-interested.
And most of us have very little trouble going
and figuring out whether an action qualifies.
Although, of course, you can say, well,
what was Mother Teresa really trying to do?
All right.
Right. And, of course, you can imagine
that she actually was stocking away tons of money
in a secret Swiss bank account.
And was living high off the hog.
Right. And my understanding is Christopher Hitchens does have a
book where he kind of accused her of something
in that ballpark, not quite, but be, like,
like actually not be, really being all that great.
All right.
But, but again, so you have an idea.
Well, here's a book that says
that Mother Teresa wasn't really,
wasn't really all that great.
You have some idea about what would be in that book, right?
Right. And, and if, if you had a friend and you're,
like you're going and shopping for a present.
And they say, well, like I'm just doing this
because I'm selfish.
Like, so, well, you're buying a present
for orphans because you're selfish?
Why? It's like, well, I'm doing it in order
to impress an employer who really likes this philanthropy.
He's, all right, well, that's a good story.
But on the other hand, if you have some story, like,
I'm doing it because I think I'm, I'm trying
to save the orphans because maybe one day they'll save me.
Like, yeah, that sounds like a real long shot.
I guess it's possible, but that just doesn't ring true.
All right.
But we'll consider it a bit more as we go on.
So, anyway, if we add on selfishness, then we got a lot
of other testable implications.
Now, once we move from your basic consumer theory
into expected utility theory, which we learned two weeks ago,
then we got a lot of other testable implications.
Remember, we have things like no discontinuities
between a zero probability of risk
and a 1% probability of risk.
That's an empirical claim.
That people won't pay more to move from one to zero
than they will to pay to move from two to 1% of a risk.
Right? And also says there'll be no point in advertising.
We can eliminate this risk completely.
That won't be any more appealing than saying we can go
and move the risk down by 1 percentage point.
So, you're already, you know, so two to one versus one to zero.
All right.
And again, if you think actually that seems like it would work.
A lot of people really like that.
You have no risk.
So, I have no downside at all now.
None. All right.
Now I can sleep.
As long as it's 1% I couldn't sleep.
2% and 1 almost the same.
But going from one to zero, then I sleep like a baby.
All right.
So, sometimes people feel this way.
So, at least allegedly we might investigate that.
All right.
So, anyway.
So, you got this rapidly expanding literature.
Actually, so now I'd say it's not expanding as rapidly anymore
because it's gotten so much bigger.
So, once something is really big then it's hard to expand
as rapidly as it used to.
But anyway, let's just call it a big literature.
Often called behavioral economics.
Which is itself a really weird term, right?
It's like, well, isn't all economics about behavior?
Yeah, but we work with the phrases
that other people have already given us even
if they aren't really very good.
I mean, I think that in an ideal world economics would be called
sociology, the study of society.
But that ain't going to happen.
And it would be a marketing disaster if it did, right?
Just like the marketing disaster
of declaring Pluto no longer a planet.
Why would astronomers do that?
It's one of the worst possible things they could do
for their field to go and take away a beloved frozen ice planet
away for children.
But they did it because they're like, I don't know,
they have no sense of marketing at all I guess.
All right.
Now, the product of behavioral economics is a long list
of what are called anomalies.
Anomalies.
All right.
Now, a quick version of anomalies is just weird stuff
we found, but the technical idea is that this is robust evidence
that people sometimes are violating basic axioms
of choice theory.
Robust evidence that people are sometimes violating your basic
axioms of choice theory.
All right.
And any of you, I'm pretty sure the column is long gone,
but Richard Thaler used to have a column in the Journal
of Economic Perspectives called Anomalies,
where each article would be something that we see
in the real world that seems to be predicted
to not exist by economic theory.
All right.
Now, these violations of choice theory are also often called
irrationality.
So, irrationality.
Right. And especially if you are an old economist.
An economist, though, so old that you got your PhD before,
say, 1973.
All right.
There's not that many left anymore,
but they're still around.
So, if you got your PhD before then, then you are likely to go
and just treat these things as being exactly the same.
All right.
So, and what's the key is if you got your PhD
before the Rational Expeditions Revolution,
then you just think of rationality as being things
like having a transitive behavior.
Or it could also be things like counting sunk costs
when you make your decisions.
That would be another classic example.
All right.
So, how many people here have reached the point
where you walk out of movies appropriately?
Yes. How many are not quite there yet?
Yes. Right now, of course, there's one thing if you're going
to see movies with non-economists,
and they'll just get mad at you.
Then there's a reason to sit through it.
But if you're all by, how many of you,
so this is actually not technically predicted
by economics, but I feel like economists ought to do it.
I feel like economists ought to do this.
See movies alone.
Yes, it's not that social.
Like, why don't you just go by yourself
and see the movie you want when you want to see it?
And when you're with other people,
do something with the other people.
All right.
So, you know, or maybe you want to talk about the movie you
for or after or whatever.
But still, there I think there is a stigma
that economists must Vulcan mind meld to overcome.
All right.
So, Tyler talked, here I will thank Tyler.
Tyler got me to start seeing movies alone,
start walking out of movies.
I'm eternally grateful.
It's great.
Okay.
It's Tyler Cowan made you antisocial.
Well, made me fit for a good society.
A society we don't have yet, but one day we'll because of what he
said to me that one day.
But everything is going to fall into place.
Now, we're going to go over some
of the main documented anomalies.
But first, I'm just going to pre-answer some
of the blanket objections.
So, these are arguments that economists often make to say,
look, why do I not even have to read this garbage?
Why do I not need to even open up the textbook
to see what's inside?
Why can I just pre-dismiss it all so I don't even have
to judge it case by case on whether the evidence is any good?
I can just say that it's ruled out on methodological grounds.
All right.
So, what are they?
First one, this is where the economist plays philosopher
of science.
So, you start hearing about anomalies.
You say, well, look, all theories are false.
What matters is prediction.
So, where does this all theories are false stuff come from?
Yeah, Friedman and, you know, so, you know, so,
Popper is kind of in there.
I actually think Popper is to blame too.
Even, you know, somebody said, well, that's kind of weird.
He's the father of falsificationism.
So, the idea is that, like, every theory is going
to have problems, but, and we just keep,
we have a theory that's going to have problems.
We have a theory until you show me the problem,
that's the best we can do.
Everything's going to fail eventually.
But if you haven't found a problem yet,
that's the best that we can expect.
All right.
All theories are false.
What matters is prediction.
So, in one reply is, there's plenty of,
plenty of the anomalies evidence is showing the predictions
are wrong.
So, in that case, the objection is just really not,
is just really not relevant.
And on top of it, this all theories
are false idea is strange in itself.
You might say, well, all theories are false
to if you demand on accuracy to an infinite number
of decimal places.
Fine. But what if your theory is false
to the first decimal place?
What if, like, the first digit is completely wrong?
Right? You know, so, and, you know, of course,
very often people actually, when they're thinking
about whether a theory is relevant,
you have to say, well,
does the real world even closely match the assumptions?
So, for example, suppose that someone wanted to show
that perfect competition was wrong.
And the way you do it is you go and test the model
on say government supply of water.
When government supply, you know,
like a monopoly water company.
And then you say, see, perfect competition's wrong.
Right? What's the obvious thing to say in defense
of the perfectly competitive model if you test it
on the monopoly water company?
Yes. It's not a theory about what monopolies do.
It's a theory about what competitors do.
So, no matter what you're saying,
actually there's always some effort to see, well,
do the basic assumptions of the model seem more or less right?
Milton Friedman actually has this line where he says, look,
the reason why Newtonian physics works isn't
that the world is approximately a vacuum.
No one's reading it.
Yes, it is.
Of course that's why.
You know, if we're doing Newtonian physics in oil,
then things don't fall according to that equation.
So, why is it that objects fall very close,
almost as Newton says they will through air?
Because air, there's hardly any air actually.
We're almost in a vacuum.
Right? You know, like one atmosphere
of pressure is almost no pressure actually.
So, this is not a class in philosophy science.
I'm not going to test you on this.
But, yeah, worth pointing out that the fact
that Friedman said it, you know, like how much did Friedman really
know about philosophy of science?
It seems like he just sort of read a few things and said,
well, now all economists have to go
with this one controversial philosophy,
which apparently is the only one I read about.
You know, you can be a super smart guy,
but if you only read one out of a dozen different views,
the fact that you adopted is really not that convincing.
All right.
Now, second objection to the anomaly say, look,
sure there's all kinds of random error, but it all cancels out.
And the standard answer is no, they don't cancel out.
The errors are actually systematic.
There's a pattern of error,
such as people don't walk out of movies.
Right? It's not like sometimes people are really enjoying a
movie and they randomly walk out.
And other times they're really hating a movie
and they randomly stay in.
Instead, there seems to be a general pattern
that people are not enjoying a movie, sit in there watching it
because they already paid their money.
All right.
And, of course, if that argument no longer makes any sense
to you, congratulations.
So you are ready for your PhD in economics.
But if it still is of appeal to you, then you still have
to burn out that last remnant of humanity and just say, no.
It is ridiculous to sit there suffering
through a movie you don't like just because you already paid.
Yeah, Ash?
Yeah, to me what makes it even less sense than sitting
through a whole movie is reading a whole book.
Right? A movie is over in a couple hours.
Yeah, yeah, sure.
I think a lot more people don't finish books.
Although also books are much less likely to be starved.
I don't know.
All right.
And then a final objection.
This one says anomalies arise purely due to weak incentives.
And, indeed, it's true
that in most psychology experiments there are no
monetary incentives.
And in economics experiments,
often the incentives are very weak.
So oftentimes there are experiments where all
that happens is that if you do well,
then your name is entered in the lottery.
So only one person in the entire room even gets paid.
So you might say, oh, well, people are acting this way
because of weak incentives.
So now a reply that is often made, this is one
that I think actually is overstated,
but at least it's a common reply,
is that strong incentives often don't matter.
Furthermore, many people said a lot
of the big anomalies appear in financial markets
where it seems like there's actually huge incentives
to get it right.
And yet people keep doing it wrong.
Right now a point that I like to push is even
if this is only true, these results are still really
important because actually we make a lot of choices
that have very weak incentives.
Most obviously for voting.
Voting is a choice that we make
that has very big social implications,
but there's very little incentive
to vote one way versus the other.
So even if you thought that weak incentives changed behavior,
there are a number of kinds of behavior
where the incentives are weak.
So in that case the behavioral economics should give us a
better prediction of behavior than the regular stuff.
Or use another one I like, how about charitable donation?
What selfish incentive do you have to go
and carefully research charities to make sure
that the world is getting the most bang for your buck?
Not much.
Right? So if weak incentives lead to bad behavior,
then what might you think that philanthropists will do
when they go in and hand out their money?
Or fail to do is a better way.
What would philanthropists generally fail to do?
Research. And there's actually a whole movement dedicated
to trying to improve this behavior called effective?
Alterism.
Effective alterism.
Right? Where they look at the world and they say, look,
it seems like there's a lot of charitable donation,
the dollars are massive, but the accomplishment is small
because people spend so much money on tons of stupid stuff.
So at least it's an interesting thing to consider.
Maybe people don't really research it in the same way
that they would research their portfolio
because the main reason people give
to charity perhaps is not actually to accomplish good,
but to feel like they're doing good.
And you can get the feeling of doing good
without doing any research at all.
In fact, it seems like one of the best predictors
of who you'll give charity to is just who other people you
respect are giving money to.
So like in New York City, there is a whole society
of philanthropists and, you know, I'm only a messenger.
From what I understand, it is dominated by the wives
and other female relatives of the richest men in the city.
Right? And they will come to decisions,
what are the most important charities in the world?
And their ideas about what the most important charities
in the world are based upon being a New York socialite seem
to be very much at odds
with what any cost-benefit analysis would ever say.
It's like, well, it's very important
to support New York Ballet.
That's a given.
Right? And New York City is a very important place
and that's like the most pressing concern
in the world is Exhibition Ballet.
And then, let's see, really important to go
and have more money for breast cancer.
Like, well, how much do we already have per person here
compared to a bunch of other diseases
that kill a lot more people but don't get the same kind
of funding and so on down the list.
So it seems like there may be a problem there.
All right.
Now anyway, so during the next two lectures,
I'm going to be playing devil's advocate.
So I will in many ways just be channeling Conman
and Tversky who are the most famous behavioral economists
in history, even today.
Thaler, by virtue of staying alive,
I think is gradually pushing out Tversky.
But Conman is still hanging in there and still going strong.
So anyway, so now a strange thing
about behavioral economics is
that there generally are bimodal reactions to it.
So there's either the view of it's worthless
and I don't ever have to read it or the view
of it's the only thing worth reading and anyone
and it means that pretty much everything else that's ever gone
on in economics is almost worthless
because behavioral economics has corrected it all.
All right.
Now, my view is intermediate, so I think that this is another case where there is a great
battle of personalities and ideas based not upon a calm evaluation, but rather people
identifying with a team and then trying to say that everyone on the other team is terrible
and stupid.
So, I think there's actually a lot for everyone to learn, and we can all calm down and get
along and advance the science of economics.
I think this is happening gradually as there are more people who have grown up never realizing
that you might do economics free from psychology.
But, I'm not sure.
Alright, so questions before we get going.
Alright, let's start on one of the earliest kinds of results that economists started doing.
Actually, this is one psychologist started and then economists went and did their own
studies adding on incentives to see what would make a difference.
Alright, so as I said, for practical purposes, economists almost always assume that human
beings have constant preferences, stable preferences over outcomes.
But behavioral economists have found a bunch of what appear to be counter examples.
So, a single individual will prefer A to B or B to A for reasons that seem irrelevant.
And when this happens, it's called a preference reversal.
What are some examples?
Similarly equivalent descriptions of the same situation will lead to different choices.
So, there is an experiment where they actually had medical students.
Now this is a hypothetical example, but nevertheless it's experimental because they're randomly
assigned to get one or the other version of the question.
So some of the medical students are told, suppose there's a treatment that has a 90%
chance of working.
Should you do that?
And then the other one, suppose you have a treatment that has a 10% chance of failing.
Should you do that?
And in both cases, success and failure are defined in the same way.
So it's just a matter of saying 90% success or 10% failure.
And this, by definition, seems to be the same thing.
90% success equals 10% failure.
And yet actually, the rates at which medical students say that they would use a treatment
depends upon whether you describe it as success or failure.
This is something you can also pretty clearly see in all of marketing.
Like in marketing, do you ever want to go and talk about how our product doesn't suck
as much as the other products that might be competing for your attention?
No, you want to say it's even better.
It's the very best of these.
Now logically, again, to say, look, it's the least bad of all of them.
Same thing.
But you don't want to say it that way.
Anyone will advise you.
Just like if you are proposing marriage, you want to say, look, I'm the best fit for you
and you're the best fit for me.
You don't want to say, we are the least bad fits for each other out of the choices that
are available in this world, which is the same thing.
But it's not a good way to say it.
Right now, some people instinctively understand this kind of thing.
Like my younger son is a natural advertising executive.
So he's always looking for a way to put whatever he wants in the most favorable possible light.
So it's like, thank you, mommy, for being a nice mommy that would let me use the tablet
all that I want.
All right.
It's like, hmm.
So there appears to be a combination of a bunch of different claims that you're blending
in there, trying to package as a compliment.
But there's also a thinly veiled threat of you are not a nice mommy if you don't give
me this tablet to play with.
All right.
So that's the way that a lot of marketing works.
And when you guys are looking for jobs, I strongly urge you to apply the wisdom of the
ages.
You don't want to go and tell people, look, I don't think you can do better than me.
That's equivalent to I am your best option.
But the first way of saying it sounds insulting and pessimistic and emphasizing just the wretchedness
of man.
You don't want to do that when you're selling yourself.
You want to say, look, I understand a school of your caliber has many attractive options.
But I think that our fit between us goes beyond that.
We are meant for each other.
I am meant to do my work with you, and you are meant to have me.
Of course, you should do it better than that.
So there's always a question of, will it blow up in your face if you lay the flattery on
too thick?
I've actually occasionally said this.
So I remember once back in 1999, there was a guy interviewing here.
And to my mind, he put the flattery on so thick, I said, look, this is just going to
be at the embarrassing level.
He's sending out these thank you notes where he's basically saying, I worship you.
You are fantastic.
And I told Tyler, doesn't he understand that this is overkill?
And Tyler just smirked at me and said, Brian, you don't understand the world at all.
Just watch and see what happens at the meeting.
I'm like, all right, at the meeting, people say, and he sent me the nicest thank you notes.
I was like, wow.
All right.
So apparently, you cannot lay it on too thick.
All right.
Well, did he get hired?
Yes, he did.
All right.
He didn't stay long, but he was hired.
OK.
Now, another example of preference reversal.
So people sometimes select the choice that they put less monetary value on.
So remember, the way that economists normally think about the way we order things is that
you'll always choose the thing that you put the highest dollar value on.
So if you have five options, what's your willingness to pay for each one?
And then, well, which one are you going to pick?
It's going to be the one you put the highest dollar value on.
And yet, in experiments, people sometimes don't do this.
So there's a classic experiment where you give people the choice of two bets.
And you say, look, you can either have an 8 ninth chance of $4, or that's one possibility,
or you can have a 1 ninth chance of $40.
And this one is called high.
This one is called low.
All right.
So normally, people prefer this one if they have a choice, if they're choosing them.
But if you give the person a gamble and try to buy it back for them, they want more money
for that one, even though this is the one that they would pick.
And that's kind of weird.
They may say, yeah, those choices are really similar to each other.
Let's see.
So here we have an expected value of 32 ninths.
There we have 40 ninths.
They're very close to each other.
But nevertheless, it is odd that people would generally like this one more, but want more
money to sell that one.
That's right.
OK.
All right.
So these preference reversals have got a lot of attention.
I think there's at least 100 articles published by economists on preference reversals.
And psychologists started it.
So the economists who did the earliest experiments, at least their story is they thought that
they could disprove the psychologists, but then lo and behold, the psychologists are
right.
I'm a little suspicious of that theory, of that story, actually.
But in any case, lots of research on this by economists, and then before that, plenty
in psychology.
So how important is it in the real world?
I'm not convinced it's that big of a deal.
All right.
So yeah.
So it is a good idea to try to say the glass is half full if you want to persuade people
rather than saying the glass is half empty.
So that's common sense.
That's true.
But normally, the experiments get choices that are really close to each other and then
get it, and then get these reversals.
They don't get choices that are really different from each other.
There's no experiment where people say, you're choosing between that and that.
And then people prefer this one, but they want more money for that one, or more money
to sell that one.
No, you get choices that are really similar when you get those reversals.
So it isn't showing that you can go and manipulate people a lot.
It's showing you can manipulate them a little bit.
So obviously, if you're trying to get people to play Russian roulette, which you shouldn't
do, but you're going to say, look, five, six chance you survive.
So why not, man?
So that's not very convincing.
And in general, even though it is a standard sales trick to go and try to frame everything
in a positive light, if you've had anyone here ever been a salesman, how hard is it
to sell stuff to people?
It's hard.
It's a trick you got, and you still normally fail.
Now maybe you do better if you master all the tricks, but people are not actually that
manipulable.
And especially, look, I just don't want that thing.
I don't like football.
It's like, but how about if I gave you a free beer with it?
No, that's not enough.
I don't like the game.
It's boring to me, and it's loud, and I just don't like it.
Well, how about if I gave you a jersey?
No.
Well, what if?
No, no, no.
And for most products, most people are probably pretty much impossible to sell to them using
all the tricks.
So worth keeping that in mind.
So I said most focus on close choices.
So if you've got a heavy metal fan, are you going to say, well, look, I'm going to frame
things in a certain way, and then you're going to choose Bach over Ozzy Osbourne?
It seems very unlikely that you could ever accomplish something like that.
And then even the choice of surgery is likely to seem pretty close.
So it's like 90% chance of success, 10% of penicillin, it's really bad either way, actually.
What am I going to do?
Now since writing these notes, I have come across what to my mind is much more compelling
evidence on just bad medical decisions being made due to enumeracy.
So psychologist Gerard Gigerentzer, who's one of the biggest psychologists in all of
Europe, has done quite a bit of work on how enumeracy leads people to go and get screened
for different problems, when in fact on average people get screened, might have much worse
outcomes overall.
Right?
You're like, why would getting screened lead to bad outcomes?
Well, are you familiar with false positives?
Yes.
So for rare problems, there are high false positive rates.
And if false positives lead to dangerous and horrible treatments, then it's quite possible
that if you weren't screened, you actually would have been better off.
And he actually crunches the numbers and finds that for both prostate screening and for breast
cancer screening, that they actually, you are better off not being screened if you're
an average person.
Right now, another thing in the background is there are a lot of cancers as well as other
problems, which if you do nothing about them, you will never, they will never, you will
actually die before anything bad happens.
So prostate cancer being one of the clearest cases where it's a very slow growing cancer
and the treatments are horrifying.
I don't even want to tell you how bad they are, but you can read GigaRent and see if
you want to hear about it.
Oh my God, that's terrible.
And then, it's very, they'll say like if in fact it would take 20 years to kill you and
you're 70, and it would lead to a very large reduction in your quality of life to get the
treatment.
So anyway, so here he has much more specific evidence on innumeracy.
And again, it's the innumeracy of just not really understanding false positives.
But then he says, I mean, not only do normal people not understand false positives well,
but even doctors are really bad with false positives.
Right?
And like actual practitioning doctors who work in oncology, who really ought to know
better don't.
So there's a book where he said, okay, that seems like it's really having some real world
damage.
So yes, this is not medical advice for legal purposes.
But read the book.
It's good.
Right?
And his answer is also excellent in trying to come up with new ways of showing people
the numerate perspective.
So he actually has this whole way of doing it with like different like happy and sad
faces of different levels and showing, look, out of all these people, here are the people
who get screened and they don't, and they're perfectly fine and they don't find anything.
And he shows them with a slightly unfavorable, a slightly sad face because it's not fun to
be screened.
Right?
Right?
And these are the people who actually are saved and there's like hardly anyone like
that.
And then these are the people who would have had no problem, but they went and got a horrible,
but they tested positive even though they didn't have the problem or they had a very
slow growing problem.
And then these people, the faces are like, so, and he's trying, you know, he'd been
lobbying to go and like, like say, like, let's say that anytime someone is getting, is considering
chemotherapy, they get this page to go and explain and try to clarify the issue with
the false positives as well as the issue of how horrible it is to be treated for a problem
that you don't have or problem that you will die before you actually get.
So, all right.
So, Gigerentzer.
There's actually a long running feud between Thaler and Gigerentzer, which as to what the,
what the substance of it is, from what I can tell, it's an unrequited feud where Thaler
hates Gigerentzer and Gigerentzer doesn't seem to care.
I'm not sure what's really going on there, but this is certainly not a case where Thaler
could reasonably say this is just an ignorant man who doesn't know what he's talking about.
He is one of, a very well published empirical psychologist who is bringing up a bunch of
things that Thaler doesn't think are important, but seem like they probably are.
All right.
Questions about preference reversals?
Anyone wondering about that?
All right.
In that case, why don't we go and take our 10 minute break now and then up here, let's
see, so Julia is defending her dissertation very soon, so she has not finished her homework,
but you'll get it back soon.
But so up here, please just deliver homework seven and then you can pick up homework eight,
you can pick up the answer key for homework seven, you can pick up the answer key for
homework six.
Just a quick question about homework.
Yes.
We, if the question's about, sorry.
The Winters curse?
Yes.
I just did it all.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, you should.
So, yes.
And so, when you get through the full lesson, they.
Yeah, yeah.
So, yeah, just read, read, read, read, finish up and realize that since there is a verb,
that there is not really a class on that.
Okay here?
Sure.
All right.
Let us resume.
All right.
Can you get the door back there, please?
All right.
So, remember back in week two when we were doing basic general equilibrium theory and
we were going and indicating endowments by x and then we were figuring out how much x
people would actually consume in equilibriums.
Remember, like, x i is how much you consume of x, x i bar is how much you start with,
and the way that it worked in those models is that your consumption depended entirely
upon the price of x times the initial amount of x plus the price of y times the initial
amount of y that you have, which is, in other words, that is equal to your initial endowment,
right?
Your initial income.
Okay?
And in those models, it does not matter where your income comes from.
So, you could be someone who hates x, but you start with a lot of x.
It makes you rich, but you do not like it, and what do you do?
You sell it so you can go and buy the stuff that you actually like.
All right.
So, that is the way that the standard economic models work.
But, in the real world, people's endowments and preferences seem to interact.
Of course, in the real world, you could always say, well, maybe it is just a spurious correlation,
like maybe people naturally start with stuff that they like for whatever reason.
But, in an experiment, you can go and very clearly show that this is not true by randomly
giving people stuff and then seeing that the stuff that you start with changes the stuff
that you end up with.
All right.
Now, the simplest anomaly of this kind, the simplest way that endowments interact with
preferences is called the endowment effect.
Endowment effect.
Okay.
So people seem to put more value on their objects simply because they are their objects.
All right.
So, there is a classic experiment where people are given a coffee cup and some people are
given a coffee cup, not everybody.
And the people that are given a coffee cup want more money to sell it back than people
who don't start with a coffee cup will pay in order to get one.
It seems like just giving them a cup and saying, this is your cup now.
It's Brian's cup, changes the way that people feel about it.
And they say, oh, this is my cup.
Well, since it is my cup, it is a special cup.
And I like it.
And if you want to buy it from me, you're going to have to pay me a lot of money.
Okay.
All right.
So, now, there were some critics that said, well, there's a wealth effect.
All right.
So, you give me a coffee cup and I'm like a dollar richer.
And that means that I want more money in exchange for stuff.
But again, for this theory to work, that wouldn't just increase the amount of money that you
need to sell your coffee cup.
You could give me a coffee cup and I'd want more money to sell anything to you.
All right.
And I don't think there's any sign that this is actually true.
The people are this way.
Now, this is the kind of anomaly that I really like because as a parent, you can see it very
strongly from a young age, even though parents really try to root it out of kids.
And yet, we fail.
So, if you go and let a kid get something, that kid will like to say, okay, this is mine
now.
And if you want to take that thing back, they will get really angry and sad or both.
Whereas if they had never had it in the first place, they wouldn't feel that way.
And this is why when people give kids a toy to play with, they're often very careful and
say, look, we're letting you play with it, but it's not your toy.
It belongs to your cousin.
You're going to have to give it back.
Get ready.
All right.
Be aware.
This is not yours.
It doesn't belong to you.
It is not your property.
This is in no way implies a contract, implicit or explicit.
No deed has been handed out.
Right?
So, you can't kid things like this, and if you do, then there is a reduced, though still
a model, still substantial risk of them flipping out at you when it's time to go and they have
to let the thing go.
All right.
And if you go and take a look at, say, preschoolers playing, one of the most common causes of
anger and fighting is one kid trying to grab something that belongs to another kid.
Right?
Very upsetting.
Right?
And this is true even when you just randomly hand out the toys.
Still, this is mine now.
You don't even like dolls.
I do now.
This doll I like.
It's my doll.
And you're not taking it from me.
Another really egregious example of this, anyone ever seen a show like Hoarders?
All right.
Look, I own 80 computers from the 1980s.
They don't work and they're sitting in my garage or they're filling up my room and no
one will visit me anymore because there's no room to walk and they're afraid that my
grandchildren will have a computer fall on them.
I'm not giving them up.
No way.
Those are my computers.
They are my legacy.
And of course, these people are not so far from people who are only mildly disturbed
that you know.
It's just a more extreme case.
So this is really going on.
Like I said, it seems pretty hard to deny.
My favorite example of this actually is for parents.
So of course, a key thing of being a parent is you take a throw of the genetic dice.
You don't know what egg you're going to get.
You don't know what sperm is going to be.
You don't know what the two will do when they hit each other.
Not if someone has a child.
They're already there, they've gotten to know the child.
If you were to say, well, we could go and replace this
with another child who's better,
people normally respond very poorly.
Now, if the kid's an ax murderer,
then maybe there's an issue.
They're like, man, this kid is the worst.
But if it is just a totally normal kid,
no better than what you expect,
and you offer to replace it with a super kid,
normal human reaction is horror.
And to look at you like you,
like what kind of an inhuman monster are you,
you would suggest such a thing.
And certainly, no, if so,
in the ultimate tragic situation of someone losing a child,
if you were to say, well, it's really no different
than if you never had the child in the first place,
never say this.
This is because it doesn't feel that way
to any normal human.
Robin Hanson actually did bite the bullet and said,
yeah, I'd go and swap my kids out for improved models.
I didn't believe him, but.
So people are like, what if the existing one says,
please, daddy, don't go back in time
and replace me with another child, please, no.
I love you, daddy.
Feel like Robin would really bite the bullet,
but he's never been in that situation, so I don't know.
And notice, so something like 25%
of all pregnancies are unplanned.
So you have an unplanned pregnancy,
and a very common thing is for people to say,
well, we weren't planning on having a kid,
and we'll have a kid, but you know what?
We're gonna have a kid now.
And what is the normal way people feel about that kid
after they've had the kid for a few hours,
say certainly a few weeks?
Yes, we love him.
We love this child that we were desperately trying
to not have.
Because 10 short months ago, we were really trying
to not have anything remotely in this ballpark.
And now we have the child, and we love him,
and he's great, and he's fantastic in every way.
This is the best baby in the whole world.
All right, very normal human reaction.
And no, this is an important decision.
This is not just a small thing.
All right, now notice this has some interesting implications
of the Coase theorem.
So I know that Walter Williams said you read
Coase's original article, The Problem of Social Cost.
This does not invalidate the Coase theorem,
but it does mean that what people value
actually depends upon what they start with,
so which means that the initial assignment of rights
matters a lot more than it seems.
Because to, not entirely, but to some extent,
but there will be a large effect of who starts with what
on what finally happens.
So if the farmer is the one that has the right
to not be polluted on, and there's an endowment effect,
this will make him value not being polluted on more.
This changes his mind, changes the way that he feels,
and therefore, if you go and give it to the farmer
that says that even with zero transaction costs,
you would still see less pollution
and equilibrium because of this.
So, again, it doesn't mean the Coase theorem is wrong,
but it does mean that there is a deeper psychology going on,
and possibly this explains why the Coase theorem
is so counterintuitive to most people,
because most people feel the endowment effect
is there on some level, you know,
they can't really articulate it,
and then when you say it doesn't matter who gets it
and show them the logic, okay, I guess that's right,
but something's missing.
Maybe what's missing is that you're forgetting
that whoever starts the right actually
is going to care about it more, all else equal, of course,
although, you know, obviously,
if you go and give me the right
to some basketball trading cards or something,
I'm not gonna be interested, and then I'll sell them,
even though I'm probably a little bit more likely
to want to keep them than I am to buy them,
and I'm certainly not gonna buy them,
but there's some small chance I'd say,
I don't know, it's kinda cool, look at these things.
All right, now, of course, the standard way
of dealing with the endowment effect
is just to appeal to transactions costs.
In experiments, people generally have nothing else
to do with their time except trade something,
so if anything, you think there's a bias
in favor of making deals because otherwise,
you're sitting there bored, right,
just like if you're in, you're playing a board game,
and one thing you can do is trade,
sometimes people trade just because they don't know,
well, I'm kinda bored here, I wanna do something or other,
let's trade some wheat for some sheep
or something like that, let's try it,
I don't know, let's see what happens, right?
So the fact that we have fewer trades than you expect
in an experimental setting, which is super boring
and there's nothing else much going on,
seems to be pretty strong evidence,
but again, also, just when you make it really easy
to do the transaction and people still act
like there's really high transactions costs,
you say, look, I'll handle all the legwork,
I'll handle everything, I'll give you the money
right here, right now, you don't have to trust me,
you don't have to worry about anything,
even then, there's still quite a bit of reluctance.
So my in-laws are, they would be capable
of being on hoarders, actually.
They would be in the lower, like in the bottom third
of people that appear on hoarders,
but if they were on hoarders, it would not be,
people would not say, why are they on hoarders?
And literally, they had a car, a non-working car
sitting in their driveway, someone came
and knocked on their door and said,
I'll give you $4,000 for this Oldsmobile from the 80s,
which would have a blue book value of maybe that
if you're lucky if it worked.
And my mother-in-law wanted to say yes,
but my father-in-law vetoed it, no, it is our car.
We did not just go and sell our cars
just because they don't drive and I'm never gonna fix it
and they're offering us a price that is way behind
what any, what do you ever think,
and the guy is right here at our door
with a certified check, no.
All right, that's where, so it's not transactions costs
in this case, it's somehow the fact that they own the car
makes them, if not exactly fall in love with the car,
at least feel extremely attached,
like you are ripping out part of my soul
if you make me sell this car.
All right, so questions about the Neyman effect?
Understanding these questions, all right.
So, and again, this is very much fits with my pet theory,
which is that you wanna see the true nature
of human emotions, look at preschoolers,
because they're honest and they're not hiding
their emotions very much, they're just blurting out
whatever their feelings are and acting on them
and then you can see, wow, just selling someone
that belongs to them really changes the way
they feel about it, even if it's like a leaf
a kid picks up on the ground, like,
where my leaf broke?
I'll give you another one, that's not my leaf!
Like, you can't even tell the difference.
Oh yes I can, like, describe it.
I can't really describe it, but from sight,
I can say that's mine, that's my special leaf.
All right, now, a more complex anomaly
of the effect goes under the name of status quo bias.
All right, so this says that people are somewhat
reluctant to either buy or sell.
So you can, and in general reluctant to go
and modify a situation, even when they can do so
at a low cost, and even when the situation,
ex ante would not have been considered
an especially good one, but there's something about
you throw the dice, this is what you get,
people don't wanna go and fiddle with it.
All right, so you can make an alternative
more popular just by calling it the status quo,
right, and even when transactions costs are negligible.
So, you know, like, if there is like a standard burger
on the menu, even people who would not have ordered
that burger, there's a tendency to say,
fine, that's the one that I want.
But you don't really like some of those things,
and let's just go with that standard thing.
I don't wanna have something different there.
Right, now, Jeff Sachs, when he was going
and advising a lot of ex-communist countries
on how to privatize, he explicitly appealed to this
and said, this is why we need to just ram down
as much privatization down their throats
as we can before the next election.
Because they don't like it, we're changing things,
but it's gonna be really good in the long run,
and if we can successfully ram it down their throats,
they won't reverse it.
Then they'll just accept it.
Right, so that was his theory, and like you said,
while not 100% correct, still, the idea
that if you just push it through, that it will stay there,
seems to be a lot to that.
You can see that now with Obamacare.
Right, so, it seems like there's a lot of dissatisfaction
with Obamacare.
If people could go back in time and unpass it,
they probably would, but given that it's here,
it's really hard for people to just say,
fine, let's just go and wipe it off the books
and go back to where we were.
Right, so, again, of course, in the real world,
you can always go and say, well,
it's not really a good example,
but if no real world example seems good to you,
then maybe you are just deliberately trying
to refuse to acknowledge something
that is actually a big deal.
All right, so, and again, so, like,
if you just look at government policies around the world,
and just think, so, suppose that we could get rid
of the program and then wipe everybody's memories clear
so they don't remember they ever had the program.
Would they immediately readopt it or not?
Right, so, imagine that we just got rid
of Social Security overnight,
and then we wiped everybody's memory
that there ever had been Social Security.
I can believe that it would happen again,
but it wouldn't happen this year.
It might take decades for it to happen again.
Right, but once it's on the book,
then people take it for granted, people acclimate to it,
and that's what we are going to have.
Right, but you could also have got,
you know, if you had put on some restrictions on it,
people will acclimate to those restrictions.
Right, so, and people just get used
to whatever it actually is that they've got,
and tend to stick with it.
All right, so questions about that?
Yeah, Nathan?
Could some of these biases be explained
in terms of, like, a search theoretic account
of it's costly to figure out
whether a change would be good or bad?
Yeah, yeah, sure, in the real world,
you can always say maybe you just don't understand
what's going on, and then maybe some information
is provided for it.
In the experiment, that's where they try
to make it very clear.
It's like, all right, look, here's the coffee cup.
Look it over all you want.
It's a coffee cup.
You say, well, now that I've got it,
I can tell that it's a really great coffee cup.
It's pretty strange to say,
like, what have you learned about it?
This isn't about, but yes, you know,
in the real world, you could always say things like that,
but, you know, in an experimental setting,
that's where you can go and rule that out
by saying, look, we randomly assigned it,
and whatever people randomly assigned,
they acted like it was better.
Even if they knew it was random,
so they knew that there isn't really
any search going on here.
It's just, you've only seen one of two options.
Here's one thing that I've noticed even with older kids.
Like, I've noticed older kids will say, look,
this movie is the best movie ever,
and there's no other movie as good as it,
and say, well, you haven't seen any of the other movies.
So why, and, or maybe you say that, like,
your parents would only go and show you
the best possible movie, but, you know,
very often when you actually go and try things
that your parents ever recommended,
you learn that you actually like the things
your parents didn't recommend better.
So what is it about the fact that this is
the only Western you've ever seen
that makes you go around confidently saying
it's the best Western ever?
Again, you might say search theory.
It doesn't seem like search.
It seems more like endowment effect masquerading
as search was like, well, you know,
I mean, like, I hear, you know, even very smart,
I want to say even very smart teenagers,
I almost want to say especially very smart teenagers,
like, read one science fiction book,
and they'll say, it's the best science fiction book
ever written by far.
Like, well, how do you know, kid?
You haven't read any other books.
You know, I've read enough.
One answers it.
It's like, well, you know what?
You're actually part of experiment.
I randomly assigned it to you.
I could have been any book, and I said,
well, apparently you randomly assigned
the best sci-fi book in the universe.
It's possible, but seems suspicious.
All right, so what I'm saying, in the real world,
it's always easy to say, oh, none of the examples
are really any good.
The endowment effect, status quo bias,
say it's transactions cost, you can say it's information cost.
And again, if you start thinking about
why is something your endowment,
or why is it that something is in the,
or why is it that something's status quo,
there's usually a reason for it.
So, like, when your parents go and give you
a gift for Christmas, is it because they think
you're going to hate it?
No, your parents give you things
they think that you're going to like, hopefully.
They're nice parents, anyway.
They give you stuff they think that you're going to like.
So the very fact that they're giving it to you,
that may provide some information.
Look, they're going and saying,
look, this is your special bicycle.
Right, and we picked it out.
We think this is one that you're really going to like.
It's just the right, right for you.
We thought about it, really enjoyed it.
Or sometimes you may say, look, this is a book
that I loved when I was your age,
and I think you might like it, too.
Right, so here, there's information being given,
and the fact that it's your endowment
actually might tell you something in the real world.
Right, or the status quo in a restaurant.
Do restaurants randomly decide
what the contents of a Big Mac will be?
Like McDonald's say, well, let's see, what is this?
It's got seven features, right?
Seven, was it nine?
What are the standardized features of a Big Mac?
Two all-beef patties, special sauce,
lettuce, cheese, pickles, onions,
on a sesame seed bun.
All right, that one.
Now, do you think that they just throw dice
to come up with that combination?
They probably did a lot of market research
to find out what most people like,
and that's why they make it the standard option,
because you don't want to pick
a really weird standard option,
which would then require that you're constantly
going and adjusting the order.
Instead, you want to get an option
that has very broad appeal,
and then you only have to adjust it for someone,
well, this guy doesn't like pickles.
There's weird people who don't like pickles.
All right, fine, we'll go and adjust it.
But you want to go and pick a standard option
that's popular normally.
So usually the status quo becomes the status quo
by a process of market research,
so a lot of people would genuinely and sincerely like it,
and therefore, the effect is not nearly as big
as it might seem on the surface.
Okay, all right.
So, and let's see, I was thinking of something else
relating to that.
Let's see.
It'll come to me.
All right.
Okay, all right, and like I said,
most experiments focus on pretty close choices,
so it's not like they give you,
like the status quo was either you have a job
as a professor or a job as a janitor,
like let's say, and then let's see what happens, right?
Because of course, in that case,
there would be an enormous number of people
who want to shift over and be a professor
rather than a janitor.
So instead, you get jobs that are really close to each other,
or like I don't think this has ever been
an experiment with jobs, but that is the idea.
So yeah, it's true that kids, for example,
seem like they gravitate to jobs
that are ones that their parents had, right?
But again, this is the case where it's like,
well, it's within a broad social class
where this is a job, this is a kind of general job
that people like me would ordinarily get,
but if you're Einstein and you're a dad to a janitor,
then you're not very likely to become a janitor
in that case, that's one like,
oh, that doesn't seem very good,
whereas if you're Einstein and your dad's an economist,
then you might get into economics at an early age,
and you go down that appealing route
rather than a bunch of other routes
that are also very appealing,
which would use those talents, right?
Similarly, if someone gave you 100 coffee cups,
it is likely that you would sell almost all of them.
Now, since I wrote this, Jonathan List
has done a bunch of field experiments
involving things like this.
In particular, he did field experiments
where he tested for endowment effects
among professional baseball card traders.
And what he found is professional baseball card traders
do not seem to have an endowment effect.
So even though the professional traders
usually are also collectors,
but nevertheless, they seem to be very good
at distinguishing between objective market value
and value to them, and they do not readily fall prey
to this endowment effect.
And again, the whole point of this was,
these are people in the real world.
These are people who actually buy
and sell baseball cards for a living,
and it seems like that process actually goes
and weaves the endowment effect out of them.
Yet it might be that if you have a big endowment effect,
you don't stay in business very long
because you wind up wasting a lot of money
on your own hobby, right?
So don't get high on your own supply
is another way of thinking about it.
Yes?
Do things like that potentially invalidate
the critique that incentives don't matter?
Yeah, I mean, that's certainly one way of reading it,
is saying that when it is your occupation,
when being unreasonable would go and be very costly,
then you're more reasonable, yeah, so that seems fair.
Although you could also say maybe it's incentives,
maybe it's learning or experience,
maybe it's actually that being part of the market process
kills some normal human emotions.
Right, so if you buy and sell securities for a living,
probably a lot of the thrill of it goes out.
Just like if you are a dealer at a Las Vegas casino,
I'm not sure, but my guess is that the game
no longer seems all that exciting to you anymore
after a while.
My guess is that when they want thrills,
they don't just go and move around
from the dealer side of the table
over to the player side of the table in order to go and play.
Instead, I'm thinking that it's likely,
I have no evidence for this, it just seems fair,
like an observation that's likely to be true,
that they've done it so much
that all of the allure of the game is gone,
the magic has gone out, and it's no fun anymore.
But maybe I'm wrong.
All right, so, let's see here.
All right, other questions about this?
Other things you're wondering about?
Oh yeah, now I remember what I was gonna say.
So Richard Thaler,
again, one of the three most famous behavioral economists,
has made a very big deal about nudging.
So you're familiar with the book Nudge,
co-author of the Cass Sunstein.
All right, now a key part of the book is this idea
that you could use things like status quo bias
to nudge people in healthier directions.
So one of his suggestions is,
why don't we go and put the salad bar
at the front of the buffet
to encourage people to eat more healthy meals?
All right, now it's all interesting,
but here's something that at least seems to me
that he's never dealt with,
which is that, well, the salad is not put there randomly.
Who decides where to put the salad?
The owner of the buffet decides where to arrange things.
Why did they decide where to do it?
Presumably because, yes, they make more money
if they don't put the salad at the front.
So when he talks about, look, there's a free lunch
where we can make people just as satisfied as customers,
but also make them healthier.
It's not really a free lunch
because someone else has already optimized this
for their own purposes.
So there isn't really some way
that you can just go and change things around
and no one will be the wiser.
Even if the customers' behavior has changed,
it looks like the restaurants that run the buffets
feel like they're gonna go home unhappy.
It's like, yeah, I go there, the salad's first,
so I eat some salad,
and then I never went back to that buffet again
because I came away with a very dissatisfied feeling,
like I was being bossed around,
like they were trying to guilt me
into eating something I didn't wanna eat.
So that's something that you have to consider
when you're thinking about nudging.
When you actually have a self-interested actor
that is arranging the nudges,
the fact that if someone went
and made them change things around
is not really very relevant
because they've already figured out how they wanna do it,
which is optimal for them.
So it's not nearly the simple free lunch
that at least the popularizations of Sunstein and Thaler
will often present.
Although, so I would say that
when I talk to them often, I would say their own view,
their full view is more subtle
than the view that people often attribute to them.
Although I'd also say that they're kind of responsible
for the view that people attribute to them
because you have to sort of cross-examine them
to get the qualifications.
They aren't volunteering the qualifications,
which seems like they should.
Yes?
I was gonna say, doesn't that beg the question
that the restaurateurs didn't just suffer
from the status quo bias?
The restaurateurs didn't just suffer from the status quo bias?
I mean it's possible, but it's pretty striking that almost every restaurant goes and puts
the yummy mouthwatering stuff first.
And again, thinking about the Aziz Ansari comedy sketch where he's saying, when someone
is making a salad, nobody starts looking over, mmm, a salad.
Oh yeah, let me get some of that.
Whereas if it's ribs, then it's like, mmm, ribs.
So if you're just trying to go and have people leave with a positive emotional appraisal,
again, I know that's just evidence from a comedian, but sure resonated with me that
like, yeah, I never have anyone get all excited over a salad.
Where I've had lots of people who aren't eating meat or anything, just mmm, could I have some
of that, even if they have no hope of getting it.
So back in January, I was in California and for my niece's birthday, I went and bought
her McDonald's for lunch.
And some strange kids just started coming up and asking for fries.
They didn't ask, do you have a salad in there?
Fries, and then as it turned out, I bought too many fries, so I said, you can have a
whole thing.
Seriously?
Yeah, seriously, go and share it with your friends.
So maybe it is just the endowment effect.
Maybe McDonald's would make more profits or just as much profits if they were always saying,
you want a salad with that?
But it doesn't seem very likely.
All right, so questions, questions.
So the longer I go on, the bigger reveal these things seem to me.
So again, that's just my impression, but I feel like I see them in the real world for
very important cases.
Oh yeah, one other weird case of status quo bias.
When I'm hanging out with my dad, I'll often say, why don't we go and eat over there?
And he'll just say, well, normally I don't do that.
And that to him is a very strong argument against any idea I have.
Normally I don't do that.
It's like, no, there's no like, well, it tastes better, it's cheaper, there's nothing.
I just don't do that thing.
Well, why don't we just start?
Why don't we like, well, don't you want to try something new?
No, I do not want to try anything new.
Well, like the things you're doing seem so great, you seem pretty grumpy.
Maybe it's because you don't try new fun things.
No, I don't want to be grumpy.
All right.
So moving on.
All right, so selfishness and cooperation.
Peer theorists very rarely mention selfishness, or in fact, I've heard many peer theorists
actually deny flatly that economics has any assumption of selfishness baked into it.
But almost all real world applications of economic theory do assume narrowly selfish
behavior.
This is actually what's going on.
This is why we caught Adam Smith.
When we say socialism just doesn't work, whenever we say like incentives matter, tragedy of
the commons, whenever we talk about rent control, whenever we talk about taxes, underlying all
of this is the idea that people don't like working for strangers for free.
People don't like just giving stuff to strangers.
People don't want to suffer just because it benefits society.
This is, there are a few people like that maybe.
There's a lot of people who claim to be like that who aren't.
And there's a whole lot of people who just grump and are, no, I don't want to.
All right.
So we have almost all real world applications assume that people are narrowly selfish.
Now a slight variation on this, which a number of economists have picked up from the field
of evolutionary psychology, is something called inclusive fitness.
Right now, how many of you have ever heard of a book called The Selfish Gene by Richard
Dawkins?
Yes.
So that is probably still the best popularization of the idea of inclusive fitness.
So the idea here is that human beings, though we love being alive and doing all of our stuff,
but also we like all other animals.
We are here because of our genes.
And genes that don't propagate themselves tend to die out.
We, the very fact that we're here indicates we got the kind of genes that haven't died
out so far.
We've made it so far.
Right?
And now when you start thinking about this, there are many ways this just simply, this
predicts narrow selfishness.
Like, so, I suppose there were cavemen a million years ago who went and gave all their food
away to total strangers with no expectation of ever being paid back.
What's likely to happen to cavemen like that?
They die.
So we are not their descendants.
We're the descendants of the cavemen who did not like to go and throw and give their food
away to total strangers for free.
All right, pretty obvious point.
Now, Inclusive Fitness goes and adds on extra insight that says, yeah, but suppose a million
years ago there was a caveman who looked at his baby and said, you little beggar, what
are you ever going to do for me?
Well, you're like, you can't even talk.
You're not, you won't even remember what I've ever done for you.
And I could easily be dead by the time you're old enough to help me out.
So forget you, little baby.
All right, so imagine that there were some cavemen who treated their own biological offspring
with that level of apathy.
All right, well, what happened to those babies?
They died off.
So how many descendants did those cavemen have?
None.
So we are not descended from those cavemen either.
We're descended from the cavemen who didn't like giving stuff to total strangers for free
but love their own blood.
Love their own blood relations.
Now how much do they need to love their own blood relations?
This is where inclusive fitness gets interesting because there's a whole set of fractions associated
with the degree of blood relation.
So for example, with a biological sibling or a biological child, what fraction of your
genes do you approximately share?
One.
One half.
One half.
Yes, one half.
On the other hand, with say a cousin, how many, so if you have a first cousin, what
fraction of your genes do you have in common with your first cousin?
An eighth.
An eighth.
Yes, because remember that, so, so with your own, so if with your brother, say, so I have
half my brother's genes and his daughter has half of his genes, so my niece has one fourth
of my genes, but my kids only have half of mine, so they actually only have an eighth
each.
All right.
And so on.
So you can go and crunch all this math.
It's actually more complicated in the real world because there's actually mild incest
going on all the time.
So for example, if you marry within your own ethnicity, then you probably actually share
more than half the genes with your kids because you are a distant relation of your spouse.
All right.
So I don't want to gross anybody out, but that's what's going on.
All right.
Now, this led, well, I think it was actually the founder of inclusive fitness theory, Hamilton,
and he was asked, would you die for your brother, he said, no, but I would die for two brothers
or eight cousins.
All right.
Now that sounds a little bit stronger than reality and support, but again, the idea of
this is that when we are evaluating human selfishness, we should be looking at it not
through the narrow view of the, of the interests of the individual, but rather through this,
rather through the genes eye point of view, because that's really what we're evolved to
be like.
For most purposes, of course, it doesn't matter because normally we are trading with people
that we're not related to.
But what you're doing, say economics of the family, then suddenly it's very important
because now suddenly we're dealing with people that we are, that we are very closely related
to.
They are an extension of oneself in a way.
All right.
So now, so if you've got perfectly selfish people who are not relatives at all, there
are still funny ways that you can get cooperation there.
We already talked about them when we did game theory.
So you've got two people, they're not related at all.
They don't intrinsically care about each other at all.
How can they get, make cooperation work?
Well, we talked about, so game, game, remember game theory.
What's the obvious way they can make cooperation work?
Starts with an R. Repeated play.
It's repeated play.
So that's why I mentioned going and giving all your food away to a stranger will never
reciprocate.
If you go and give some food to another person who you know, who lives around you, who might
have food when you don't one day, and you can go and remind them, hey, remember when
I bailed you out, now it's your turn.
Right?
If that kind of thing is going on, then it may be totally selfish to go and help out
someone around you because you scratch my back and I scratch yours.
And you know, general rule is the world is ruled by friendship.
So you want to cultivate friendships as many as possible.
This means on Facebook, you should not be trying to make enemies out of people.
You don't know who might know someone who knows someone who can get you a job.
So be nice to everybody.
Make cultivate friends and try to be Mr. Nice, Mr. Nice person.
So smart and interesting, but also completely lovable.
Right?
So you have someone that everyone wants to be around.
That is a very good strategy to apply, right?
Because you are hoping that they will remember, oh, this is a good person here that we can
work with.
And we have proven this in the past, so let's go and give back to this person who has given
us years of entertaining Facebook posts without a hint of negativity.
Okay.
All right.
So mere cooperation is not good evidence against human selfishness.
The mere fact that people trade with each other doesn't show that we are not totally
selfish.
Maybe we are and it's just repeated play.
Lately, I have been reading all of the academic research on trust.
And again, the way that people talk, sometimes they make it sound like they do believe that
there is no human reason to interact with other people, to cooperate, other than trust.
Other than, well, we just have a feeling that other people, we just have a feeling of trust
and that's the only possible way.
Well, maybe it isn't trust.
Maybe it's reciprocity that you just know that what comes around goes around.
You don't need any trust for that to work.
Right?
Or I'm also very tempted to say, have you ever seen a credit card?
I deal with people all the time that I have no actual fundamental trust in, but I trust
the Visa Corporation.
The Visa Corporation, them I believe in.
Visa, the flag of Visa flies high and I say, yes, Visa.
I believe in them way more than any of these different people that I trade with on Amazon
Marketplace.
Because look, if they're okay, according to the Visa Corporation, that's good enough for
me.
But otherwise, would I trust them?
I don't think I trust them at all.
Who are you?
Whatever.
Okay.
All right.
Now, how then can we actually establish that people are not totally selfish all the time?
So step one is we can look at the experimental evidence, which we've already talked about.
There's plenty of cooperation even in one shot games where there's no opportunity for
repeat, where there's total anonymity and yet we see cooperation.
So that would be some pretty compelling evidence that people are not selfish all the time.
Right?
So why would they be doing it?
You don't have any idea who I am.
We don't repeat the game.
What possible motive could you have other than I am not a completely selfish person?
It's hard to say what the other reason would be.
All right.
In the original Superman 2, the original and good General Zod, not the monstrosity from
the last one, but the original one played by Terrence Stamp, there is a great scene
in this movie when the three villains from Krypton are fighting Superman and they accidentally
go and drop a building on a bunch of innocent people and Superman rushes to go and save
them.
And then General Zod says, ha ha, I've discovered Superman's weakness.
And then I think his girlfriend says, oh, what is it?
He says, he actually cares about these earthlings.
And then she's like, as pets?
Presumably.
So that was his reaction.
Complete puzzlement that someone would care about the earthlings.
But that actually seems to be often the case.
All right.
So as I said, just remember we did these, we talked about public goods experiments.
In one shot games, it's very normal to contribute 40 to 60% of the socially optimal balance.
Which again, you might just say is because people don't understand the game.
But even after they've been playing for a while, you can generally get results up to
or cooperation up to pretty high levels again just by saying, OK, time out.
All right, new round, people.
Let's start the game over.
And then again, people generally start cooperating at these moderate levels again.
All right.
As we said, cooperation does tend to decline with repeated play.
And remember, this is repeated play where it's a big group, so there's no real hope
of punishing anybody.
It's just like we're going on and on.
And the people that cooperate keep losing money and getting more and more depressed
about the nature of man and so on.
And then cooperation goes down.
Like I said, if you restart a tournament with experienced players, we get this initial jump
up in cooperation again.
And then we got a lot of extra experimental elements too.
So tipping.
In general, you are not legally required to tip anything.
So and if you remember, if you ever seen the beginning of the movie Reservoir Dogs, there's
a guy who tells a bunch of gangsters, I don't tip.
And they're all horrified.
What do you mean you don't tip?
That's terrible.
We murder people and rob banks, but we tip, like all decent people.
All right.
So tipping.
You could just take 15% off the bill of what you're paying or whatever you tip and just
not do it.
Again, of course, if you repeatedly go to the same restaurant, I wouldn't recommend
this.
Then they might start spitting in your food or giving you really slow service or saying
we don't even want your business here.
But very often, people go to a restaurant they're never going to go to again.
No one's ever going to remember you.
You can walk out before they even go and look at how much you tipped.
And nevertheless, tipping rates remain extremely high.
So and then you say, well, that's just because people are going in groups.
Nobody tips when they're alone and they're in a place that they don't normally go.
Really?
I do.
At least I say I do.
So let's see.
Anyone here ever work as a server in a restaurant?
So how often was it that if a person came in all by themselves and they were not a regular
customer, what fraction of them just tip zero?
I don't think that's ever happened.
Yes.
So it's still extraordinarily rare to just tip zero.
I mean, so again, among people who work, there's all kinds of informal knowledge about who
tips how much and why.
So like I've heard the rule that the elderly barely tip at all.
And furthermore, I've heard the rule that you can never tell whether they're satisfied
or not.
Even the elderly people who seem super happy with everything still tip 8%.
I've heard.
I don't know.
So that's one server told me that anyway.
So anyway, so tipping seems to be a case where people are consistently overpaying for stuff.
They don't have to pay to do it.
They could get away with not doing it.
But very few people are comfortable going and taking advantage of it.
Instead, they go and pay.
So that would seem to be evidence that people are not totally selfish.
And you can always say, well, but Word could get back somehow.
Yeah, I suppose you could be hit by a bus on the way to the restaurant too.
But again, what are the odds if you are all alone touring around a foreign city and you
fail to tip at a restaurant and then somehow, and you're all by yourself, and then somehow
Word gets back home that you didn't tip?
Sounds pretty hard.
Yeah.
All right.
Then of course, there's charity.
So Americans give about 2% of their gross income to charity.
This is high by international standards, but still it is normal all around the world for
people to give money to charity.
Some of this charity you can go and explain away as, for example, being done for tax reasons.
Now cash, it never makes sense to give cash for tax reasons because all it does is you
subtract it from your gross income.
But unless your gross income is 100% marginal tax rate, you still lose money.
But if you can go and give charity in kind and then subtract out the purchase price rather
than the actual market value, then you can make money by giving money to charity or by
giving stuff to charity rather.
So if you go and donate a bunch of clothes to charity and the clothes are now worth $5,
but you paid $5,000 for them and you subtract $5,000 for the clothes from your tax bill,
then you just made money.
So that's a case where you could say that selfish people would do it.
And then there are charities where people may do it because other people know they're
doing it and it's part of their advertising.
So for example, it is often noted that realtors are extremely likely to attend a church.
Now maybe it's because realtors are closer to God, but a more common story is that realtors
attend church because they want to go and network in their community and meet lots of
people.
And furthermore, when the collection plate comes along, they want to make sure that they're
very visibly, oh, oh, oh, here's my donation here.
And in a tightly knit church, even if there's a sealed envelope where you give the money,
what comes around goes around.
If you appear to be very rich, but you give hardly anything, rumors may spread.
So that is a reason.
I know among Mormons, so legally, or not legally, but according to the religion, you're supposed
to give 10% of their income.
Not only is there no official monitoring, there's no official definition of income that
they use.
So one of my classmates, Gordon Dahl, who's a very pious Mormon and a very good economist,
he did a whole survey asking Mormons, what do you consider income for purposes of tithing?
And there is some agreement, but a lot of it is just people making it up as they go
along.
So they were asked, if you get a tax refund, do you tithe 10% of the tax refund?
And most Mormons say, no, I don't do that.
But on the other hand, if you get an inheritance, do you tithe 10% of that?
Yes, that.
And in terms of the logic, unclear, but there's some norms going on.
Now if you are, say, a Mormon realtor, and part of what you're doing is going there to
make friends and contacts, do you want to be going and using the strictest definition
of income so you can give as little as possible to the church?
Maybe not, because then people will talk about how you are cheap and you're not a good Mormon,
and I want to buy a house from a good Mormon.
Whether I'm not a Mormon, I want to buy a house from a good Mormon.
They're awesome.
But yes, I've had nothing but good experiences with Mormons in my life.
Fine people.
Let's see.
Now, and then of course, furthermore, even if you're not a realtor, there's still the
fact that a lot of the reason why people go to church is to make friends.
You may be looking for a spouse, you may be trying to informally arrange a spouse for
your children.
So within that context, you probably don't want to be known as a really cheap person.
So there you have a possible reason.
Also of course, when you go and give money to your alma mater, are there any selfish
reasons why you might go and give money to the school that you went to as an undergraduate?
Yes.
So my kid can go there.
Yes, your kid can go there so that they, when your kid's on the edge of being admitted.
And then they say, hmm, how much money has Daddy given?
Of course this is not the way that we admit people, but it's something that we holistically
consider and then put into a formula.
It's the holistic spreadsheet where we put in the exact dollar values.
and then take the logarithm and then add some points.
All right, I'm not quite sure what they're doing,
but seems very likely, so there's that.
And of course, people also network with people
through their schools, so you may have business contacts.
So again, there are always selfish reasons
to give to charity, but still,
when you strip all that away, still it seems
like there's a fair amount of charity given by people
where it would be very strange for them
to think it's going to financially benefit them.
So think about Bill Gates giving away
almost all of his fortune to charity.
Is this some kind of a secret plan
to get an even bigger fortune?
It's like, all right, step one,
become the world's richest man.
Step two, give it all away.
Then step three, become twice as rich
as I was in the first place.
They'll never see it coming.
All right, you can imagine that being his plan,
but it doesn't seem like a very likely plan.
Instead, probably he just wants to go
and give away a ton of money to people
without any actual hope of financial gain.
All right, and then voting is another case.
So what's the point of voting?
Every vote counts, right?
Well, every vote counts a microscopic amount.
How microscopically?
Well, if you're in public choice,
we go through all the calculations,
but a very optimistic number would be like
one in 10 million chance to change
the outcome of the election, right?
Or which means, as Gordon Tellick said,
you're more likely to die on the way to the voting booth
than you are to change the outcome of the election.
And yet a lot of people do it.
Why?
Well, seems like people, so you're like,
look, I'm not really, so yeah,
like selfishly, I guess I'm gonna stay home,
but I'm not gonna be selfish.
I'm gonna be someone who goes and stands up
for this country and goes and votes
for the true and the right candidates.
I'm gonna vote for good stuff and try to do my part.
Very common reaction.
And there are even people who go and volunteer
for the military during wartime using this reasoning,
although this is greatly exaggerated, as I've learned.
So World War II, you probably heard the story
of how the recruitment offices were just overcrowded
and clogged right after the Pearl Harbor bombing.
All right, now, I went and actually got the numbers
on the number of people who volunteered
to join the US military in the months
immediately after World War II,
or rather, in the months immediately after Pearl Harbor.
So I found the total number,
and then I went to the census and found out
how many draft-age men there were, military-age men were.
So about what percentage of American males
volunteered for the US military after Pearl Harbor?
That's small.
Yeah, like, what do you think?
One in three.
Yeah, 2%.
2% volunteered in what would seem to be
the greatest insult to America that has ever been made.
Right?
So, and then, what happened?
Well, the other ones got conscripted.
Right, and then, of course, said,
I was very proud to serve my country.
Of course, if I could have weaseled out of it,
I would have liked that, too.
I wouldn't be bragging about it,
but I didn't want to die and everything,
and it was really unpleasant, and it's very scary.
So yeah, if you've seen any World War II movies,
of course, most, the survivors,
most people who fought in World War II,
right, so most people who were in the military
in World War II didn't actually see combat.
So you got that, you can always hope for that.
But if you're in combat, you've seen those movies,
like the accurate ones, the ones where blood and guts
and arms and legs are flying, and say,
wait a second, I think I could have lived
with Pearl Harbor, actually.
I never even planned on going to Hawaii.
Right, I'm cool with this here.
So a lot of people actually had that,
like ultimately had that attitude.
Of course, it's not one that was ever polite to express.
Very few people would admit it,
and yet, if it had really been left up to volunteers,
seems quite likely that the vast majority
of American men that fought in World War II
would never have been in the military at all.
It's one thing to go and take an hour
out of your day to vote, but to go and volunteer
to get on a boat to storm the beaches of Normandy
when there's guys in pillboxes
with machine guns shooting at you?
Yes, very scary.
Yeah, so one other movie reference.
So great Kirk Douglas movie, Paths of Glory.
This is about a World War I movie
about three Frenchmen who get tried for cowardice
because their unit was ordered to charge machine guns,
and then they didn't make it,
and then the survivors retreated
after they lost half the men.
So anyway, they are charged with cowardice.
And the whole time, while I'm watching the trial,
define cowardice.
Is cowardice anyone who is below
the 99.999th percentile of bravery?
If so, these men are cowards.
Otherwise, they're not, because real cowardice
would have, I'm not even getting near the front,
I'm running to Switzerland.
That would seem to be a normal level of cowardice.
But anyway, the standards of cowardice
were moved up to a very high level,
which you can say, well, we gotta terrify these people,
because otherwise, they're not gonna wanna fight anymore.
All right, was there a question over there?
Yes.
I'm just curious what the numbers would be
in the war for the Revolutionary War and Civil War.
Yeah, so I don't know those numbers.
I would guess 20% in the war for independence.
That would be my guess.
20% of military-age men fought?
That seems really high to me.
Yeah, so.
Lower, because what are your incentives
in the Revolutionary War?
I mean, if you're not a wealthy dude,
like, it's a matter to you.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Now, so there is the point that if you are suspected
of being a Tory, you may be charred and feathered,
expropriated, and tortured.
So that might be a reason for one person in your family
to volunteer, just to say, look, see,
our family's good here.
But then again, there's also the fact
that it's much more likely that your side is gonna lose,
and then there'll be reprisals
on not only you, but your family.
So that's a reason to not participate.
Yeah, so I actually don't know
what the percentage of military-age men
that the fought would be.
That's a good question.
In the Civil War, of course,
they almost very quickly switched to a draft,
the draft where you could buy your way out.
Oh my God, that's the most horrible possible thing
that could occur, right?
At least that's the way I was taught,
and then I learned some economics, and no, no, no.
That's actually a way better system, right?
At least it gets rid of the inefficiency
of having, say, someone whose comparative advantage
is being a banker going and being given a bayonet
and told to go and charge when you can barely run.
All right, so real world significance of all this.
So clearly there is some.
So it is normal for us to offer and accept small favors
from strangers all the time.
Happens frequently, right?
And we pass up and expect others to pass up
small chances to take advantage.
Anytime you let someone in in traffic
or someone else waves you in, right?
This happens fairly frequently.
That looks like there's a small deviation
from selfishness going on.
But still we can say people do keep about,
keep 98% of their own money for themselves.
And it's not likely because they don't believe
that any charity on earth works.
It's probably more like they just don't care that much.
All right, so questions about that?
All right, so.
Now again, this literature on trust often taught,
again, at least when you read it casually,
it often seems as if they think that society
is fundamentally totally dependent upon unselfishness.
And if people were selfish, then society would collapse.
Again, this is where I raise the flag
of the Visa Corporation and say, I don't think so.
Seems like you could actually have a society
that functioned well just based upon selfishness.
And in fact, there are a bunch of horrible things
that wouldn't happen anymore if everyone were selfish.
Like probably most warfare would be impossible to fight
with totally selfish people,
because everyone would be there saying,
well, it seems that my risk of dying is greater
if I fight than if I defy orders, so I'm not gonna do it.
Right, no one's jumping on,
no selfish person's jumping on grenades.
No one is there saying, we must fight and die
for our country's honors.
No, no way.
For honor, no.
Well, how about our country can have all the honor it wants
or could have, but it doesn't matter to me
nearly as much as my pinky.
My pinky matters more to me than the honor of this country,
whatever that might mean.
That would be a selfish reaction.
Just think about if for every war,
no one actually felt any real loyalty to their side,
everyone was ready to run away at the first sign of danger,
what a world it would be.
It would be a very peaceful world.
All right.
Implicitly, people always do the thought experiment,
what if we all were super cowardly,
but everyone else on earth remained the way they are?
But this is the thought experiment they're doing,
even if they say, what if everyone thought that way?
Everyone thought that way, we have perfect peace,
the world would be over, it'd be great.
All right, what I mean is what if every American
thought that way?
Well, then it's more complicated.
Why can't we just go back to what if everyone
thought that way?
All right, now moving on.
All right, so to fairness and vindictiveness.
So the opposite of selfishness in the dictionary
is altruism.
And what does altruism mean?
It means caring directly about the well-being
of other people.
So now of course a waiter will often care
about your well-being, but they don't directly care
about your well-being generally.
They don't sit around saying, gee, I hope Brian's
having a good day.
Remember that guy who came in at lunch?
I hope the rest of his day went well too.
I think it's very unusual for a waiter at a restaurant
to think about me at all after I've lost the restaurant,
after I've left the restaurant.
All right, so how do they care about,
but they seem to care about me while I'm there,
and the answer is they care about me indirectly.
They care about me because they want to satisfy a customer,
they're looking for tips, they're looking
for repeat business.
So they don't love me, they love what I can do for them.
But there's also such a thing as really loving a person.
This is where, like the love of a parent for a child.
What's the kid ever gonna do for you?
Probably nothing, but I love this kid more than anything.
Or when you have the love of a child for an aged parent,
and when the parent dies, you get an inheritance,
and the parent is just a lot of work,
and they're not much fun anymore, and yet the kid
keeps taking care of the parent and taking them
to the appointments.
And again, or some people are doing this
because they don't want to be written out of the will.
But there's plenty of other people who know their parents
are just gonna give them their share, whatever they do,
but they just love their parents, and they feel devotion.
All right, so anyway.
There is, so altruism, there's also altruism
caring directly about others, but there seems to be
more to interpersonal motivation going on
than either true altruism, where you truly care
about someone, or total selfishness,
where you only care about yourself.
So one thing, when we treat people better
than selfishness would recommend,
it seems like the real reason is not really
that we care about them, but rather that we are concerned
that we treat them fairly.
So it seems to be about we must be fair
rather than that we actually care about them.
All right, so an example of this, so suppose that you are
at the beach with your child, and your kid goes
and loses his jacket, and then he's freezing.
The jacket gets washed away in the ocean.
So what will every parent do when they see
the freezing child?
The parent has a jacket too, hint, hint.
What does every parent do?
Take off my jacket, give it to the child
so the child can be warm.
I would rather that I freeze than that my child
would freeze because I love the child.
It's like, yeah, but what for?
What's the kid ever gonna give back?
Is this so that he'll give you jackets later on?
No, nothing to do with that.
It's that I would rather personally suffer
and be freezing than watch my child be unhappy.
All right, so that's real love.
Now, now suppose, however, that there were a,
so that's, you know, the other year,
there was a stranger on the beach.
You both find, you go and find two jackets,
and you say, well, what's the fair thing to do?
Well, let's each get a jacket.
And then your friend goes and loses his jacket.
In that case, you're not so likely to go
and give him the jacket because, look,
he said, look, you cared about me enough
to give me a jacket the first time.
Why not do it again?
Because it wouldn't be fair for me
to have kept both jackets.
But after we divided up the jackets,
then it's your own tough luck, right?
And then it's your problem, right?
So, you know, it doesn't seem like you actually
really care about that person so much
as you care about you being a fair person.
This seems to have a lot to do with tipping as well.
So suppose that you found out that after you left
a nice tip for the waiter, that the waiter
accidentally went and dropped the money
down a storm drain.
Would you be inclined to go and give the waiter
a double tip the next time to go and help them out?
No.
No, because look, I gave you what was fair.
I assume you received a certain reward.
But after that, I'm done.
Like, so that's one less.
But if you really cared about me,
you would give me the money because I need it
just as much as I did before.
What is it really that I care about you?
I care about me treating you
in the socially acceptable way.
Which is very different from directly caring about you,
which is what you'd have for your kid.
For your kid, it's not fair that I don't have a jacket.
Actually, it's really fair that you not have a jacket
because you lost your jacket, which I warned you
to not lose, but I love you, so I'm giving you
another jacket anyway.
But if the waiter would say, it's not fair
that you don't make up the tip, I need the tip more.
Or you can imagine a waiter saying, look,
you know how you're giving me some more money
than you legally have to, right?
Well, let me tell you how tough my life is.
And then maybe you'll give me more money.
Now, not only are you not that likely to give him more money,
you might even not want to come back
to that restaurant anymore.
Because now that I've learned that the waiter
really needs the money, I don't want to have
anything to do with him.
It's a very unpleasant experience.
So anyway, we seem more concerned about how we treat people
who we directly interact with, and we pay more attention
to whether we behave fairly than the actual welfare
of others, which is of much less interest.
So going back to the experimental evidence,
remember ultimatum and dictator games?
So it's very common for the first mover
to share earnings with the second mover,
but very unusual to share earnings
with the next stranger that you meet.
What's the difference between sharing money
with the other person that's playing with you
in the ultimatum game, and sharing money
with the first stranger that you meet in the hall?
In principle, they seem like they're both strangers, right?
But people feel differently because, look,
we're playing together.
And since we have this social bond,
then fairness rules kick in, and then I'm
supposed to share with you.
On the other hand, the person out there in the hall,
I've never met that person.
He's a stranger.
I don't know him anything, so I don't have
to go and give him anything.
That's the idea.
All right, so fairness suggests that you go and split the pie
evenly with your partner.
But genuine caring about mankind would actually
lead you to go and find out who needs this money the most,
and then give the money to that person, which, again,
is very unusual.
And of course, when you see someone going and giving money
to a person who seems to really need it,
is your reaction to say that's a super fair person?
Like when you see someone going and opening up their whole lot
and giving all the money to a homeless person.
I've never seen this, actually, but I've read about it.
So when that happens, is your reaction
to say that person is so fair?
No, reaction is more like that person is really nice.
That person seems to actually like the homeless person,
to be concerned about the welfare of that homeless person.
Unless he's trying to impress someone who's watching.
Maybe that's what's going on.
Might be your other reaction.
But again, the idea of fairness is
you have some kind of relationship with the person.
There's some kind of social norm about how
you're supposed to split things.
You do, and once you do that, then you're done.
Whereas, of course, if you really care about someone,
you're never done.
Because they're always having new problems, new needs,
new concerns, and if you care about them,
you're always going and looking into them
and trying to help them out.
So questions about that?
So again, when you do tipping, while it's not selfish,
it's not really altruism either.
It seems to be motivated by some kind of fairness norm.
And the fairness norm used to be that you tip 10%.
When I was a kid, it was 10%, and it was really easy to do it.
Then you get 15%, not so, not so, a little bit harder.
18%, very confusing.
So some people now make it 20%.
And of course, now notice one other thing.
If you're traveling in another country,
people commonly ask, what do people tip around here,
or do they?
And whatever it is that is normal in that country,
people generally acclimate to pretty easily.
Because it's not that you really care about servers,
or that you say, well, in Japan, I don't care about them,
but in America, I do.
Rather, say, well, in Japan, tipping is not customary.
So it's not unfair to fail to tip.
In fact, I've heard that if you try to tip in Japan,
it's insulting.
Is that correct?
Yes?
I used to live in Japan, and yeah, it's condescending.
Yes.
Will they still take the money, or will they pass it back
to you and be angry?
I never try.
Oh.
So you ever see an American go and try tipping, and then?
So everybody now, sorry.
So when I'm in Europe, so the first day or two
I'm in a European country, that's
where it's very hard to adjust.
It's like, I'm just going to pay the bill, and then walk away.
It's kind of weird.
And then, especially when they say, well,
it's customary to sort of give whatever pocket change you have.
Well, I don't have any pocket change.
What do I do?
I don't want people here to think
that I'm a big American jerk.
But then, after a few days, then you
start to feel, OK, this is what's normal here.
OK, now I think I understand what people looks at.
Well, every now and then, there's
someone who'll say, well, he's an American,
so he's supposed to do the American thing.
No, I thought we were in Germany,
and we do the German thing.
No, no, no.
Americans have to be American even here.
No.
All right.
So anyway, that's fairness.
Now, another motive that we see experimentally, as well as
seem to experience introspectively,
is called vindictiveness.
Vindictiveness.
All right, so this is what we can see in the ultimatum game.
If you offer less than an even split,
there's a very good chance that the other person will cut off
his nose to spite his face and say, $4 out of 10,
I don't think so.
How about no dollars for either of us?
Ha, you're stuck on that, greedy jerk.
All right, that is a pretty common reaction
to uneven splits.
All right, now you may say, well,
but what do you care?
He's a complete stranger.
It's just a game, and you just gave up $4 to hurt someone
that you don't even know?
That's right.
A lot of people have this reaction to the experiment.
So the idea is that, especially when we're treated unfairly,
we think we've been treated unfairly,
then we actually are worse than economists dangerously assume.
We then put negative weight on other people.
So normally, of course, economists
just say people are selfish.
You don't put any positive weight on other people.
But there's experimental evidence
that we sometimes put negative weight on other people.
Another way in which it would be really good if people were just
regular old homo economicus, with regular old homo
economicus, no one ever wants to go and wipe out
all the members of another group because what one member did.
No one wants to go and kill off other people.
It's just like, hey, well, what's done is done.
What can I do about it?
You might want to go and punish the actual person who did it
because you want a reputation, but to go and just
punish a random person because you're like, well,
a redhead went and hurt me.
Let's go and hurt another redhead.
That would never occur to homo economicus,
but to an vindictive person, it might.
It's a really weird idea.
People say stuff like this frequently.
So if you know anyone who's ever made
a point of just getting in a fight
over some small and petty offense,
either a physical fight or maybe just start yelling at someone
for no particular reason.
If you just sort of look around and you
see people yelling at others and getting angry,
or I can just look at my dad and see him getting mad at people
and getting in a fight.
getting into petty disputes with people
over very small amounts of money.
He's not even really retired,
so he has a decent opportunity cost,
but nevertheless, he will go out of his way
to go and say, I'm very angry about this here,
and I wanna talk to the manager.
Like, that's gonna do any good.
But that's the way that my dad is,
and he's not the only one for sure.
So plenty of people get angry at others,
and then wanna get back at them.
I'm gonna get back at them.
All right, so you may think about
whether you've ever wanted to get back at somebody.
All right.
So that's the idea.
All right, so real-world significance
of fairness and vindictiveness.
So pretty easy to observe.
So we wouldn't have tipping without fairness norms probably.
At least tipping would be very different.
There'd only be tipping in places
where there's repeated customers,
or of course, where you go in groups.
Now, the funny thing about the whole,
the idea that people tip as much as they do
because other people are watching,
is actually restaurants seem to have the opposite theory.
Right, because it's very common for restaurants to say
that if the party has, say, six or more people,
what happens automatically?
The crudity's put in.
The crudity's put in.
So there it seems like contrary to theory,
that people only tip because they wanna go
and impress their friends with how generous they are.
Actually, when there's a large group,
the tragedy of the commons kicks in,
and everybody starts skimping,
because it will be the whole group
that will be regarded as an unfair group
rather than any one individual in the group
will be seen as unfair.
All right, so even when there's no repeated interaction,
we give up small personal benefits
to do what fairness requires,
expect others to do the same.
We might think that prices and wages would be more flexible
if we didn't have these fairness and vindictiveness norms,
because a lot of people have it in their heads
that it's unfair for prices to change,
and if a price unfairly changes,
it's okay to say shoplift,
or go and, say, buy something and then return it
and get your money back after you mess it up,
or something that was noted with a lot of foreclosures.
Very often, when a home is foreclosed upon,
what do the occupants do before they leave?
Trash the place, rip out the toilets.
It's one thing to go and try and recover
valuable items from the house,
like rip out the copper wire,
but just to go and put holes in the walls
to get back at the bank for taking your house away?
All right, this, in the end,
seemed like it was a pretty big deal,
and of course, it winds up having some bad effects,
because in general equilibrium,
the banks know that if they ever foreclose their home,
that you will trash it.
This does what to the interest rates
that everybody has to pay?
That increases, and especially, of course,
if you are a high-risk borrower,
high-risk borrowers have to pay especially high rates
because they're especially likely to foreclose,
which means that the bank's especially likely
to not get back its full investment.
All right, so things like this.
Now, one example that at least used to be talked about a lot
was shortages of concert tickets
when concert tickets would be priced well below markets,
especially for very exciting or big or important events.
I've heard people talk about this a lot less
than they used to.
Has it actually become less common
for tickets to be underpriced?
Or have you noticed?
So how common is it that, say,
tickets for popular concerts sell out
within a few minutes and then there's no way
of getting tickets?
It's still common.
It's still common, so maybe it's possibly less common
than it used to be, but again,
this is something where I can't tell
whether I've just gotten older
and so I don't talk to people who complain about it
or whether the world has actually changed.
It's certainly much easier to resell stuff
than it used to be.
Yeah.
So it may be that the actual harm of the norms
is much less because now they get bought up quickly
and then they get resold quickly,
and then in the end, it's still going to be rich people
who are the ones who attend the concerts.
So that might be what's going on.
Isn't there an embarrassment factor there
if you don't sell out?
I mean, you wanna-
Yeah, so that is a theory people are told,
but normally people say there's sort of like a pride factor
in selling out, but couldn't there also be a pride factor
in charging a normal ticket price successfully?
So similarly, it seems like there could be a shame factor
in making your tickets really cheap, right?
So like if the tickets are a dollar, wow, we sold out,
but that's pretty embarrassing.
So I mean, there is a theory that you get some advertising
out of the news saying tickets sold out instantly, maybe,
but like, what's it feel like if they always sell out,
then why do you want that advertising?
It's not so clear what the point of that is.
All right.
So when we do labor economics, we'll talk more about
the role of fairness norms in labor markets.
You know, over time, I've become more and more convinced
that actually labor markets are heavily affected
by these norms and very much for the worse.
It would be far better if people would just have
a more Vulcan attitude about it and realize
it's only business, it's not personal,
there's no reason to get offended about the way
that people pay, and there's certainly no reason
to try to get revenge on someone.
And in fact, this would lead to higher levels of employment,
lower unemployment, more rapid recoveries and recessions,
but we'll talk about that more when we get
to the labor economics section.
All right, questions, questions.
Anyone bringing about anything?
All right, then let's move on to a topic
that I have researched and therefore super important.
This is an endogenous, right?
I wouldn't research it unless it's super important.
All right, now, have you ever heard an economist say,
preferences explain everything and therefore nothing,
or something like that?
All right, so, so you say, well, maybe what happened
is that people just started liking heavy metal music more.
Right, and then economists say,
no, that's not a good explanation.
You can explain anything with preferences.
And explain anything,
they didn't really explain anything at all.
All right, so this attitude all comes back
to an article by Gary Becker and George Stigler,
where they made an argument that is so odd,
it really must be read to be believed,
but I will just tell you what they said,
and if you don't believe me, you can go and double check.
So what they said is, constant preferences,
or again, constant or also called staples,
stable, constant preferences, that's not really enough.
You know, and when it's not just preferences,
that's not enough, you know what we need to assume?
Identical preferences.
See, well, what do you mean
you're gonna assume identical preferences?
We're gonna assume that all human beings
throughout all human history in every country and society
have wanted exactly the same things
and have had exactly the same fundamental utility function.
But they totally don't, right?
Some people really like football and others don't, right?
And this is where Becker and Stigler say,
well, that's what a naive person would think,
but the real story, the real story,
is that football fans face different constraints
than non-football fans, and that's what's going on.
Like what?
Well, I mean, they must have some kind
of different price factors or income,
a specialized income that they're having,
or it may be that they had more time
to build up a certain kind of human capital
that allows them to appreciate football games,
and then another person might have spent their life
building up the human capital to appreciate books,
but it's not that one person is a book person
and another one's a sports person.
It's that they had prior investments
which went and changed their production function
for utility, but fundamentally,
everyone's got the same function.
Now, I think they would be okay if you were to say,
like some people are born smarter than others,
and it's easy for a smart person to appreciate a book
than for a not-so-smart person.
I think they might be okay with that,
because they say, ah, so then it's the people,
everybody has the same utility function,
which is everyone receives utility
from understanding books that they read,
and then smart people can get the utility
because they're able to understand the books,
and not-so-smart people can't get utility from that
because they can't understand the books,
so then it's the same utility function
but a different constraint and the theory of sound,
and that's the way they put it,
and I think they actually, yes,
so I think this might be a footnote
where they talk about things like,
well, what about Jews keeping kosher?
Doesn't that just mean that Jews like keeping kosher?
And they say, well, that's not good enough, really,
because, well, first of all, they don't have to be Jews.
So you may say it's part of being part of that religion,
but you could just say, fine,
give me your theory about why they're in that religion.
Say, well, their tastes were formed at a young age.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
No, you can't say that your tastes are formed
by being raised in a religion.
That's violating the identical preferences assumption.
Now, if you were to go and reframe it
and say, fine, they built up Jewish human capital,
which other people don't build up,
and so the fundamental utility function is not different,
that's okay, although even there,
they'd be, wait, it sounds like you're making fun of me now.
But any case, Stigler and Becker
were enormously influential with this work,
and even economists who have no idea
where this idea came from,
or often are themselves, whenever you say, well,
here's my theory about why people are doing it.
The people who are doing it like it,
and the people who aren't doing it don't like it.
Well, there's nothing else for economics to say.
Why is it that some people are eating the chocolate ice cream
and some are eating the vanilla?
And it's the same price for all the ice cream.
Some people like chocolate, some like vanilla.
It's in the utility function.
There's nothing more to say,
and yet I've heard economists say, oh, no, no, no, no.
You can explain anything that way.
Like then if you saw someone drinking motor oil,
you could say, well, he likes motor oil.
So, no, no, no.
There's gotta be a better explanation
for why some people are eating chocolate ice cream
and others are eating vanilla.
And again, the story, and again, it comes down to,
it's not really, what you're doing isn't science
because it explains everything.
All right, now, what I see in response is
there's actually a lot of empirical evidence
that's just not true.
So I have a paper in the Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization on personality economics.
Now, personality is an area
that almost no economists have studied.
At the time that I wrote, very few had.
Since I did it, James Heckman got interested,
and so he's done a bunch of papers,
and his co-authors have done a bunch of papers.
It's still a very small number.
But anyway, in this paper, I go over a whole lot of evidence
from personality psychology that indicates
that there is a high degree of preference heterogeneity.
Human beings don't have identical preferences.
For example, the reason why some people are librarians
and other people are salesmen
isn't that some people just randomly started acquiring
librarian human capital
and others started randomly acquiring
salesman human capital.
Instead, some people were born very introverted,
some people were born very extroverted,
and if this is the way that you were born,
well, if you were born as an introvert,
being a librarian sounds like a much better job
than being a salesman,
where if you were born extroverted,
being a salesman seems like a much better job
than being a librarian.
Right, and lo and behold, we can use personality
to go and predict occupational choice very well, actually.
It's one of the best predictors of occupational choice
is what your personality is.
Almost every personality element
has some predictable occupational profile.
Like, you can think about the profile of a typical economist.
A typical economist, like a touchy-feely person?
No, typical economist is a hard-headed, hard-hearted person.
That's not the only profile found in economics,
but it's extraordinarily common
compared to the general population economics,
and there's a bunch of other occupations
that have similar personality profiles.
So, what are some other occupations
that just have a lot of your cold, hard-headed people?
Your charts and graphs, show me the numbers kind of people.
Bankers.
Bankers, yeah.
Statisticians.
Statisticians, lawyers.
Prison guards.
Yeah, prison, I don't, so prison guards are,
I'll say like, they're similar in that,
although prison guards are not very curious
or interested in ideas.
Whereas economists are, so there's that difference, yeah.
So, yeah.
So, there's all kinds of differences,
so we can give you, so let's see.
Yeah, we're out of time already,
so we'll talk more about some of the fun facts
about occupation and personality next class,
but let's keep going.
All right, and again, if you are missing any handouts
or you haven't given me your homework, please do so.
Are you familiar with the film
The Americanization of Emily?
Yes, I am, yeah, very good.
Yep, yep.
