You handed out evaluations?
Yes.
Yeah, I'm going to travel through time and then something.
OK.
All right.
So today we're going to finish up with labor,
and then we're going to do financial markets,
and then after that, let's see.
Then next week, we're going to do public choice,
and then we're done.
So let's get started.
Could you close the door in the back there, Elaine?
Thanks a lot.
All right, so two more topics for labor economics.
All right, first one, nominal rigidities, often discussed.
At the beginning of the fall semester,
we had Truman Buley out to give a seminar.
It was very hard to hear him for some reason,
but he said he had a constant volume.
He can't raise his volume.
But anyway, the book is really good.
So long noted, probably for several centuries,
that there's something funny about labor markets,
because even though labor markets seem
very close to the perfectly competitive assumptions,
but it's very unusual for nominal wages to fall
when there's surplus labor.
So during periods of very high employment,
in a market that is close to perfectly competitive,
there's an obvious thing to expect,
which is just that the price will crash,
restoring full employment or ending the surplus.
But this generally does not seem to happen in labor markets.
You can always look and find some way to blame government
and say government is hindering adjustment,
but normally when government is trying to hinder adjustment,
the market is trying to hinder the hindering
of the adjustment.
That's the normal thing, is that there's creative evasion
in business.
When government tells them they have to do something,
oh yeah, we have to do that.
OK, well, how can we not actually do that,
even though you say you have to and then make money?
But for nominal virginity, it seems
like it's a very stable thing that not that much effort
is used to, or not that much energy trying to evade it.
Now, there is a simple neoclassical theory
of nominal virginity, and that is just menu costs.
There is a neoclassical theory to explain it.
This is menu costs.
This is a simple neoclassical theory
about why, say, restaurants don't adjust the prices
on their menu every single day.
Well, they don't want to incur the expense of printing out
new menus with the daily prices.
And therefore, if you print out menus
where the prices that are going to last for a year or two
years, then on any given day, the market price
won't be quite right.
And then, of course, firms make a trade-off
between how often to adjust the menu
and how off the prices are going to be.
And sometimes you can see that restaurants will have
a few special items that fluctuate widely in price
daily, like lobster, where they don't put
the price on the menu.
They say market price.
And once you learn some economics, you might say,
wait, it's all market prices.
Everything's a market price.
What do you mean is the market price?
Really, what they mean is the daily price,
something like that.
So it's all market prices, but some market prices last a year
and others only last a day.
So that is an alternative explanation.
But in general, it seems like the menu costs and labor
are pretty small relative to the value of the product.
Furthermore, menu costs, the menu cost model
has a simple implication, which is
that the bigger the shock to demand,
the smaller the problem will be.
So the idea with menu costs is there might be a 1% change,
and then it's not worth changing the menu over 1% change.
But what do we see during the Great Depression?
You have a 1 third fall in the money supply,
and therefore wages adjust instantly or very quickly.
So well, by God, there's a huge fall in demand.
We've got now the menu costs are irrelevant compared
to all the losses of keeping a quarter of workers unemployed.
But that's not what happened during the Great Depression.
Instead, you had many years of high unemployment
after this huge shock.
So the menu cost model says really the problems
come from tiny shocks, shocks that are so small it's not
worth changing the menu.
But in later markets, we seem to see that very large shocks
have large effects.
Whereas in a simple menu cost model,
there would be a small range where, of course,
a double microscopic shock will have more effect
than a microscopic shock.
But once you get over the threshold
where it's worth printing up another menu,
then the problem should be solved,
and it doesn't look like that in the real world.
So in light of all this, a lot of behavioral economists
have come up with alternative stories
of what's really going wrong in labor markets.
And the two big stories are, first of all, money illusion.
And second of all, some kind of nominal fairness norm.
So for one thing, there are a bunch
of studies that indicate people have money illusion to some
degree.
That means that when there's low inflation,
people tend to think of the value of money as constant
rather than slightly changing.
So how often have you gone to the same store
for a few weeks in a row, and each time you
see the price is the same, and each time you say,
oh, the price is the inflation rate divided by 52% lower?
That's not the normal reaction.
As long as there's positive inflation,
every week they don't raise the price,
they've really lowered the real price.
But that's your story.
Maybe you do that.
Maybe you do do that, in which case
you're in the right business.
Then you're really internalizing economic norms,
like just three more weeks, and then it
will be worth buying this.
But that's one story.
Now, what's striking is, though, even when you go and make
the point very explicit, so it's very hard to really still
have money illusion, people still
seem to actually define fairness in nominal terms.
Even when you show them, look, it's
totally the same in real terms.
Well, maybe totally the same economically,
but not fairness-wise, where something different's going on.
So here is a famous behavioral study.
People were given two hypotheticals,
and then you randomly assign the two,
and they're out, and you're asked to rate the fairness.
So two hypotheticals.
One, inflation is zero, and then you give everybody
a nominal 7% pay cut.
And what percent of people consider that unfair?
62%.
What if inflation is 12%, and you only
give people a 5% nominal raise?
Then only 22% consider that unfair.
And here, you're very explicit.
Here's the pay cut.
Here's the inflation.
See how it's the same thing?
And people don't actually feel like it's the same thing.
Now, you may respond, well, who cares about fairness anyway?
This is a business.
It's not like a fairness factory.
Well, there's also evidence that disgruntled workers' pay is
worse.
Or, excuse me, disgruntled workers' performance is worse.
Productivity falls when workers feel like they're
being badly treated.
And one of the big lessons of Truman Buley's book,
Why Wages Don't Fall During a Recession,
he went around and did hundreds of interviews
with hundreds of different firms.
Standard result is nominal pay cuts seem unfair to workers.
Who cares?
Well, I'd better care because they're my workers.
And when my workers feel unfairly treated,
they don't do a good job anymore.
All right, so in other words, effort's partly about incentive,
partly about trust.
So if people feel like you have screwed them over,
then performance falls.
And you may actually prefer paying people higher wage
as long as the productivity is proportionately higher.
On the other hand, you may not want to go and cut pay
because you might cut pay by 5%, but if productivity
falls by 10%, you actually had a bad deal out of this.
So Buley spent a lot of time asking employers,
how do workers respond to wage cuts versus layoffs?
Very standard reaction is wage cuts hurt productivity,
whereas layoffs actually improve productivity.
And again, usual story is that when there are layoffs,
the remaining workers work harder because they're scared.
Of course, there's also a selection effect,
but this is supposedly in addition
to the selection effect.
When you say selection effect, you mean?
That you would lay off the worst workers.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Yes, but again, the story that people
with firsthand knowledge on both sides of the employment
relation will say is when there are layoffs,
well, employers say the workers seem to work harder
because they're scared, and the workers say,
well, I work harder because I'm scared.
I don't want to lose this job.
I really need this job.
I don't want to get unemployed in this recession.
I just need to make it through this next round of layoffs,
and I've got to make sure people know my value
so I don't get laid off.
My favorite real world example of this, so in the early 1990s,
the state of California had an especially bad budget crunch.
And I was told secondhand by someone
who was in the faculty lounge at the Berkeley Economics
Department that there were theorists sitting around
complaining about their nominal pay cut.
All right, now that might say, well, of course,
they don't like getting a nominal pay cut.
The same observer said that 10 years earlier,
when the real pay cut was way higher.
Because remember, early 80s, think about how high inflation
was.
So even if you're getting a substantial nominal raise,
still, the real wages are getting cut very rapidly.
But my same inside observer said, now, the same theorists,
these are PhD theorists with tenure at Berkeley,
were complaining a lot more during a period of no raises,
or I guess it was like very mild nominal pay cuts
and near zero inflation, than they were 10, 15 years earlier
when they were getting moderate nominal raises
and there was high inflation.
So even they seemed to actually be vocally more upset and more
outraged by the high inflation, moderate nominal raises regime,
which means substantial real pay cuts,
than they were during the minimal inflation
and absolute nominal wage cuts, which were actually not
as bad as the earlier ones for them.
Yeah, Ash?
On that point about how workers respond to layoffs, et cetera,
Tyler Cowen said that one way to view how productivity increased
during the Great Recession after layoffs
is that the people who were laid off
and zero marginal productivity.
Yeah, so that is a standard story, right?
And I was saying, so the selection alone would give this
to you, and this is why if you believe that people
who have a lot of first-hand experience
with an industry know something about it,
they're saying something on top of that.
They're actually saying that the one and the same worker
who remains works harder from the fear of the layoffs.
But yes, there is Tyler's story,
which is just an extreme version of an earlier story
of you lay off the lower productivity people, right,
as to what Tyler's evidence ever was for their zero product.
I don't know what that, I've asked him many times.
I've never gotten an answer better than, well,
there's some selection, but it's hardly the same as zero.
Yeah.
Yes. Right, there are some, right?
Yeah. So, I mean, it would be surprising if there were a lot
of zeros but no negatives, right?
Just by statistics.
So, like, whatever, there's like this giant spike at zero,
that must be some miracle that there's a bunch of people
who do, on balance, do nothing, exactly.
Right? So, but, yeah.
Okay. Now, the classic response to nominal rigidities,
of course, which we know from Keynes as well as people before
and after, is just to inflate away the nominal rigidities.
So, if you've got a problem where you have 25%
of your workforce unemployed,
and you've got almost no inflation,
why don't we just print up a ton of money, cause a bunch
of inflation, and hope the workers are too dumb to notice?
Right? Or maybe they, or maybe they're,
maybe they're even aware, but then they don't feel
like it's unfair.
Or maybe they feel like it's unfair,
and they think it's the government being unfair rather
than employers, because there's also plenty of evidence
that people blame employers for pay, but government for inflation.
So, in which case, you could deflect the blame,
and the government can sort of throw itself on the grenade
and say, yes, hate us, don't hate your employers.
And then, presumably, workers will not try to get revenge
on their employers by stealing or doing a bad job
or being rude to customers or just slowing down or whatever.
Right. Now, in practice, as you probably know,
just inflating away nominal wage rigidities is easier
said than done.
Lots of countries have tried.
Countries that do it a lot seem to be really bad at it.
There's a paper by Robert Lucas in the 70s, the punchline
of which is that the higher your long-run rate
of nominal GDP growth, the worse the benefit of inflation is
for employment and output.
So, countries where they have a long history
of very high demand growth and very high inflation,
in those countries, Keynesian policies don't work anymore.
Whereas, countries that generally have almost no
inflation, in those countries,
Keynesian policies do seem to work.
But then, there's the problem of once you say, hey,
Keynesian policies work really great in a country like ours,
let's use them all the time.
Well, if that's your reaction, then before long,
you don't remain one of those countries with low inflation.
You turn into one of the countries
where the policies don't work.
All right.
So, yes?
So, in a world of digital menus,
do menu cost models still have any validity?
Or are they still?
Well, so as long as there's that, you know,
like so you could take it up a level and say
that rewriting the algorithm for the,
rewriting the pricing algorithm,
that might actually change if market conditions change.
Of course, if you have the perfect algorithm,
you never need to change it.
But from what I understand in real world programming,
algorithms change all the time.
People are always improving on them,
and they never hit the perfect one.
So, then you might actually just get a, you know,
like you might get a change in the algorithm,
or people might put more effort in the algorithm,
or you might have more variable, like a more dynamic algorithm.
So, there's still that.
I do know that during the 2008 recession,
multiple economists told me that they subscribed
to just a menu cost view of why you have nominal wage rigidity.
And so, they were predicting that better inventory systems
and so on would mean that whatever unemployment happened
would be very short-lived.
And I said, well, I believe the psychological theory.
I don't think the menu cost really explains very much.
And I don't like to be, I don't like to be claimed
to be proven right by offense, but that's in the ballpark
of being proven right by offense.
It did take just as long, roughly,
for the Great Recession to go away as previous times.
So, a good long-run rule is that after inflation, or rather,
after unemployment reaches its peak, it declines
by one percentage point per year until you go back to normal.
And if you take a look at the graph for the Great Recession,
it almost perfectly is on that line.
So, there is the question, well, how high up will you go?
And that's, I don't know any good rule for that.
But once you hit the peak, once it starts, once it stops growing,
then the percentage point per year rule works really great
for the last 70 years, right?
Which, if you think about it, it actually is a little bit
of a challenge for almost every theory
because, wait a second, so, doesn't the quality
of contracyclical policy vary over time in some way?
Well, if it does, then how come there is this very clear rule
of one percentage point per year that unemployment goes back
down after recession, so wasn't there, like,
a better time and a worse time?
So, I guess the Great Depression does not fit it.
So, you might say macro policy was noticeably worse during the
Great Depression, but everything post-war seems to be
on that line pretty closely.
So, I encourage you, if you're curious, to go
and actually look at the BLS data.
So, I mean, I've looked at that.
And, you know, on the basis of that,
I made this totally atheoretical bet with Tyler
that unemployment wouldn't remain above 5%
for 20 years, as he predicted.
He gave me 10 to 1 odds as well and lost in three years.
So, there, vindication by bet.
Now, that's real vindication, right, because that's one
where both sides specified in advance what they would count
as being right and wrong.
So, it's easy to wait around to see what happens and say, see,
that was pretty much what I was talking about.
Another thing when it's well-defined publicly
where you can actually see that someone was,
in fact, definitely right.
Okay. Now, last topic.
Another fun one.
Efficiency wages.
All right.
So, you've all heard about how garbage men get extra money.
That's a basic fact about the economy.
Most important fact to explain,
why garbage men get to make more money, right?
And, yeah, so if this is supply and demand for normal workers
with the skills of garbage men, then what is different
about the market for garbage collection?
Yes, yes, and therefore, what curve shifts and how?
Supply, yes, supply is lower.
A lot of people want to say demand goes
up because you have to pay workers more in order
to deter the unpleasant conditions, but the fact
that a job is miserable doesn't make it any more profitable
to hire people, right?
So, remember, demand is based upon worker productivity,
so the fact that you're miserable doesn't make you
more productive, right?
So, what really happens is the people don't want to take
that job, and therefore, wages go up as a result
of reduced supply, and then, of course, employers have to go
and pay the higher wage in order to get workers
to do this unpleasant job.
All right.
So, this is known, of course, as compensating differentials
or also equalizing differences.
Should be well familiar to you.
All right.
So, well known.
And notice, is this a model of asymmetric information
where people, where the two sides,
where one side knows whether the job's unpleasant
or the other one doesn't?
Or is it a model of symmetric information
where it's known to both sides what's going on?
Yeah. What's that?
Yeah, it's symmetric.
So, you know, the workers know how it's unpleasant,
but employers don't say, gee,
I don't wonder whether a garbage collection is unpleasant
or not.
Who knows?
How would one discover such things?
Instead, it's just common knowledge, and of course,
for a job like that, we're going to debate more.
And workers know, of course, for a job like that,
you're going to debate me more.
All right.
No big surprise.
All right.
Now, what about in a market with asymmetric information?
Market with asymmetric information
where suppose workers know more
about whether they're doing unpleasant stuff than you do?
Like one thing that's generally considered unpleasant is having
to go and work really hard all the time.
So, if you could either have a leisurely pace
or you could have a frantic pace.
Most people don't like having a frantic pace.
So, if you ever try to get someone to hurry up
and notice the resentment that a lot
of people feel at being hurried.
I'm a non-coffee drinker, so I especially notice the coffee
drinkers get very agitated when you try to speed them along.
Can we go now?
I'm drinking coffee.
So, I never say I can't hurry because I'm drinking a glass
of water, so usually you can't hurry up because you have a
different beverage than me.
So, great anger at trying to hurry a coffee drinker.
It's an attack upon them as human beings
to try to move them along.
Anyway, so what if we've got asymmetric information
where the boss wants you to go and work fast,
but you don't really feel like it
and the boss has trouble telling how fast you're actually working?
Well, in that case, what might you do as an employer?
You might say work fast or I will fire you,
but there's a little problem here, which is
that if the market's competitive,
the threat to fire someone is not scary.
Just like if there's 100 sellers of strawberries
and one seller of strawberries says,
I don't like the way you're touching my strawberries.
You can never buy a strawberry here again.
It's like, fine, walk three feet and buy it from another guy.
All right, so it's not very scary to ban someone
from your store if there's lots of other stores that are just
as good and very close by.
Similarly, if it's really easy to get another job that's just
as good with the same pay, then it's not very scary
to threaten to fire somebody.
And that is the problem.
All right, so if you are trying to get someone
to work really hard and you say, look, I'm hiring you.
I expect you to work really hard.
I know I can't monitor you all the time,
but if I ever catch you doing things slowly, I will fire you.
And then the person, oh, no, I would never do that.
And then if you happen to be caught by your boss
and he fires you, all right, well, just move over
to somebody else.
Get the same deal you were offering.
And I can repeat my same tactics again of saying I'm going
to work hard and then not actually doing it.
Right? So what can employers do
when the threat to fire is no longer scary?
And that is the heart of the efficiency wage model.
So the efficiency wage model says how about this?
How about you first give people a nice raise.
Your workers a nice raise so they're getting paid more
than the competitive amount.
And then you say if I catch you shirking,
catch you slacking, I will fire you.
And now you can't just say who cares, let us move over.
Because now when you move over you're going
to be settling for a lower wage.
Yes?
Yes?
So workers first they will have to find a reputation?
Ah, so that is actually a great question.
So yeah, again in a world where your reputation is known,
that would not be asymmetric information anymore.
Right? So again this is thinking at least
in a lot of labor markets, especially for low-skilled labor
where people really don't know much about you from before.
So I mean they could.
In the United States at least it is normal for employers to lie,
or former employers to lie about you and just say you're great
because they don't want to get,
partly because they don't want to get sued.
And partly because they feel sorry for you.
Yeah, it was great, oh yeah, wonderful.
We were idiots to let them go.
We're fireworks, we actually.
Yes?
Does any other countries have that sort of standard?
So I think it's very likely that they do.
But I'm not sure, but in the U.S. I know.
But yeah, but what I can say is around the world it is normal
to feel bad about firing people.
And normal to go and lie to cover stuff up for someone
that you personally know.
Even if you think the person is actually kind of scum, still,
the scum you know is your scum.
Right? So, yes, you've probably never known,
you've probably got like a bad cousin or something.
And so what is he really like?
Oh, well, he's a good guy I guess.
All right.
So anyway, step one is you raise workers' pay
on the market clearing level in order to make them feel
like they have something to lose.
And then if they do get fired
because you catch them doing something bad, it's going
to be hard for them to get another job that's just as good.
Now the standard question is, yeah,
but if all employers think this way it won't work anymore.
And actually that is not true.
Because if all workers think this way,
so this is regular supply, this is regular demand.
But if all employers go and raise their wage
above the market clearing level,
then what do we get in the market?
Generally, this is, let's let go of it.
Shortage?
Yes. Yes, we get a surplus, which is also known,
a surplus labor, also known as unemployment.
And in a market where there is unemployment, is the threat
to be, is the threat to fire someone scary?
No. Then it becomes scary.
All right.
So either, you know, one person can do it and then it's the fear
of having, getting stuck with a crummy job instead of a good job.
If everyone does it, then it's the fear
of being unemployed rather than having a good job.
So either way, this is a scary threat.
But then there is the side effect of everyone doing it,
which is you have this permanent labor surplus.
All right.
And again, in principle, in the model,
these unemployed workers can be just as productive
as the employed workers.
What's the difference between the employed and the unemployed?
The employed are lucky.
Right? The employed won the lottery
and the unemployed lost the lottery.
The unemployed serve a function,
which is scaring the employed people.
Right? So many people take this model and say, ah,
this is the right way to model Karl Marx's reserve army
of the unemployed.
Ever heard of this one?
There's just a little funny difference between this model
and Marx's reserve army of the unemployed.
In the, in this model, the ideal thing would be if wages,
would be if wages just fell.
All right?
So if wages were just lower, then the problem would be gone.
Where, of course, Marx actually, in this bizarre way,
tries to say, and this is why more wages stay low.
No, no, no, no, no.
This is a model where wages are too high.
It's not a model about why wages are too low.
So, you know, some people have tried to use this
to say this is what Marx was talking about,
but it just doesn't, it doesn't really fit
with what Marx was saying.
And once again, Marx was just wrong.
All right?
So even if there's something that you might take
out of a sentence and say, ah, there's something going on here.
Yes?
Yes?
I'm confused about the demand curve.
Is there like a real demand curve?
Yeah, well, so again, remember, like, you know,
standard model, demand curve is just given
by the marginal revenue product of a worker.
So there are paying workers above the market.
No, so no.
Here, like, here's the key thing is that, so this,
but again, so think about this.
This is the marginal revenue product
with symmetric information.
Right? That's the true marginal revenue product.
That's what you would do if you could be watched
like a hawk all the time.
That's what you're capable of doing.
But then there's the problem that if you just pay people,
if you just pay people that wage,
people feel like they have no particular reason
to actually work that hard.
And so people are not being paid above their actual marginal,
their realized marginal product, but you have to go
and pay them more than that intersection in order
to actually get their full effort out of them.
That's the idea.
Okay. All right.
And if you go and set the model up correctly,
this is a totally stable equilibrium because, you know,
like in the model, so as long as you get the model up right,
if you cut wages a little bit, yes, a bunch of people want
to work for you, but they don't actually work.
Right? So in other words, the productivity
of the workers you get falls faster than the wage.
So if you go and say, hey, I'm going
to pay workers 5% less of that, you get a bunch of workers,
but they're not going to be as productive as they would be
if they were paid a higher wage.
In fact, they'll be, say, 10% less productive than normal.
So if you can get workers that are 10% worse for 5%,
or worse for 5% less, does that sound good?
It's not good.
Right? So that's the idea is
that these other workers who are employed,
even though they're just as good in the model as the ones
that do have jobs, if you went and offered them an amount
of money that made it profitable,
that with an offered amount of money below that amount,
they would actually do a worse job,
and it would not be profitable.
Okay. All right.
Now, the efficiency wage, oh, yeah, yeah, Ash.
I'm just wondering, maybe you'll touch on this later,
but is there an efficiency price theory for?
Yes. So absolutely, you can just turn this around very easily.
You need to have a similar situation where the quality
of the product, where there's asymmetric information,
and the buyer has trouble knowing.
So yeah, but, you know, think about you go and, oh, let's see.
So you, yeah.
The example I'm thinking of is in Toronto, we have a train.
We buy the ticket, but there's no one checking the tickets all
the time.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
That is a good example.
So yeah, so if all, you know, if you were caught without a ticket
if all you had to do was pay the normal price,
then why would anyone ever buy the ticket?
Then it's heads you win and tails you break even.
So yeah, so it needs to be, so the fine has to be enough
to persuade people to buy the ticket in the first place.
Yeah, so that would basically,
that would be in the same ballpark, sure.
Right, but any time there's been, you know, been someone who,
I don't know, like, you know, there's like an electrician,
and he doesn't, and, you know, like you want him,
and you want the electrician to, you know, to do a good job,
you might actually deliberately tip, right.
So, oh, we don't tip.
Well, this time I'm tipping, right, and that way,
the person is worried that they're going
to lose your patronage, right.
You're only actually, even a better example would just be
regular tipping, any place that you go often, right,
if you want to get better treatment, you just go
and give it, and pay an extra tip,
and then people will notice you and probably treat you better.
So, all right.
Now, notice, this is a totally real model.
So, this has nothing to do with the number of identity, actually.
People often go and throw the two together
as if they're the same thing.
They're totally different models.
So, efficiency wage models, nothing to do
with the number of identity.
You know, you get a totally real model where there's no,
where there is no money illusion, no fairness.
You could still have this going on.
Right, Marcus, you have a question?
Yeah. So, I also hear this often, like,
in relation to why wages don't fall during a recession.
It's not related to the business cycle at all.
Yeah, well, so this model has nothing to do
with the business cycle, right,
whereas the nominal model does explain something
about business cycles, but this does not.
Least, again, like, of course, you could do a hybrid model
where efficiency wages and nominal rigidity all working
together, so you could do that.
All right.
So, now, this model is one of the most popular arguments
for industrial policy in labor economics.
Right, and what's the idea?
So, the idea is that it is possible,
and always remember possible, because people are,
there are economists who like a regulation, often very quick
to reason from it's possible to it really will work this way,
but anyway, it is possible that you can increase total output
by taxing the employed to subsidize the unemployed.
Right, and why does that work?
Well, think about this.
If you go and you tax these people, right, you say,
you know, if you go and tax these people, then still,
you know, like, it remains worse to be unemployed.
So, it remains worse to be unemployed, and then you can go
and take that money and use it
to subsidize employment for the other workers.
Actually, in like a more advanced version of the model,
you might go and tax the workers in the symmetric information
sector to subsidize workers in the asymmetric
information sector.
Right, so you would actually go and say, well,
productivity is higher in the asymmetric information sector
than in the symmetric information sector,
but due to the asymmetric information,
there's no movement, so let's go and heavily tax the workers
where we know what's going on, and then we'll take that money
and subsidize jobs for the jobs over in the asymmetric sector,
and yeah, won't that make life even worse for the people
in the symmetric sector?
Yeah, but remember, we're doing Calgary's efficiency here,
so as long as the total social gains are greater,
then that passes the efficiency test.
Doesn't that reduce the real?
Well, so it actually, so that actually increases the gap
between the asymmetric sector and the symmetric sector.
So let's see, so you tax it, so that means the after-tax pay
in the asymmetric sector goes down,
and then actually you subsidize, so that raises post-subsidy wages
in the other sectors, so you're actually spreading the gap
between the two sectors even more.
So people often think about this as like auto workers
versus taxi drivers, and for taxi drivers,
it's symmetric information, and for auto workers,
for some reason, it's asymmetric information, and then the idea is
that we're going and moving workers from these, well,
the low-wage jobs in the taxi sector by taxing those workers
and moving the lucky ones over into the highway sector,
and if this model is right, then it's possible
that total output goes up, and if total output goes up,
then of course, average well-being also goes up,
right, usual model, okay?
Now, there are some other implications
of the efficiency wage model
that have gotten almost no attention
because they horrify the people who like the model,
but they're worth mentioning.
So in the efficiency wage model, you could also solve the problem
by just making unemployment worse,
just make unemployment more scary, right,
and there's one big thing that government does
to make unemployment less scary.
What's that thing again?
Unemployment insurance, so one thing you do is let's get rid,
let's reduce unemployment in the asymmetric information sector
by cutting unemployment benefits,
getting rid of unemployment benefits.
That's totally consonant with the model.
The people who like the model are normally Keynesians
who would be horrified at the thought
of cutting unemployment insurance, but it comes right
out of the model that anything that you're doing
that makes unemployment less scary,
it causes more unemployment, right?
And of course, could be arguing as welfare, and then if you want
to go full Charles Dickens, you could also say, well,
this is an argument for vagrancy laws, saying it's illegal
to not have a job, all right, which,
well such laws have existed 20th century, most prominently
in the Soviet Union where you can be arrested
for not having a job, so, and like especially,
you know, it's a monopsony employer anyway, so you can see
like people wouldn't want those jobs, but yeah,
everyone in the Soviet Union has to have their book explaining
their whole labor history,
solving the asymmetric information problem
to a large degree, right?
If there's a law saying everyone has to have a book
and you can't do anything without someone signing off
and making marks on you, not to advocate it,
just point it out at the model.
Yes.
Uh, so for the subsidy model of work, I guess,
you would have to be tied to keeping the job, right?
You'd have to be tied.
Yeah, yeah, well we give them, well, you subsidize the jobs
in that sector.
Right. So, I mean, you know, like just with like, you know,
so it is a per, it's like a per-unit subsidy
or a per-job subsidy, or maybe a per, maybe an hourly,
hours of work in that industry subsidy.
So yeah, it would be like the investment
of the earned income tax credit, except, you know,
if you thought the whole economy worked this way,
then it would be for any job.
If you believed, as most people who do empirical work,
that the model's relevant in some industries and not others,
then it would only be subsidies
in the special high-value added industries.
And again, there's a common view
that manufacturing has this problem and services don't.
You know, always a little puzzle as to why they think that.
But I mean, I guess it's because wages are higher
in manufacturing, but there is, of course, another explanation
for why wages would be higher in manufacturing.
The civil model, those jobs are more unpleasant, right?
You're in a hot, smelly, smoky, just greasy environment.
So, you know, some people like that, I guess,
but a lot of people do not.
So that would be a simple reason.
Now, just one last point on this.
If you go and read textbooks, including my undergraduate,
my intermediate macro textbook that I had in 1990,
Dornbush and Fisher, when they explain the efficiency
of the wage model, they actually,
the words describe that.
Even though they mean this.
And I remember I took it to Bill Dickens, and I said, hey, look,
doesn't the textbook just go and explain it wrong?
He's like, oh, yeah, I guess it does.
Right? And so when I took it to him, he's saying, well, so,
and this is why mathematical economics adds value,
because if you just use words, then it's easy to go
and confuse these two, whereas if you go and use math,
then you never mix these two up.
And at the time, I was like, maybe, but then afterwards,
I was like, wait a second, Dornbush
and Fisher know the math perfectly well,
but somehow that didn't stop them
from mis-explaining it in words,
which is what I call the problem of poor back translation.
When you go and take words, translate it into math,
and then translate it back into English, a lot of people
who are very good at math are terrible at that last step.
And really, the last step is the one that counts, right?
I think. Not for publication, but for economic understanding.
So, all right, so let us now move on to our next topic here.
Oh, sure.
Is the compensating differential the height difference
between the two supply curves?
So, yeah, the compensating differential is, yes,
the difference in the equilibrium wages.
So, the compensating differential is that amount.
Yes. All right.
Right? And similarly, the efficiency wage would be the
difference between the intersections going in
and the wage that you need in order
to get people to put in effort.
So, again, of course, in the real world, this would be,
again, this would be a continuous variable.
In the famous models, they make the problem easier
by assuming that either you apply effort or you don't.
So, it's a binary decision, and then if it's a binary decision
and all workers are the same, then there's one exact wage
that you need to get up to in order
to get everyone working hard.
Everyone who's employed working hard.
All right.
Yes. Oh, and there's one other solution
to this problem that could also be done.
So, remember we were talking
about contractual punishments earlier on as a solution
to moral hazard problems?
Another application.
Another thing where we're in another case
where we're not using it.
So, the idea here is that if you could go and post a bond saying,
like, if you employ me and you catch me playing Tetris
on the job, I lose my $5,000 bond,
that could solve the problem, too,
and then you could have market clearing.
So, that's another way of doing it.
When you think about it a bit more, there are just built
into the normal job search, something like that,
because in the real world, it's almost never that easy
to find another job, even if you can eventually find another one
just as good, you may be out of work for a week or a month,
and you're stigmatized, and people frown at you and say,
why can't you keep a job?
So, that functions as at least a modest efficiency wage,
because people are, it's like a modest bond,
where if you lose your job, then people get mad at you.
And again, of course, if people are keeping track
of your employment record, that's another way
of solving it by just getting rid
of the asymmetrical information problem.
And you may have noticed that a common piece
of advice is once you get a job, you should not quit that job
for about how long?
Yeah, yeah, people often say at least a year, right?
So, and why?
Because, well, how come you only have that job for a little while?
Yeah, so, my wife once did a job where it was only a month,
but the people hired her had known her for years.
So, then, and the amount, and the raise she got was so large
that almost no one would turn it down.
So, it doesn't reveal that much about your character
if you switch for a raise that almost everyone would go
and switch for.
Oh, yeah, and as I was mentioning, it's very common
for employers to refuse to reveal negative information
about a past employee because they're worried
about legal consequences.
So, if you really were worried about this problem,
how might you change the law?
Well, there's the obvious one, stop punishing people
for saying bad things about workers.
But you could actually switch it around and go further, right?
What, you could be punished for?
Yes, for failing to disclose negative information, right?
Now, technically, that's actually already illegal,
but when I was looking into it,
but that law is pretty much never enforced.
The odds that you'll get sued
because you painted a worker as being better
than they really were, you know, might, you know,
I suppose you might suddenly be attacked by a crazed vigilante
who's angry that you're lying about labor markets or something,
but it's very remote.
All right, so now, finance and portfolio theory,
next set of applications.
All right, so, starting with permanent income anomalies.
So, who here has diminishing marginal utility of consumption?
Diminishing marginal utility of consumption?
All right, good.
And who has access to intertemporal markets?
Yes, all right.
If so, combining these two assumptions,
tailoring your consumption
to your current income makes very little sense, right?
It does not make much sense
to be basing how much you consume now based
on how much you're earning right now.
Instead, the smart thing is to base your consumption upon what
we call your permanent income, or also known
as your expected long-run income.
Your expected long-run income.
This is actually the main insight
that won Friedman his Nobel Prize.
So, if you go and read the citation, it wasn't primarily
for monetarism, more for his theory
of the consumption function published in the 50s.
All right, so now, obviously, there's a lot of truth
in this permanent income hypothesis.
So, take a look at what young people do.
Young people normally pile up a lot of debt,
and then as they get older, they pay it off.
And then, normally, they try
to actually accumulate some assets before they retire.
And then, when they retire, they try to live on that.
those assets. So that looks very much like the permanent income hypothesis. So
when you're young you consume more than you're currently
earning and then when you're in your peak earning years you consume less than
you're earning and then once you retire then you consume more than you're
earning which may be nothing. But behavioral economists have found a
bunch of anomalies, a bunch of ways in which people don't seem to consume
according to the permanent income hypothesis. So one of them is consumption
does seem moderately sensitive current income. So there's been work on medical
students. Now medical students generally have low income but they also
predictably have high income. Furthermore they're really good example because
there's hardly there's not much uncertainty about it because unlike say
undergraduates, medical students have a nearly perfect completion rate. So like
they it's really it's like I think it's over 90% on time completion rate for
medical students. So in general then medical students don't just suspect that
they're going to be rich sometime in the near future. They have near that they have
near certainty that they're going to be rich pretty soon. All right so in that
case it seems like would make sense to go into a whole lot of debt so you could
live like a doctor when you are in medical school. Right now it is true the
medical students tend to go into debt but nevertheless also noted that when
you when people finish medical school their consumption predictably rises and
by a lot more than you expect from resolving this is small residual
uncertainty maybe I'll flunk out somehow maybe I'll get one of the horrible
diseases I studied in the last year and then won't finish. So you know being a
medical student you often come across a weird disease and then start wondering
whether you have that weird disease. Generally you don't fortunately. All right
so and then there's been some more formal statistical analysis which
confirms this so current income does in fact have a moderate ability to predict
current consumption. Well once I won a large cash prize and then I had a former
student say so like what are you gonna spend it on a big trip or like you know
like how can you insult me like this it's going into my permanent income like
why wouldn't it and oh that's boring. Well it's boring to consume according to
Friedman's permanent income hypothesis then just call me Mr. Boring because that's what
I'm doing. All right so it does seem like people do have a sensitivity of their
consumption with respect to their current income and then furthermore it
seems like it also varies with the kind of income so people get a one-time cash
bonus are more likely to go and blow that on one big purchase right.
Rarely do people use that to go and smooth their consumption over their
lifetimes and now I'm gonna have 0.2% higher consumption for the rest of my
life. Instead more common for people to just say oh what should I do with this
thousand dollars I just got. That's so cool. All right now the permanent income
analysis, permanent income hypothesis does have one way of explaining why
someone would go and make a big purchase and that is durable goods. So if there
are durable goods then, so a durable good is something where you buy it and
then you get to enjoy it for a long period of time like you buy a car right
and then you know then you get to go and drive that car every day and take
advantage of that. Now that is something where it might make sense when you get a
large cash amount to go and buy a durable good because again you're
smoothing utility rather than actual physical possessions right. So just so
you think about it this way, for any durable good you could easily be renting
in every period right. So if you're renting it then what you want to do
according to permanent income analysis is just to go and rent a
little bit better or a little bit more every period. But if you're going to own
it outright then how is it that you can in a world where you purchase durable
goods give yourself a little bit more of a period. You just go and buy the thing
outright and then you have it and then every day you can drive a little bit. So
with durable goods you might actually wind up going and making a
large purchase when you get a lump sum cash payment. Although if you do
satisfy the permanent income analysis you do just the same thing if you found
out you're getting an inheritance in ten years. You would do just the same thing
if you got a 5% unexpected raise. Right. Now is the time to go and do
what? So you get a 5% raise so perhaps that means you want to
have 5% more durable goods. But that would mean spending a lot more than
your one week's pay or one month's pay right to go and get your stock of
durable goods up by 5%. So what that means is that you go and you find out
you get an unexpected raise and what do you do? According to permanent income analysis
you would then go and borrow a lot to go and buy some cool ski jets or jet skis or
whatever. Different durable goods. So you would have higher income
and then you would have in that case would actually spend more on the raise.
Okay. All right. Furthermore there's also good
bureaucratic evidence that a lot of people are reluctant to tap into their
pensions and home equity to smooth their current income. This did seem to be
reduced during the financial boom before 2008. So it did seem like there was a
period where more people were going and consuming out of home equity. Although
even there the traditional approach is no no you don't consume out of home
equity. You don't consume out of pensions. That's not for that purpose. I remember
when I was during this period my value of my parents home in LA doubled and my
dad characteristically got angry about it. And he's like prices are totally crazy I
don't know what's going on. And I'm like well but that's good for you because
you've just received half a million dollars for nothing so you should be
happy. It's like it doesn't do me any good. Like well if you wanted something you could go
and borrow against it. It's like you can't do that. You can only borrow at a home to
improve your home. Actually you can borrow for anyone. And then finally he said well what
would I do with it? Well in this case like you could give it to me.
But really this argument would apply to any large amount of cash that he
suddenly got. I don't know what to do with it. Anyway so people are generally
reluctant to tap into pensions and home equity even though that like makes
perfect sense to go and smooth their consumption. So if turns out that the
value of home has gone up a lot, then why exactly is it that you want to go and
keep so much of your assets in that home rather than borrowing
against it? I say well I want to leave something to my kids. Alright well leave
them the same amount of equity that you were leaving before. But why is it that
why is that you're going to leave them a hundred percent of the extra equity? Like
if you had extra income from some other source you wouldn't give all that to
your kids would you? Maybe you would but probably not. Yes. So I don't know about
Australia but my guess is that you know it may be legally easier and more common
but still I would be surprised if you told people this and a common
reaction was not no no you don't want to do that. Oh no you don't understand. Then
you won't have then you won't own the whole house anymore. I think I understood
that but I'm saying that that's actually a good idea. All right so now another
example so you guys are familiar with reverse mortgages. So a normal mortgage
of course is one where you borrow some money in order to buy a house and then
every month or so you go and you pay back that money and eventually
you own the house and the bank has its money returned. With a reverse
mortgage you start at owning a house and then you go and sign a contract where
the bank gives you money every month generally for as long as you live and
then when you die the bank owns the house. So that's reverse mortgage. Now
it's been noted that there are a lot of people who live in very expensive houses
and eat cat food. At least this was in the 70s when social security payments were lower.
But real social security payments were lower but anyway it's like look you live in a
million dollar house why are you eating cat food? Oh but I can't spend that money.
Yes you can, you borrow against the value of the house and then you buy something better
than cat food. Well but that's my house. Well this is your cat food.
If your house were worth a lot less and you got a bag of money you
wouldn't eat cat food would you? So why do it when your house is worth
so much money? It doesn't make a lot of sense. Okay so again reverse
mortgages have become a bit more popular but still they are pretty unpopular. It's
all true they're very heavily regulated on the assumption that only an idiot
would do this. Whereas one of the main lessons of behavioral economics is no, no, no.
Smart people would do this under the right circumstances in particular if you
are a low-income person living in a really nice house. So if you're low-income
you live in a nice house then reverse mortgages are great. Which is a nice
example of how behavioral economics can easily rationalize policies that are
really the opposite of what the actual evidence says but it just puts people in
a mindset of saying let's protect people for themselves. Of course I guess to be
fair I think that regulation to discourage reverse mortgages was
around long before behavioral economics. So there's more intuitive behavioral
economics of no, no, no that's dangerous only an idiot would do that. It's like well
hold on maybe it's actually you're the idiot and the smart people would do this. And you're stopping people from doing the smart thing.
Yes? So is loss aversion kind of the story behind this I guess? Like I don't like the idea of losing my house maybe?
Well maybe although it seems so specific to houses. There's something in like
there's some emotional attachment to this house which you wouldn't have to a
bag of money. Right? And you have a loss aversion that you would seems like you
would be just as attached to bags of money as you are to real estate. But
normal human beings actually do regard them as as distinct. Although you know
some people will get attached to a bag of money. But more often to a house.
Now what's going on here? There is again a standard neoclassical explanation for
why people might actually violate the permanent income hypothesis. And that
explanation is liquidity constraints. So maybe the reason why medical
students go and sharply increase their earnings as soon as they become doctors
or assuming sharply increase their consumption. They obviously
increase their earnings. But they sharply increase their consumption is just that
no one will lend them the money. So that's possible. So maybe if a medical student
went in and said look dudes I'm a doctor. I'm gonna be a doctor. I'm gonna be a
doctor. Right? So how about you just give me like a million dollars now and I'll
pay it but I'm totally good for it. So probably there would be a reluctance to
pay the doctor this. And they say well what collateral do you have? You got my
future income as a doctor. That's my collateral. But you own it now. Well I'm
me now and I'm gonna be a doctor. So not good enough. All right so that's the
problem. Right? And no doubt liquidity constraints do explain something. It is
true that it's hard to get large cash loans based upon no
collateral. But this liquidity constraint story only works when people are
actually liquidity constrained. So you know the main most obvious one is once
people have a lot of home equity then that story no longer makes much sense.
Okay. Right? And again it is actually not that hard for people to get out to get a
lot of home equity. So like once you own your house for five years then normally
you'll actually have quite a bit of home equity. You can then start getting large
loans at the prime rate or less. So again if you're stuck with credit card debt
like no there are way lower rates in your future. This might actually help
you go with your permanent income planning. But so there are way better
interest rates awaiting you in the future. So like prime rates or like
prime rate minus a half. So which yeah could often be like a fifth or less of
what a credit card rate would be. Although of course credit card rates if
you shop around and then move your balances around every six months or a
year you can also have pretty low rates. Is anyone here doing that right now? Yes.
So yeah we did we did have one there was one graduate student Eric Crampton when
he was he when he's a graduate student here. He actually ran up a ton of credit
card debt at zero percent interest and every time he was about to have to pay
he just got another credit card deal and switched over. So he actually was one of
the truest apostles of Milton Friedman that I know. All right. Yes. And his
wife was not an economist but she let him do this. All right.
Yeah. All right. Made a good choice there. All right. So anyway once you've got
significant home equity then appealing to liquidity constraints no longer
makes very much sense because people are clearly not liquidity constrained and
yet a lot of these anomalies do persist. So if it's not liquidity constraints
then what else could it be? Well behavioral economists often talk about
something called debt aversion and the idea is that many people simply dislike
the state of being in debt. A state of being in debt as defined by our society.
All right. Now I know multiple people who end up who not knowing any behavioral
economics have talked about this as a motivator for their behavior. So remember
my brother went and paid back a lot of zero interest student loans early.
Why? Because that way I'm not in debt and he's also made a big deal about prepaying
his mortgage. So he's gonna own his home outright very soon whereas I have
refinanced repeatedly to keep pushing the repayment date out another 30 years.
So I mean I actually just wish I wish it could be a console where I never
actually own the house. I just I want to actually have the maximum amount of
deductible principal forever for as long as I'm alive. So if I could just have a
million dollars in principal forever that would be optimal for me. But again
that is considered weird by most people. Most people want to go and pay it down.
Now again the standard economist thing is well instead of paying down this low
interest debt you could go and take that take whatever you were gonna use for the
yearly payment and buy high interest assets. Why not do that instead? And then
a common thing is no no I need to get out of debt before I can think about
that. Well what's the big deal about being in debt? It's just another way of
describing having some assets you know having negative assets that are good to
have a very small amount of. Like so it's good to have a negative amount of assets
that are crummy right? So if you can so if there's some assets that pay a really
bad return wouldn't you rather be someone who actually owes those assets
rather than owns those assets? Seems like it. All right so evidence so some of us
some more evidence besides my brother for a debt aversion. So it is still
normal that second mortgages are taken out for home improvement not
just smooth consumption. It has become more common there's probably a
significant increase in the amount of second mortgages taken out for non
improvement purchases during the run-up to the Great Recession and then there's
been some retrenchment. But still you know one of the most common things is
just for home improvements. There is actually something in the tax code that
encourages this because technically if you go and have a second mortgage or
home equity line of credit you're only supposed to deduct the interest for home
improvements. However there's the good there is no monitoring of this so you
can always just claim that you're improving your house with whatever
you're borrowing and there's no checking. So not that you should do that of course
but but I'm just saying you can totally get away with murder here so if you
consider a comp a little murder don't do it. But all right other examples so we do
see people pre-paying very low home mortgage and student loans rather than
just investing the surplus in the bottom market. Again when someone has a zero
interest rate loan that's where you really draw the line and say it's crazy
to be pre-paying that. That makes no sense right there's tons of things that pay
more than that. Why would you I understand making the minimum payment but
why would you ever pay anything more than that? All right so you know that
would seem pretty clearly to violate the permanent income hypothesis. All right now
observation here a very common theme in behavioral economics is that people are
excessively impatient but debt aversion says actually the opposite right. Says
the people I should be less so should people should be more impatient. They
should be more willing to go and borrow against their assets live life enjoy life
now and then later on their consumption will be lower but that's optimal. All
right so I mean think about all the people who only start traveling once
they retire. How crazy is that? Right it's like you know I'm gonna go traveling
when my whole body hurts and I so and like I can't enjoy half the things I
can't I can't go and do this like I can't go and ski anymore I my knees
hurt I'm tired so it would seem like would make more sense to go and borrow
from your retirement move the travel to when you're really young and can suck
the mirror out of life and then if you believe the travel is a durable good
where you can enjoy the memories forever isn't it better to enjoy the memories
from years from age 20 onwards rather than from age 70 onwards? Seems like it
makes sense. So yes Alex Tabarrok once did the thought experiment of if you
knew that you were gonna live forever what would you do and he said I'd
travel more. He said if you you were gonna die in a year what you do and he
said I would travel more and they said there's a contradiction here and so he
decided to start traveling more. Right now he's like wait how could it be that
no matter how my life changed I would do more of it? That doesn't make sense or
how my lifespan changed so must be that I'm just suboptimal so he started
traveling. Okay all right so anyway if debt aversion is true then people be
better off if they borrow more to live better today. All right so questions
about that? Let us proceed. All right so present discounted value diversification and
risk premia. All right so in a world of certainty theorem the price of every
asset must equal its present discounted value. So suppose that there's a world of
certainty there's no question about what's going on and there is an asset
and the market interest rate is 5% and there's an asset that's going for $90
now and will be worth $100 a year from now. All right so world of total
certainty everybody knows that the rate is 5% so what are people going to do
rather than lend money at 5%? Buy that asset at 90 which then will with
certainty be worth 100 at the end of the year. Right and that of course is like an
11% interest rate so in that case the money will move and that will bid up the
price of that asset until there's an equalization of the prices. All right so
again as long as it's totally clear everybody knows exactly what's going to
happen then if we don't have equalization rates then people are just
leaving money on the sidewalk and that would not make sense. In a world of
perfect information would there be money on the sidewalk? No. There's money
right there so let's go get it. Because there might be money on the sidewalk in
Antarctica or something like that although how did it get there? Right with
perfect information someone would have dropped it and left it there.
And then they would know, oh wait, I just brought my money.
So, yeah.
Once I was by the Public Choice Center
and I literally found a $20 bill right outside the door.
And I was looking around for a hidden camera
to see will an economist stoop down to pick
up $20 from the sidewalk.
And I did.
And there was no camera.
It just was, you know.
How come I never found $20 when I was a kid?
I guess there was inflation, but still.
Like when I was a kid, I never found more than a dollar.
So, yes. And that was when I needed the money.
And, yes, there were liquidity constraints, although.
Yes, I also had debt aversion when I was a kid.
Or, you know, something more extreme.
I had just poverty aversion.
I just wanted to have a high visible net worth.
So, I just would accumulate money and piggy bank.
And say, once I wanted a checking account,
put in the checking account.
I just sat on it, building it up and feeling better
than other people that I didn't spend money.
Right? And if someone had said, look, you're being an idiot,
Brian. You're going to be richer in the future.
So, now is the time you should be spending.
You shouldn't have money right now.
Yes. If I, could I talk myself into it?
Maybe. Yes.
If I appeal to my ego.
So, you know, you really, what I, you know,
probably my brother always spent whatever money he got.
Which turns out was actually the more sensible thing.
Although, not given what he was spending the money on.
Usually like bad business ideas and things like that.
But, all right.
Any case. So, rule of certainty, the price of every asset has
to equal its present discounted value.
And if you've got risk neutrality,
so everyone is risk neutral, then this holds
under uncertainty as well.
Because in that case, everything will sell
for its expected present discounted value.
So, if you've got uncertainty, but people don't,
but people value everything at the expected value.
Right then, of course, if there's something
with an expected value of $100 a year from now, and it goes
for $90 right now, then that is an expected interest rate
of 11%. And if people are risk neutral,
then they pick whatever has the highest expected return,
regardless of the variance.
Right? That's the definition of risk neutrality.
Right? Sound good?
All right.
Now, furthermore, imagine that everyone
in the world is risk averse except for one person.
In that case, will things still sell
for their expected present discounted value?
Sure, because that one person isn't going
to have any effect upon world interest rates, are they?
So, in that case, that one person who is risk averse will
just sell off all the risky assets
to the risk neutral people.
And that one person isn't going to change the world market.
So, in that case, that one person can have free insurance
if everyone else is risk neutral.
So, if you're the only risk averse person in the world,
you can get insurance for free, essentially.
But once those risk averse people become a significant part
of the market, then they may have
to start paying people premium in order to get them
to provide the service.
Okay. So, once there's enough risk averse agents,
then assets, then factors besides present discounted value
will start to matter.
So, in particular, we should expect
that assets will start trading for the present discounted value
minus some risk discount.
All right.
And you're saying, but wait a second.
Things trade for the present discounted value minus risk
discount, but shouldn't you get a higher rate of return
for the risky asset?
And the answer is absolutely.
And that's implied by this, right?
Because when asset price falls, what by definition happens
to the interest rate or the rate of return on the asset?
Rises. Rises.
So, not only is there no contradiction,
it would be a contradiction if it didn't work that way.
So, either, so when you're talking about the price,
then you should expect something like that.
And you're talking about the rate,
then it should be normal,
the normal rate plus a risk premium.
So, how could things earn both a risk discount
and a risk premium?
Well, there's a risk discount on the price and a risk premium
on the rate, and the discount
and the premium are two sides of the same coin.
Just like low interest rates
and high bond prices are two sides of the same coin.
So, never say there's a correlation between the two.
It's more than a correlation.
It's an identity.
Right? So, important to realize.
Okay. All right.
Now, this is complicated by the fact
that there's actually a ton of different risky assets.
Right? And there's a basic theorem of probability.
Remember the law of large numbers?
So, the law of large numbers tells us
that the average riskiness of a bundle of risks is less
than the average riskiness
of an equal dollar amount of the same risk.
So, if there are 10 assets,
and they all have the same standard deviation
on the return, still, if you put 100% of your money into one
of those 10 assets, you will have a higher amount of risk
than if you put 10% of your money into the 10 assets.
Right? And this can be true even if each one
of them has the same variance, same standard deviation.
As long as those risks are not perfectly correlated,
by diversifying your money,
you can reduce risk for free in a way.
All right?
What this means, then, is that it is possible to a degree
to do what we call diversify away risk.
So, risk can be diversified away.
Right? In an amazing world where there were some assets
where they were perfectly negatively correlated
with each other, you just put half your money in one asset,
half your money in the negatively correlated,
the perfectly negatively correlated asset,
and you would have an income stream
that was perfectly certain.
So, that theoretically is possible.
That even though all the, both assets are risky,
the combination doesn't have to be risky at all.
Strangely.
All right.
And what this means is insofar as you can diversify
that risk away, you shouldn't expect
that stuff to earn the premium.
So, that kind of risk,
risk that you can actually weasel your way out of.
Risk that you can actually just repack it and say,
oh, it's risky.
You know, like, rearrange things.
You know, sort of like take a transformer, move the wings.
All right?
I'm not risky anymore.
I turned this truck into a samurai.
All right?
So, similarly, I turned a bunch of risky assets
into one perfect solid block of non-risky assets.
Isn't that amazing?
Okay. So, then what are you supposed
to earn this risk premium for?
And the answer is something special.
It's undiversifiable risk.
So, undiversifiable risk is actually the relevant risk
that causes a discount in prices,
causes a premium in returns.
Okay. All right.
So, what does this mean?
Well, so, the usual way that people actually think
about this is first you imagine constructing a market portfolio
where you have an optimized portfolio of all the assets
that exist, and you see how low you can get the variance
on that down.
And in the real world, it still has a lot of variance.
So, in the real world, if you go and you try to figure out,
so what is the lowest variance portfolio I can get
that has a given rate of return?
Well, you know, like almost never can you get it
down to zero unless you accept a really low rate.
And even that isn't really zero variance, right?
Even if you put it all into government bonds.
What are the risks of government bonds?
Well, there's the blatant risk.
There's the risk that we're always facing,
and then there's the long shot risk that, nevertheless,
has burned a lot of people.
So, what's the obvious risk of a regular government bond?
What's that?
Inflation.
Inflation, yeah.
Inflation is the obvious risk.
And then what is the long shot risk
that has burned lots of people throughout history?
Default. Default, yes.
So, everyone who owns Zara's debt lost everything,
for example.
All right.
So, when there's even been some effort to try
to explain anomalies in financial markets
by looking at the small risks of total wipeout,
which do occasionally occur.
All right.
The usual punchline explains a bit, but not nearly everything.
Okay. So, anyway, so we first go
and we find this optimized bundle of market assets,
and then we go and we can look at the correlation
of individual assets with that market bundle.
Right? And insofar as assets correlate with the movements
of a given asset correlates with that market bundle,
you can say each asset is actually going to go
and earn some risk premium because you haven't been able
to diversify away that risk.
Right? On the other hand,
if you actually found something that negatively correlated
with the market, then that asset should actually have a risk.
It should actually pay a risk, you know, it should actually pay
more than an asset of certain value
because you can actually take that asset, combine it
with the risky stuff, and get rid of that uncertainty.
So, my favorite example of this is on the first day
of the really huge stock market crash in 2008.
I think there were like five days of horrible crashes.
But on the first day, out of the S&P 500,
there was only one stock that went up in value.
What company went up in value the day
that the other 499 went down?
Campbell Soup.
So, maybe it's just coincidence, but, whoa.
All right.
So, when the rate position is kicking in, Campbell Soup goes
up, well, it seems plausible that a lot of people
who would not normally be eating Campbell Soup are going
to, planning on, I guess it's going to be a few years
of eating Campbell Soup now.
So, anyway, that was the one stock that went up,
at least that one day.
I don't know what it did the other day.
So, that is at least one plausible answer.
Some people have talked about, like, the resume business
as maybe being, as having a negative correlation
with the stock market.
And I think Keynes had the idea, if only we'd be on some kind
of like a clay brick standard,
then every time there's a recession, there'd be a boom
in the clay brick industry.
Because, you know, it's like a cost of return
to scale industry, you just go and make clay bricks and use,
and you turn them in and get paper certificates as money,
something like that.
Okay. So, anyway, if there were something negatively correlated
with the average market rate,
then it would actually be more valuable
than a truly riskless asset.
All right.
So, questions about that?
Questions?
All right.
So, now, yeah, we've got time to do this.
All right.
So, mean variance efficiency.
So, a popular simplifying assumption in finance is
that people only care about two features of their portfolios.
Let's see.
Wait. Am I totally out of?
No. I guess this is what people are using.
All right.
There was a half-destroyed eraser last week,
but it was still almost as good as a regular eraser.
This is worse than a regular eraser.
All right.
Let's see here.
Okay. So, anyway, popular simplifying assumption is
that the only things that people care about are the mean
of their consumption and the variance of their consumption.
All right.
And, of course, people want to have what kind
of mean is better?
Higher. And what kind of variance is better?
Lower. All right.
Yes. So, and that's a simple function that you can use
in order to define what people's preferences are.
So, of course, if you think about it, this,
if you start actually putting numbers on it,
it could apply to some odd results,
but anyway, commonly used just for simplicity.
Right? And this gives rise to the idea
of mean variance efficiency.
Which is a lot like any other kind
of utility optimization problem.
So, assumes that there's going to be some kind
of a mean variance frontier.
Right? So, there is a, you know,
so for any given variance there's a maximum mean you can
get. For any given mean there is a minimum variance
that you can get.
And people are trying to get
on to the frontier of those combinations.
Right? So, this is easiest to think
about if you actually reverse the scales.
So, like here we have mean and that means bigger.
And then here we have variance and that means smaller.
Yes. Yes.
Yeah. Yeah.
It could be one over variance and bigger.
Right? And then we'll have something like that.
So, like our usual kind of budget constraint
where we'll say yes, yes, you could go
and get a smaller variance, but then you're going to have
to settle for a lower mean.
Or you could get a higher variance
and then have a lower mean.
We're going to assume you have higher variance, higher mean,
lower variance, lower mean.
Okay? All right.
So, anyway, and that's the mean variance.
So, as long as you're on that frontier,
then you've got mean variance efficiency.
Right? Does that make sense?
So, use the general idea of being on a production frontier
or consumption frontier.
Same idea.
Okay? Okay.
Now, if you work through all these assumptions,
which I'm not going to do.
I'm just going to tell you the answer.
So, we work through the assumptions of a model
where people only care about the mean and variance.
Then you wind up getting the following equation
for the expected return on asset.
And it's a bunch of symbols, which I know most
of which will be unfamiliar to you.
But I'll write them down and then explain each part
of the equation.
So, we have R A bar equals R naught plus sigma A E
over sigma E E all of this times R E bar minus R naught.
All right.
So, what's the translation?
So, this is the expected return on asset A. So,
that's the expected return on asset A. And so,
R sub A is the expected return on asset A.
R naught is the risk-free rate,
which we usually operationalize as thresholds in the States.
All right?
And then this is plus, plus the ratio of the covariance
of A's return to the variance of the average market return.
So, E is the market basket.
A is this particular asset.
So, remember this here is the covariance between A and E
over the variance between E, variance of E.
And remember what is covariance of A with E
over the variance of E?
Remember there's, you remember covariance
over variance of that equation?
Yes, so that's correlation coefficient.
Yes, correlation coefficient.
Right? So, that's the correlation coefficient times
the difference between the average market rate.
So, this is not the risk-free rate.
This is the rate that you get
from holding the market portfolio on average.
And then that's the risk-free rate.
So, the difference between,
from holding the well-diversified market
on market bundle, which you think of as say the S&P 500
or something like that.
And then that would be the treasury bill rate.
Okay. And again, so this is actually,
you know, the coefficient you would get if you regressed,
if you were to go and regress asset A's return
onto the average market return.
And remember, and this is also called the beta.
If you ever wondered why is it called the beta,
remember how we called regressions coefficients beta,
regression coefficients betas?
Remember that?
And then people talk about the beta of an asset.
Well, it's not a coincidence.
Right? Basically, imagine, you know,
you're essentially regressing the price of the one asset
on the overall price of the market.
And then you get this correlation.
And then once you do that,
you're going to just say it's regressing the return.
So, regress the return of say, I don't know,
Dell on the overall market.
And that will give you the beta of Dell,
which is just the regression coefficient
for regressing Dell onto market return.
Okay. Yes?
This is the capital asset pricing.
Yeah, exactly.
This is also called CAPM.
Yes, capital asset pricing model.
So, you know, it's the basic one.
There's many variations.
But this is where people usually start.
All right.
So, why don't we go and take our 10-minute break now.
And if you're still missing, let's see.
So, if you're missing the week 12 notes,
you can come and get them.
If you're missing homework 8 answer key,
you can come and get that.
If you're missing homework 9 due next week, you can get that.
And let's see.
I still have homework for Olivia and Brittany.
Oh, and then there's.
All right.
So, when you look at an equation like this,
it's easy to just think of it as a bunch of symbols,
which don't really, which mean something in a model,
but don't really say anything very much about human behavior
or anything interesting like that.
But actually, there are some big behavioral implications
of this equation.
So, here's one thing.
So, this tells us that the rate
of return on an asset has to be, say, 7%.
Now, suppose that there's some bad news for an asset.
Right? Well, at first glance, you say, well, in that case,
it's going to earn less than 7%.
But if it was earning less than 7%,
the equation would be wrong.
Right? So, something has to happen to keep
that asset earning 7% despite bad news.
And what could keep an asset earning the same rate
of return even though bad news is coming in?
How can an asset keep earning the same rate
of return despite bad news?
The news is already known?
Yes. No, no, no.
It's really new news.
It's new news.
It's new news.
It's genuine news.
Total surprise.
But how can the equation continue to be satisfied?
Well, let's see.
We were talking about cases like this.
So, suppose that before we have a bond that sells for 90,
it's going to, you know, but it matures to 100.
But then you find out, oh, my God,
this is no longer a sure thing.
Right? This is no longer a sure thing.
So, actually, what's going to happen is that there is,
there's now a new default risk
that we hadn't thought about before.
All right?
And the answer, so, is what's going to happen in order
to maintain this, or so, I'm thinking about this.
So, I guess that's a case where, let's see.
So, it's one where, let's see.
Actually, so, it's no longer literally a premium.
It's actually, you now know for sure
that there is this problem.
All right?
So, anyway, so, there's an asset where before, you say, well,
this seems like a pretty good rate of return, 11%.
Then you find out, oh, my God, actually, it's no longer 11%
because there's this chance of default.
So, how can you go and restore the world
where on average this return, this asset, pays 11%?
Excellent. You decrease the present price.
Yeah, the price has to fall.
So, the price falls, that can compensate you
for that risk of default.
So, when bad news comes in, what happens is the price
of assets has to go down.
Right? Of course, it's even more clear
when there isn't any face value of the asset,
which would normally be the case for, say, a stock.
Right? So, for a stock, it doesn't have a face value.
So, when you find out that it's, that dividends are going
to be less than you thought,
then the way to maintain this equation is
for the price to fall.
Right? So, if, for example, the present value
of dividends falls by 80%, what has to happen
with the stock price to maintain the same rate of return?
Is it 50%?
Yeah, it's at 50.
So, if expected dividends fall 50%,
what has to happen to the stock price?
It's got to be falling by 50%.
Yeah, the stock price falls 80%,
and then we have reestablished the ratio.
Because remember, what is the return?
It's the ratio of the payoffs to the cost of getting
in on the investments.
Now, of course, some people lose.
You know, who are the losers?
Who loses when the bad news comes in?
The early buyers.
Yeah, the people currently hold it.
So, they don't get to say, wait, the equation protects me.
No, the equation robs you.
The equation goes and says, in order for this equation
to keep holding, you, you...
The person holding the bag, the person holding the now worse asset gets a big hit so that
anyone who, so that if you want to go sell it, no one, you are not going and able, you
are not able to escape from this bad news by just going and selling it to someone else.
Instead they'll say, well, yeah, sure, I'll buy it from you for half of what it used to
be going for because now it only gives half.
And you say, no, no, no, but I want to go and sell for what I used to get for it.
And then have you suffer.
That's my ideal, and well, you're going to have trouble finding a person who wants to
accept that offer.
But instead people will want to have an offer like this one.
Now once you start thinking about it more, what's interesting is that you can ask, well,
what does it mean for news to arrive?
When does bad news happen?
So you might say that news of rain happens when it starts raining.
Say, no, no, no, we know about the rain before it actually starts raining.
Say, when is the news of rain?
When will the storm clouds come?
Say, well, we know rain's going to come before the storm clouds come.
So when is it?
Well, then maybe when the first weather forecast, the long-term weather forecast starts saying
anything different from the long-run average.
Say that's when the news comes in.
And then similarly, think about, say, young people, young people are smoking at lower
rates.
When does that news come in?
Say, well, really it's been around for a long time actually.
And then the only question is, will it continue going in the same pattern as we've been expecting?
Or will it hit a floor?
Or what?
And really the news is just the difference between what we're expecting at any point
in time and what actually occurs.
All right.
So, like if you find out that a firm is going to have to pay a million dollars ten years
from now, it makes perfect sense for the price to fall right now.
So you say, look, we don't have any problem for ten years.
Why can't you just wait ten years for the price to fall?
Or maybe, anyway, wait like ten point, wait nine point nine years.
Well, if you wait nine point nine years to sell, someone else is going to have sold at
nine point eight years or nine point seven years or so on.
So anyone who sits around waiting for the thing to happen when the thing is foreseeable
is going to actually wind up being the one that suffers.
And of course the same applies to probabilistic news.
So if you learn that something is more likely than you previously thought, it's more likely
that a nuclear war will occur because Donald Trump is president.
You say, it's only a small chance, but it's a bigger chance than before.
Right?
If you think it goes from a half percent to one percent because you have a hot-tempered
guy with no prior experience in office.
All right.
So that's a reason for, a reason to make a small adjustment.
Well, again, a small chance of a really big thing.
So maybe a moderate adjustment actually.
You might want to work in that case.
All right.
So anyway, something revealed that is more likely than previously thought, then asset
prices should adjust to that as well.
All right.
So another way of thinking about it is that the occurrence of any expected pattern is
not news.
Contrary to almost all newspapers.
All right.
Which in general, most headlines are totally predictable and boring.
It's like, there's still no Israeli-Palestinian peace deal.
Oh my God.
The same thing has been going on for 70 years.
It's continuing to go on.
I really need to buy and read about this non-event here.
All right.
So instead of like the real news would be like there is progress.
Oh my God.
All right.
Now that would be something.
Is it?
And then you say, is it really progress or is it just the newspaper trying to sell papers
by making it look like something new has occurred?
You know, is it just click bait where it's like, well, you will be surprised at this.
And then you ever click, oh, I wasn't surprised at all.
Seven tips you'll never think of.
They're all obvious to everyone.
So that's the idea.
Now my dad, once again, to give an example of someone who seems to violate this.
He has a theory that there's just something called a good company.
There's a fundamentally good company.
And these companies you just can't go wrong with.
And there's other companies that are just fundamentally bad companies.
And these ones, they never work out.
And so a key part of his investment theory is you just sell the fundamentally bad companies
and buy the fundamentally good companies.
And again, if he actually had a way of knowing, that would be amazing.
But it doesn't seem that he actually has any way of knowing.
Yes.
All right.
Now a surprising implication of all this, and one that really did shock people when
it first became known, is that asset price changes should be totally unpredictable.
Asset price changes should be totally unpredictable.
Because if you were able to predict that prices would be rising, what would you want to do
right away?
Buy.
And if you could predict that prices would be falling, what do you want to do?
Sell.
Right?
So it makes sense then for there to be a predictable price change.
And therefore, the only two things that make sense are total stability and random change.
And of course, in the real world, we don't have total stability because weird stuff's
happening all the time.
So what we actually expect is for there to be random price changes.
Random price changes.
So asset price changes should be completely unpredictable.
And therefore, prices should follow a random walk, such as the expected price at time t
plus one is equal to the expected, is equal to the price at time t.
Not expected because we know what it is.
At time t.
So the expected price at time t plus one is just going to be equal to whatever it is right
now.
Of course, any time you break that, people can always make fun of you because you're
almost always wrong.
Right?
The price is almost never exactly, tomorrow, what it was today.
And you're always predicting that.
But again, of course, the right reply is, I said that's a prediction.
Sometimes it's going to be too high, sometimes it's going to be too low.
But the right way to test what I'm saying is to get a large number of assets together
and see if, on average, they're the same.
Of course, you can go and have a random walk with a trend because stock prices generally
go up over time.
So you could add on a small daily time trend.
Like every day, they get 1 365th of a year's worth of interest.
So you can put that in, things like that.
And so the hypothesis that prices follow a random walk like this is called the efficient
markets hypothesis or EMH.
People sometimes just do random walk hypothesis, but this one is the main thing people talk
about.
It's the main abbreviation people use.
Same thing.
So efficient markets hypothesis, random walk hypothesis.
All right.
Now, the emission markets hypothesis has been very thoroughly denounced over the last 10
years especially.
But there are two kinds of people who denounce it.
There's people who denounce it because they claim that there's nothing to it and it's
all just some professors making up nonsense.
And then there's other people who are denouncing it because it's not perfect.
All right.
So people know the data do the second thing.
So when you hear someone like Richard Thaler or Robert Shiller going and talking about
dogmatic believers in the efficient markets hypothesis, if you go and actually read their
works or cross examine them, and they give an enormous amount of ground to the image,
they're complaining about relatively minor deviations.
And of course, I think they might say, well, they're not minor.
If you were to just go and put, say, Thaler on a continuum from pure believer in the efficient
markets hypothesis to your typical stock charlatan who claims that he's got an equation that
predicts everything that's going to happen and then ask, where's Thaler fit on this continuum?
Right?
So it's probably over there.
Saying, you horrible people there.
You deluded fools.
What about those guys?
Well, those guys are such scum, Thaler wouldn't stoop to talk to them.
And rightly so.
But although you may say, well, if you're going to go and talk to fools, you might want
to point out that there's the fools and there's the really big fools.
There's the people who sit around saying, buy Tungsten and then they're going to go
and buy the big stuff.
And you might say, well, I'm not going to buy Tungsten.
I'm not going to buy Tungsten.
I'm going to buy the big stuff.
But you're going to have to go and buy Tungsten.
And you might say, well, if you're going to go and talk to fools, you might want to point
out that there's the fools and there's the really big fools.
Now, there's the people who sit around saying, buy Tungsten and this will solve everything.
Tungsten never goes down.
So those people are really crazy.
Anyway, so even strong critics like Thaler or Schiller will happily admit if you read
them that it performs well in many respects.
Right?
So, for example, it is very common that there will be good news for a company.
They'll announce high profits and then the price crashes.
And what's the efficient markets hypothesis explanation for that?
Good news, price crashes.
How could that be?
Yeah, and the good news is, hey, we have an 11% profit.
This is fantastic.
If they were predicting a higher.
Yes, if the market thought it would be 13 and it's only 11, it makes sense for the market
price to go down.
Even though the news is good because there's the news in the normal sense of what appears
in the newspaper, what is officially announced versus the real news.
What is the gap between what people thought before the information came and what actually
happened?
So in that sense, good news can be bad news.
News that isn't as good as expected is bad in the ice of the market.
And similarly, it is very common that firms announce losses and problems and their stock
goes up.
And again, this is the flip side.
How could that possibly be?
This is the kind of thing that my dad will say, these markets are crazy.
They're losing money and the price goes up.
Well, there is a theory about this.
And the theory says that if the bad news isn't as bad as expected, then initially there was
a really bad event factored into the stock price and now, oh wait, it's only a moderately
bad event.
And if you go from factoring in a really bad event to a moderately bad event, price rises.
Very simple.
Okay.
Alright.
So, that's one.
And again, if you really say it, like read Thaler or Schiller, they're happy to go and
concede all of this.
Even though I would say this is not obvious.
Right?
Again, so like my dad has done fine investing.
He's done well.
He's a smart guy.
But he's still baffled by this.
And he's especially baffled by this.
So this is the one where he's like, how could that be?
That's crazy.
Like you just look at Darts and it does well, it doesn't make any sense.
And every time I say it, it actually makes a lot of sense.
And this is one of the few things I'm able to teach him, but I can only teach him temporarily.
Because he will like yell at the time, oh yeah.
And normally I don't get the oh yeah.
Normally I get the glare of trader of America or something like that.
Foreign oil.
Alright, my son.
Right, maybe this is what happened.
I'm like the best knife in my bag.
But anyway.
For this, there'll be sort of like a look of recognition.
Alright.
But then two months later it's back to how could that be.
So he's in his 70s.
So maybe if I got to him younger, then it would have sunk in.
But now it does not sink in.
Alright.
Okay, furthermore, EMH passes a number of surprising empirical tests.
At least some of these I've done myself.
So I was just curious to describe them.
So here is one that actually works.
You cannot predict annual returns of the S&P 500 using pass rates of return.
You just go and do a regression of the rate this year on rates in previous years and try
to find something you don't.
And you say, but how can that be when there are these strings of good years and strings
of bad years?
Well, that's perfectly fine as long as what?
What happens at the end of a string of good years or a string of bad years?
There's a turn.
Yes, there's a turn.
And if you go and do the regression, then if you've got a few good years and then a
terrible year, and when the terrible year comes, it's self-random, then you'll have
strings of good years, and less is a bad year, and the bad year comes anywhere between zero
and ten years, late into it.
You go and do that regression, and you actually get a zero coefficient on the past returns.
So that does actually work.
So I've seen that.
Now this is despite the fact that there is a giant industry of people who sell their
advising services to customers, telling them whether this is a good year to invest.
And people pay for that and get the data.
There's no sign that there is any such thing as a good year to invest.
Right now, the great practical success of the image can be seen in the rise of index
funds.
And this is actually one of the biggest practical ideas that economists can deservedly claim
almost all the credit for.
So the idea of an index fund is that rather than going and hiring geniuses to try to pick
the best stocks, you just buy and hold a fixed bundle of assets.
And what's the advantage?
The advantage is supposed to just be that you save on the cost of the advisors.
Because if that's true, then how much do the advisors actually help you?
How much do they help you for your gross return?
None.
And if they cost money, then what do they do to your net return?
They reduce it.
Right?
So anyway, this idea first arose in the official markets I was advising in the early 60s.
It only takes a few years before some economists get convinced enough of us to say, let's go
and launch some investment funds where we do exactly that.
Where all we do is we go and buy the S&P 500 and we hold it.
And let everyone laugh at us.
Everyone's laughing at the professors who don't think they can do any better than dart
throwing monkeys, which is one common way of explaining what the EMA says, is that you
can go and either try to hire the best talent in the world to pick stocks, or you can go
and have monkeys throw darts at the Wall Street Journal and you'll get the same gross return.
And then for the net return, of course, the monkeys were cheaper.
So I mean, unless they're exotic, they're killing each other with the darts.
You get the idea.
All right.
So anyway, so index funds come along and they, at first, of course, they start off as a small
part of an enormous market of hundreds of billions of dollars, even then.
But their market share has been growing and growing and growing over time, despite the
fact that most people that I know who had their money in index funds are completely
baffled by how it could work.
All they say is, I don't know how it works, but it does.
It keeps beating the market.
Keeps beating managed funds, beats the market.
How could it be?
I mean, this is where my dad starts freaking out.
How could it be that just randomly doing something does better than trying to do something well?
All right.
And that's all.
Remember what we were talking about?
Something like this.
And so if that's true, then really you're just wasting your money on the advice.
All right.
But, you know, at least it's not the same level of hostility that I get for a comparative
advantage or something.
All right.
My son, the traitor.
He did the Japanese thing.
He did the Japanese thing.
The traitor, he did the Japanese agent.
Agent of all countries of Asia.
The greater East Asia co-prosperity sphere.
All right.
But anyway, so index funds have done, their market share has risen and risen.
And it was already by the 90s doing pretty well.
But now I think it's getting close to 50% of the markets.
Now on one hand you can say, wow, it's taken like 50 years to get to 50% when it's, at
least it's doing, at least the net return is better.
Now there's actually been some weird just good luck for index funds where it seems like
even the gross return generally appears to beat the market for whenever I've looked.
So it's not a huge change.
But it seems to actually just be doing better, you know, better even than the gross, which
is even more than expected, of course.
You expect that it would do, be at the median for gross and then above the median for net.
But at least what I've seen index funds normally or do maybe at the 60th or 70th percentile
for all funds in gross.
And then for net they're doing even better.
Anyway.
All right.
So that is the amazing practical result of economics.
And my teacher, Burton Malkiel, was one of the key people involved early on.
So John Bogle I think was not, at least he was not a professor, but he was very closely
tied to some professors like Burton Malkiel.
And let's see.
So Burton Malkiel.
So I'm not sure, but I believe that he was in at the ground floor and must have been
worth an insane amount of money.
Because so.2% of a massive amount of the market every year really adds up.
You'd be surprised.
Yes.
Yes, doesn't the effectiveness of the index fund rely on the market trying to beat the
market?
Great question.
So actually when you think about it, in, so remember search theory.
So in equilibrium, what should we finally expect to happen once index funds have reached
their optimal level, optimal use?
So think about search theory.
So what ought to be equalized in equilibrium?
Cost of benefits.
Yes, the cost of benefits.
So in equilibrium, the net return of managed funds and index funds should be equalized.
So essentially index funds should either keep growing or maybe should have already reached
the point where so few people are actually paying attention to what's going on in the
real world that the minority of people that do can actually earn their keep.
What's strange is that after 50 years, index funds keep rising, but we don't seem to have
hit equilibrium yet.
Again, possibly you can think of this as a behavioral anomaly that it's so hard to believe
that not trying can do better than trying that people keep doubting it despite the fact
that it keeps working.
So maybe that's what's going on.
All right.
So anyway, so looking at net returns, it's actually anomalous how well income index funds
are doing.
So the success of index funds is a strong confirmation of the power of the efficient
markets hypothesis, but the fact that they haven't equalized under 50 years suggests
some kind of behavioral anomaly still going on.
By the way, if you can get an index fund through an institutional employer, you can get those
rates down to insanely low levels.
I think if you get an index fund through, so if you get the normal index fund through
your George Mason retirement, then I think it's actually down to like 0.02% management
fee.
So I mean, I remember when the fee was like, so like the fee on T-Graph was 0.2% and I
was like, oh, it doesn't get lower than that.
And then someone said, oh my God, you realize that?
You're getting ripped off.
S&P, if you do Vanguard, then it's 0.02.
I'm like, 0.02?
That's crazy.
I looked into it.
And yes, now Mason, they let you do some of your funds with a good fund, but other ones
you can't do with a good fund.
It's a mystery why we can't only do the good one.
But I don't know what's going on.
But anyway, if you're interested in this, I'll be happy to talk to you.
I'm going to go ahead and close out the session.
I'm going to go ahead and close out the session.
I'd love to hear what you have to say about what's going on survey.
Oh, anyway, If you're paying 0.2% on index fund, don't think that's the best you can
do.
You may be able to do even better than that.
And remember that 0.18% interest compounded over 40 or 50 years of work.
That actually adds up to a significant sum in the end.
So, questions about this?
Everyone happy?
Yes?
So, but with the index fund, you're still investing in the S&P 500?
Well, it could be any, there's many different indexes that you can invest in, but yeah.
But still, someone picked the index, right?
So, the index is picked, but it's not based upon expended performance,
it's based upon market capitalization, something like that.
Okay.
Yeah.
But I mean, that was my only question.
Right, right.
Yeah.
Now, since we get to saying, you know, while we're on this topic,
so once you're doing index funds and you're saying, well,
we're doing this in order to get this diversification,
they're like one of the other big lessons that,
practical lessons that's come out of financial economics is
that there's something called home bias.
Where human beings in pretty much every country
around the world tend to invest a strangely large amount
in their home country.
There are a few countries that don't?
No, no, no.
That's crazy.
Yeah. Yes.
So even if you're like in Belgium or something,
there's like you might have like 30%
of your assets in Belgian assets.
It's not that much.
Like, you know how small a part of the world Belgium is?
You have 30% of your assets in Belgium?
How many people who aren't Belgian have 30%
of their assets in Belgian assets?
Like, almost no one would do it.
So, this is a very real problem.
And even in the United States, most estimates say
that you should never have even 50% or more of your assets
in US, of your wealth in US assets.
So, when we talk about diversifying away risk,
there's a lot of risk that people could be diversifying
away that they don't bother diversifying away.
Right? And, again, of course, back in earlier times
when it was just hard to go and invest internationally,
there might have been some excuse.
But now it's so easy to do this.
And there are index funds for many different countries,
for many different regions of the world.
Right? And then when you think a little bit more
about how most people own a home in the country
where they reside, right?
Normally the home that you own is in the country where you live.
You, like, the percentage of your assets
that you actually have in your home country is probably,
is way higher than you think.
Because, you know, even if you put half
of your liquid financial assets outside of your country,
if your home is half your wealth, then you still have,
like, three quarters of your wealth in your home country.
Which, again, is pretty crazy.
Right? And, again, it's so easy for people to go and try
to move their assets in other places.
So this is something where, again,
I will not claim any independent wisdom on this.
But when I read it, like, my God, this is totally right.
And, see, my wife was a little nervous about it.
But then I said, well, here's what we'll do.
We'll make a phantom portfolio that I'm advocating,
which we'll just put down and pretend we own it.
We don't really own it.
But we'll just put it down so you can see what happens.
And then after a year, okay, this doesn't seem too crazy.
So now I've got maybe down to, like, 25% U.S. assets.
Maybe even less.
So that's only financial markets.
So we still own a house here.
So maybe I should go even lower.
Right? Now, you know, and then when you're thinking
about this more, like, when you owe, like,
any time that you owe an asset that are in another country,
that any time your own country's currency crashes,
that's actually awesome for you.
Right? So suppose that the dollar were to fall to 1%
of its current value compared to the pound.
This would mean that the value of my British assets in terms
of what I can buy here in the U.S. would multiply.
What did I say?
Fell 99% would be worth 100 times as much.
So that would be pretty cool.
So, and normally I'm rooting for the dollar to crash
because I own all these foreign assets,
but I consume almost everything in the U.S. So,
at least we're thinking about it.
All right.
So questions, questions.
All right.
So, all right.
Moving on to calendar effects.
So even though the efficient markets hypothesis surpasses
some pretty nice empirical tests, and it's just impressive,
just realizing like you cannot predict the annual movements
in stock indices just using past movements,
which I think is a very popular view.
If there is a view, well, like good years go together,
bad years go together.
Yeah, they do, except when they don't.
Except when you have a good year,
then you have a terrible year, which wipes out the correlation.
And then it's like, well, but as long
as you know what the turning point is, yeah,
well if you could know that.
I think once the economists actually did a thought
experiment and just said, imagine a person every year just
knew which country would have the largest increase
in stock value that year.
How rich would a person be if every year they could just move
their assets to the country that would go up the most?
Yes. And the answer is that person would own more
than the world if they could have done this.
And that's not nearly as hard
as picking the best stock every year or anything.
This is just picking the right country.
Even that, if you could really do it, you would be richer
than any human being is by far.
So something's like, how hard can it be
to know which country's going to be best on earth?
Super hard.
So hard, no human being has done it ever.
It's that hard.
No human being's come remotely close.
I guess if someone every now and then, they just pick a country
where they lose all their money, then that would work,
because then you'd have a zero multiplied in there,
and then it would fit with the fact that you own nothing.
But yes. All right.
So anyway, there's a bunch of, but there are a bunch
of anomalies for the MH, and some of the ones
that have gotten the most attention are called
calendar effects.
So calendar effects.
Excuse me.
Effects. And the best note
of all these is the legendary January effect.
The January effect.
So, Thaler Reports, book published, I think,
like around 99 or so.
I don't remember when it was, when it was first published.
So thereabouts, I think.
So back then, he predicted, he said that, you know,
average New York Stock Exchange monthly returns from February
to December are.5% per month.
Average January return is 3.5%.
So there's one month that has seven times the normal rate
of return.
All right.
And if you look at it further, it seems like it primarily comes
from these really high returns for small firms in January.
So you just buy, invest in the small firms in January,
and you get over half your annual return right then.
I think, let's see.
Or no, no, no.
Let's see.
Would it be over half?
No, it wouldn't be quite that good.
Let's see.
Eleven. So, you know, you got like two-thirds
of your annual return.
Or like one-third of your annual return, but still pretty good.
All right.
And then you might think this is just a U.S. specific thing.
So, of course, this inspired a lot of research.
And 15 out of 16 countries studied had a January effect
by the late 90s.
All right.
Now, since then, many people have, you know,
people working in this area have generally said the January
effect has either gone away or is going away.
So I haven't kept up to date
on what the very latest word on it is.
But a common saying is the January effect is now happening
in December.
Right? And that's the idea.
Well, if everybody knows that it's going to go up in January,
then it won't go up in January.
It'll go up in December.
But I think actually there's just been a general annual,
general smoothing over calendar months.
But I haven't followed that closely.
So I'm not sure what the current story is.
But even if it goes away totally,
the fact that it was big for many decades and 15
out of 16 countries studied is not the kind of thing you can
just say, ah, it doesn't mean anything.
It's a split.
So that's one case.
Another one that is not nearly as impressive
but still well-documented is something called the
weekend effect.
So when you go and leave your money in a bank account
with continuous compounding over the weekend,
how much interest do you get between Friday and Monday?
So continuous compounding.
So between Friday morning and Monday morning,
how many days have passed?
Three days.
So with continuous compounding,
how many days interest do you get?
Three. All right.
So pretty obvious.
All right.
Now it would seem like stock markets would also have
continuous compounding, right?
So people are always able to go and buy and sell.
So anyway, people could go and dump their portfolio on Friday,
buy something with continuous compounding,
and then sell the continuously compounded thing on Monday
morning and then buy back their portfolio
if they weren't getting the continuously compounded return
on the stocks.
So it seems like the average Friday
and Monday return should be three times the normal return.
Right? But actually,
Monday returns don't seem to be especially good.
So that's another thing that's been found.
Now, Thaler, who again is, if you go and read him carefully,
he's always more reasonable than the summary.
All right.
So, all right.
And possibly more reasonable than his own summary when he's
on TV or something like that.
So, you know, I have been on TV, so yes,
you do have to simplify, but still.
If you do read him, he says something that is much richer
than the view that is normally attributed to him.
So one thing he admits is, look, sure,
these anomalies are pretty hard to take advantage
of due to transactions costs.
But what he says is, you know, at least you should expect people
to adjust the timing of the transactions.
In order to take advantage of the pattern.
So if you know that you're going to buy stocks once a year,
there's a January effect, when should you buy the stocks?
By the end of December.
Right? And then either way,
you're paying the transactions costs.
But then in one case, you're going
and getting your best deal.
Whereas if you just do it randomly,
maybe the dice will come out February.
And then you're getting a way lower return.
And you pay the same transactions costs.
All right.
And yes, so similarly, so there would be a problem
in the real world in selling all your stocks on Friday morning
and then buying them back on Monday morning.
Or Friday evening and then buying them back Monday morning.
Which is almost every place would go and charge a fee,
which would wipe out the benefits.
You see, like, if you really know what you're doing,
you might be able to have a, one of the brokerages
where they just charge a flat amount per sale order
or purchase order.
And then if you, and then if you don't diversify as much,
you might go, you might be able
to get the transactions costs down.
If you have an index fund,
normally they actually will not allow you to do stuff like that.
So normally for index funds, there's a rule saying
that you're not allowed to buy or sell more often
than every few months.
And actually, when you call Redeem,
the last few times I called, they said, why are you selling?
And if you say, to market time, then they'll say, oh,
I'm sorry, sir, you're not allowed to do that.
So, or something I want to say, like,
if there's an extra fee if you do that,
we're saying just I need the money, then there's no fee.
So it's a little bit funny as to how they enforce that.
The fact they ask is just maybe sometimes people do
to support it out, and then they can scold them at least.
All right.
Yes, and like another calendar effect, well, which, again,
it's hard to believe, but I didn't, I met one
of the primary researchers, and she really knew her stuff.
So I will tell you what she told me.
So there's a researcher who, like, has,
there's a paper called, this is your portfolio on winter.
And it's all about the calendar effect
from seasonal affective disorder.
Right, and the, so seasonal affective disorder,
so there's something like 10 to 15%
of people feel more depressed during winter.
And the standard view is that it's just
because they're getting less sunlight.
So people get happier when there's sunlight,
and most people don't really care particularly,
but there is a segment of the population, like 10 to 15%,
that gets really bummed
out when they don't have enough sunlight.
So anyway, what these researchers did is they actually
went and tracked down, based upon your latitude,
how much sunlight you're getting
in all the different stock exchanges.
And then they looked at what's going on for,
either in the stock exchanges or in country, or in the firms
that are based in the countries of the stock exchanges.
And note, not only are you able to get variation
from latitude, but remember how there's two hemispheres?
So, and when the Arctic has full sunlight,
what does the Antarctic have?
Full night.
So what this means is actually there's a reliable pattern
of sunlight, and they claim that when you go
and test global financial markets, a particular,
like based upon each country or each stock exchange,
for seasonal affective disorder based upon their latitude
and the time of year,
they claim that they actually get a very predictable pattern
of returns get depressed during times of low sunlight.
Or actually, I believe it's prices get depressed,
which means the returns are high.
Yes, that's the actual results.
So people get depressed, they sell, oh man,
the world's terrible, there's so little sunlight.
And then there's enough people feel this way
that the sales depress prices.
And then if you don't sell your stuff during that time,
you can make an extra return.
And in principle, this does mean
that if you could just oscillate between,
like the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange
or the Stockholm Stock Exchange, so you're always going
and selling when there is, you want to sell
when there's a lot of sunlight, I believe, and buy
when there's very little sunlight,
then you could make some extra return.
So I mean, I'm sure I was asking, but like,
that sounds really easy.
Wouldn't everybody do it?
I don't remember her answer to that.
But this was a piece in the AR, so I'm sure,
and it was controversial, so I'm sure the referees put it
through a bunch of stress tests.
Very good.
All right.
So, well, there are a few authors.
So, but there's, but the piece, this is your brain on winter,
or this is your portfolio?
I remember it's investigating the relationship
between the weather and the stock return in NYSE.
So weather conditions.
So weather, so but the weather or sunlight?
So this one is about sunlight.
Oh, he said about weather, maybe the sunny days,
the stock return is high.
Okay, so in, so they don't have, like in this paper,
they don't have a lot of information.
They specifically didn't actually look at local weather.
They looked at the amount of sunlight that is coming
to you from the earth, you know, like coming to you from the sun.
So I mean, I'm saying, like, well, what about if there's,
like, really thick thunderstorms or whatever?
And, you know, they don't count that.
So they base their measure purely upon your latitude
and time of year and, of course, which hemisphere you're in.
So anyway, there's another one.
All right.
So questions about calendar effects?
I guess.
There might be one more.
I heard about it a little while ago, and I was just looking it
up to see what sort of recent research might be on it.
But there might be a congressional impact.
Okay. And that market tends to outperform when Congress is
out of session, recess, versus days when it is in session.
And this goes back how long?
Apparently, there was a study done in 97 that looked
at stock prices from 1897 until then.
And there you get some variation because Congress used
to be in session a lot less
from when there was no air conditioning.
So, you know, so perhaps, you know, the theory,
the hypothesis is that, you know, there's less uncertainty
because they're not meddling with things like that.
There's a guy, Eric Singer, who founded a mutual fund
to invest specifically in days when Congress is out of session.
So it's potentially another area of research.
All right.
That's good.
All right.
So next anomaly, mean reversion.
All right.
Let's see.
I was going to do just this here.
All right.
So this fiscal markets hypothesis tells
that returns are unpredictable.
So you can't use past returns to forecast future returns.
But there is a literature on mean reversion,
which is essentially the opposite
of what a normal person thinks.
So the normal view is something like good years follow good
years, bad years follow bad years.
Mean reversion actually says the opposite.
Mean reversion says, no, no, no.
If anything, bad years follow good years,
and good years follow bad years.
And you should buy the stuff that's been doing poorly.
So essentially the reverse of my dad's view,
there's like the fundamentally good companies
and the fundamentally should buy those.
No. The fundamentally good companies are the ones to sell.
And the fundamentally bad companies are the ones to buy,
would be a way of saying it.
So essentially it says that if markets have done poorly
for a while, then on average they will actually do better
or at least individual stocks.
So now if you take a look at what had happened
to U.S. stock markets since around 2009, well,
let's see you had an incredible horrible crash,
and then you've got a bunch of good years.
Right? And the mean reversion story is generally something
like when there is a crash, people panic.
Does that sound at all plausible based upon anything you saw?
People are going like, ah!
Stocks have risked!
Oh no! Oh my God!
I never would have bought them if I'd known that!
You know, so people get really, they get terrified,
and they dump their stuff, and they just say,
I'm never buying stocks again.
And then there's all of these stocks that are sitting there.
People are just too scared to touch them.
And if you're someone who just says, well, look,
long run averages though, come on.
And then you look at them, they're really cheap.
No one else is buying them.
All right.
And then you go and buy them.
Right? So essentially if there is an overreaction to bad news
where people say I don't want to buy stuff anymore,
or there's an overreaction to good news
when markets are growing up, and they are going
up, and then people say, oh my God!
Stocks are just a free lunch!
They're like, it's just like bonds, but with no risk!
And higher returns is wonderful.
So if that's, again, a common reaction, then again,
the smart money is there saying, no, again,
look at the historical payoff.
So that's when I don't want to go and buy them, and that's,
in fact, when you may sell them short.
So you've got that.
All right.
So high returns in the past.
If anything seemed to predict unusually low returns
in the future, right?
And again, Thaler is a fan
of this systematic overreaction theory,
which just says past returns negatively forecast future
returns because too many people believe what my dad believes,
that bad past return, that the past returns positively forecast.
So if almost everyone believes
that there's a positive correlation,
then this will lead people to, you know, when prices go up,
to go and buy and buy to an unrealistic high level,
and then there'll be a crash, and then the people
who know better can then take advantage of it.
So at least back 10 years ago, there was an index called
The Dogs of the Dow.
Does anyone know if it still exists?
Okay. So The Dogs of the Dow, this is basically going
and taking the 10 worst performing Dow Jones stocks
last year and buying them.
And the underlying theory was mean reversion.
Dogs of the Dow is still around.
Dogs of the Dow is still around, and as it works
for the last 10 years, that's the more important question.
Not just whether it survives, but whether it still works.
But anyway, if we have some information on that.
All right.
Now, the main thing to say, I am a little bit suspicious,
just because I at least, when I've done the directions myself,
I haven't seen anything for the U.S. But, again,
it could very well be
that the U.S. is an unusually stable stock market,
being the one that everyone around looks
to as being the rock of the world economy.
And if you go and look at other countries,
maybe they do have a more serious overreaction.
Also, what I can say is when I've gone
and done the same regression on monthly data,
then I have found a little bit of predictability
in monthly data.
That does fit with the idea of transactions cost are too high
for most people to take advantage of it.
Because if there's just a very small month
to month correlation, so, but to go and be,
like buy or selling on the basis of monthly variations,
probably really hard for most people.
Although, of course, if you are a major investment house,
that might be something that you can do.
Thank you.
that you can take advantage of.
All right, so questions about mean reversion?
So again, mean reversion is one of these ideas
where if it's true, it is a way
to probabilistically beat the market,
although of course, the main thing
with any of these anomalies is realize
that just because it exists statistically
doesn't mean that it's big or that it's in any way certain
or that it's ideal.
Yeah, so there's a famous lawsuit
where University of Chicago Business School professor
told a class of business students,
I guarantee this equation will never screw an investor.
And then one of the students used it
and was screwed by the equation
and then he took the professor to court for that.
And the court had a very important
and extremely wise ruling,
which says that no professor can ever be held liable
for anything he says.
All right.
Perfect, essentially.
Right, so George Stigler had a very amused comment on this
on how isn't it surprising that people
who are very close to the professorial community,
namely judges, come up with a ruling
which shields professors from any responsibility
for anything they ever say.
All right.
Of course, if you believe the Ecker-Lavellev model,
then we might wanna be suable for what we say, right?
What's the advantage in being suable
for wrong things you say?
There's an advantage.
Compensated for the right things you say.
Yes, well, people will listen to you.
People will care what you say.
People will pay you more for your advice.
Whereas if it is known that there is no liability whatsoever
then people don't care as much.
Okay, all right.
So questions about mean reversion?
I'm happy.
All right, let's move on to betting market anomalies.
So remember back in week two,
when we talked about betting markets
and how Robin Hanson is one of the world's leading
researchers on betting markets,
including betting on terrorism
and other controversial things,
which do not actually plausibly cause terrorism
because, well, many reasons,
but one is the maximum bet was 100 bucks.
So you have to imagine there's someone
who wasn't gonna kill themselves
and then, oh, there's 100 bucks in it.
And then the other one is that the betting market
is monitored by the CIA.
So you'd have to go and do this
and then withstand scrutiny by the CIA.
So that's also, other than in order to get paid.
So it's also not too plausible.
Anyway, so betting markets are just a special kind
of asset market.
So if I hold up a piece of paper
that says I will pay you a dollar
if inflation goes over 10% in the next 10 years,
that's really, like, that's really an asset, right?
That's an asset that pays under certain conditions.
We can call it a bet or an asset.
Really just a bet is a certain kind of asset.
That's all it is, all right?
And then the same empirical techniques
that we apply to other asset markets, right?
And really the same equation over here.
Could be, you could go and take it
and apply it to betting markets just as well.
Apply it to betting markets just as well.
So, and a lot of the things that we see in betting markets
is just the way they expect.
So for one thing, there's a really high correlation
between subjective and objective probabilities
in betting markets.
So I think I was already showing you
what calibration looks like.
We're showing you in, so when people go and look at bets,
and here we've got
subjective probabilities as reflected in,
like, the initial prices that bets go for.
And then we've got objective probabilities,
which is the actual frequency with which different bets win.
So again, if we start, so we start at, like, 0.5 to one,
then we are quite close to a nice 45 degree line
where if a bet is going for 50% of its face value,
then it generally actually wins 60% of the time.
If it's going for, say, 80% of its face value,
wins about 80% of the time.
And again, this is a price,
and this is a price before things happen,
and that's a frequency after things happen,
and we can then go and plop them together.
And again, of course, it's possible,
like if people are really dumb,
if you're betting against two-year-olds
or something like that, not that you should,
but if you're betting against two-year-olds,
then maybe you would see that the line would look like that,
or it could look weird,
or there would go all kinds of weird lines
if you're betting against people who are just clueless.
But these, remember, these are subjective probabilities,
but they're market prices,
so they are the subjective probability
of the marginal bettor.
So it's not even average,
it's like what the marginal person's willing to do.
Okay.
All right.
So, so anyway, so that is,
describes a lot of what's going on.
So betting markets do very well by most tests,
but there are a number of anomalies.
All right.
So, and of course, once you start looking for anomalies,
eventually you find some.
So probably the very best known betting market anomaly
is called long shot bias.
Long shot bias.
All right.
Generally demonstrated by studying horse racing.
All right, now if you ever wondered how it is
that horse tracks make sure they'll have enough money,
the answer is they actually have a procedure
that can't fail,
which is if, say, people are betting three times
as much money on one horse than another,
then they actually use that to say,
in that case, there are three to one odds.
And that way, and so, you know,
if there's three times as much money put in favor of horse,
put in favor of one horse,
then if the one where there's three times as much money wins,
you only get a small payoff,
paid for by the,
three to one, so by the 25% of people bet the other way.
So like the winners all get an equal share
of the 25% of money that went the other way,
but if the unpopular thing wins,
then they each get to triple their money,
minus transaction costs, of course.
Right, so, you know, so if there are,
you know, there's three times as much money bet on,
you know, like, I don't know,
what's a good name of a horse?
Sure, Shadowfax.
Shadowfax is one horse.
And what's your horse?
She always wins.
Yeah, she always wins with the other horse.
So three times as much money is put on Shadowfax,
then she always wins.
Then if you go and bet on Shadowfax and you win,
you're going to get a one to three payoff.
So like for every dollar, for every $3 you put in,
you get $1 back, which means that the bets on
she always wins are gonna be enough to cover those bets.
On the other hand, if she always wins wins,
or then, every person who bet a dollar there
gets $3 from people the other way.
So this is called parimutuel betting.
It's a very simple way to make sure that you're solvent,
because you set the odds just based upon
the total volume of dollars that people
are putting down on every possibility.
All right.
So, normally this works fine,
but one thing that's been noticed is that
there is long shot bias, which says that
expected returns in horse racing
increase with the probability of the horse winning.
So in other words, this says that if you bet on the horse
that is favored to win, say one horse
has an 80% chance of winning,
you generally get a higher payoff per dollar
than if you bet on the long shot,
the horse that only has a one in 30 chance of winning.
Now again, notice this isn't the obvious thing that
the total number of dollars that you get
when you bet on a favored horse
are less than the total number that you win
than if you bet on a unfavored horse and you win.
This is saying that the actual expected payoff is lower.
The expected payoff is actually lower,
whereas in that example that I gave you,
the expected payoffs are equal.
Right, so either you have a three quarter chance of winning,
but if you win, you only get one third of a dollar,
or you have a 25% chance of winning,
but if you do win, you get $3 for every dollar.
So that means the two bets are actually equal in value.
But the long shot bias says that
if you go and bet on the safe bets,
you actually on average take home more money in the end.
And if you go and bet on the long shots,
you take home less money in the end.
All right, now one explanation that
lifelong gamblers generally have,
and which people who research it
have said seems plausible anyway,
is that a lot of people actually want to leave
either in the money or at least not out of the money.
So basically they don't want to leave having lost any money.
All right, now of course since there is a commission
or a management fee deducted for every bet,
on average people are losing money every time, right?
So if at the end of every day,
typically you will have lost money.
And if then you want to try to avoid losing any money,
then at the end of the day you will go
and bet on the long shot,
which is your only way of making it up.
And if there are enough people doing this,
regardless of the actual objective odds
of the long shot horses winning,
there will be too much money
poured into the long shot horses,
which will mean that the odds,
although the odds are still good,
the payoffs are still good,
they're not as good as they should be.
So basically a horse that has a 30 to one odds to win,
might like objectively,
might only have a 20 to one payoff,
because too many people go and say,
I don't wanna go home not having lost money,
so I'm gonna take my remaining money
and dump it on this long shot horse,
and come on, come on, she always wins,
or whatever.
So that is one that seems pretty well established.
So says that if you do want to improve your odds,
don't bet on long shots,
just go and bet on the safe ones.
And if you feel like that isn't risky enough,
you could just go and bet on more safe horses,
or bet larger stakes.
You could still lose just as much money,
whatever you want, right?
But with better odds.
And then another example is lottery betting,
which also often uses this parimutuel betting system.
So whenever you hear about how the pot
has grown to a certain amount of money,
the pot has grown to $100 million for this lottery.
Well, the normal things that happens
is that they actually start selling
more lottery tickets for those.
And then the more lottery tickets sold,
then eventually the fact there's a huge pot
doesn't mean that in equilibrium,
the tickets are not especially good
because more tickets get sold,
and of course there could be one winner
that gets the whole thing,
but there's way more tickets, so your odds are less.
But also very common with these kinds of lottery systems
is that if people can choose their own numbers,
and people like being able to choose their own numbers,
it gives this feeling of, oh my God,
like I can decide whether I win by choosing my own numbers,
then in systems like this,
what happens if multiple people choose the same numbers?
They have to split the pot.
Now, what's interesting about this
is that there are patterns in numbers
that people voluntarily pick.
People pick a lot of birthdays and other dates.
So if you have the option of picking any number
between like one and 60 on three numbers,
then if you go and pick a first number
that is greater than 12,
and then, let's see,
so then another number that is greater than 31,
and I guess the last one, if you do the year,
then you wanna pick a number that is,
let's see, I guess I'll go, let's see, so.
Well, let's say, I guess you could go and pick a number
that few living people have as their birthday, right?
So right now, there'd be very few people alive
who would be buying lottery tickets
who would have like 18 as the last digit
of their birth year, right?
Those people would be 99 years old.
So you go and you pick numbers
that are normally not picked as birthdays
or for other superstitious reasons,
and in this way, you can greatly reduce your risk
of having to share the pot.
And in this way, it is actually possible
for people to buy lottery tickets
that have an expected positive sum
under very special conditions.
All right, so economists often dismiss lotteries
as a tax on stupidity, but Thaler shows there are cases
where it's at least has a positive return,
which doesn't seem that stupid.
He does also admit that you would have to live
for thousands of years for this
to actually become a viable way of getting rich,
so it's not to me that impressive,
but still given that a lot of people play lotteries,
the fact that people go and pick these losing numbers
so frequently, kind of interesting.
All right, so questions about betting market anomalies.
Wondering about any of these.
All right, so we're not, yeah, yes.
I was wondering if you'd heard of the Martingale
betting system, betting strategy?
Is that the one where you keep doubling your bet
and telling them to make money?
Yes, yes.
Do people ever try it, and then at what point
does that end up breaking down?
Right, yeah, so the strategy of going and betting on roulette
and every time you lose, doubling your bet.
From the point of view of casinos,
this is just like a new sucker showed up
and did a bet twice as large as the last sucker.
They're perfectly happy for it.
Of course, if you literally had infinite money,
then this could work, but how many people on earth
have infinite money?
Zero.
No one has infinite money, so it actually doesn't work.
Yes, so it's one, of course, what you could say
is that the median, if you have a lot of money,
the median is good, but the mean is still terrible.
Yeah, yeah, Ash?
This is actually why casinos have minimal bets, though,
because they start with just betting one penny.
Yeah, well, I mean, it would make sense
to have a minimum bet anyway, because it's not worth their
time to handle a bet of a penny.
But yeah, Lane?
I'm probably good at casinos too much.
They've always had minimum bets, but the end result
of a betting system that presses on loss, like the Martingale,
is that the expected value can't change, right?
There's no change in the betting system,
but you have more small wins and a few
number of catastrophic losses.
Yes, yes.
Similarly, if you press on a win instead, it flips it.
Yes, yes.
That's right.
Anyways, but I'm sorry, sorry, sorry,
please don't talk when someone else is talking.
Excuse me?
Hello?
Please don't talk when other people are talking.
Yes, all right.
See you guys soon.
And then practically speaking, of course, nowadays,
pretty much every casino has table limits
where you're only going to be able to double maybe
a half dozen times.
Yes.
So you're going to get a big five billion dollar bet.
Right, yeah.
Right, so there is that.
Yeah, and then there's a lot of betting market anomalies
that I have noticed, as far as anyone who has studied,
just things like people don't like giving odds on bets.
Which again, is so if you do try betting people on things
they say, well, of course, the first thing
is people don't like betting at all.
That's one anomaly.
But the other thing is people really
don't like giving anything better than even odds.
Which again, people say, well, why should they
get better than even odds?
To entice a person to go and lose their money.
That makes perfect sense.
So if you really have inside information,
if you really know the odds are five to one,
and someone wants you to pay them three to one,
that's a great deal.
Because it's, well, sure, sure, three to one's great.
Because I know that actually you only have a one in five chance
of winning.
So the fact that I have to give you three times, that still
is a great deal for me.
So in the same way that you want to entice customers
with good prices, you want to entice betting partners
with good odds.
And the only thing you have to be careful about
is that you don't make your prices so good
that you lose money.
And you don't want to make your odds so favorable
that you, on average, you lose money.
But there should be plenty of room
between your great confidence, if you really have it,
and even odds to do something in between.
And yet it's very hard to get people to give odds.
So the obvious explanation, of course,
is that people are just not nearly as confident as they
seem.
And people like claiming to have omissions.
But actually, not only do they not, but they know they don't.
They realize that they are just mortals,
despite the fact that they talk like immortals.
All right, so questions about betting?
Questions about betting?
Anyone wondering here?
All right, so I think now is actually a pretty good time
to go and talk about the final exam.
And then this will leave the full next class
to talk about public choice.
And so by the way, so I do teach the graduate class
in public choice for the second semester.
So next class, in addition to being incredibly fascinating
and important material, is also a trailer for the class.
So if you like the next class, then you
might want to think about doing public choice as a field.
It was kind of like having a movie,
and then you have the TV series.
So it was like one two-hour 40-minute movie
on public choice.
But then you would have the 14-episode.
But production values don't comply.
Production values just get increasing returns.
Seriously.
Yes, and think about this.
The more confused you are by politics,
and probably the more confused other people are,
the more interesting questions there
must be for public choice to answer.
So really, the weirder things get,
it opens new vistas for you guys, especially.
All right, so let's just talk about the final exam.
So the final exam is going to look just like the midterm.
So we'll have the same number of questions,
the same format of questions as the midterm.
You will have more time for questions.
A little more time for questions.
If you felt rushed on the midterm,
you can feel rushed on the final.
The breakdown is going to be about the same as before.
So about 50% of material from lecture,
40% from homework, and about 20% from readings.
I didn't remember those readings.
Yes, they're still there, still waiting for you.
They're still fascinating.
And then the exam remains fully open book and notes.
So you're welcome to bring any written materials that you want
whatsoever.
You cannot use an electronic device, not even a calculator,
because of the negative externalities
of advanced technology and the asymmetric information
of cheating and so on.
So it's fully open book and open notes.
And then, let's see.
So other things?
Yes, so Julia will proctor.
So again, I still won't be here.
If that's frustrating.
I would have been just as frustrating
if I had to do it in a different way.
I would have been just as frustrating in person
because normally, the answer to any question
is part of what the question is testing
is whether you understand what this question is.
So something important.
Will the test be cumulative?
The answer is yes, but.
So about 1 third of the material will
come from before the midterm, about 2 thirds
from after the midterm.
So while it is cumulative, everything in the class
is fair game.
But I will wait the exam towards the second half of the class.
I'm greatly fond of questions that combine some knowledge
from the first part with some knowledge from the second part
in order to see whether you've really put things together.
And not only remember, but can apply and see
the connections between different ideas
that we've done.
Let's see.
Anything else that I should tell you?
Yes, and of course, you still write directly on the exam.
The amount of space that I give you is intended as a guideline
for how long your answer should be.
There is that great rule to apply,
not just in this class, in all classes, answer the question.
Which I know is easier said than done
when you're under test pressure.
But still, that is a great rule to follow.
So a mediocre responsive answer will
do better than a brilliant answer to something
I didn't ask, because of course, when I get the second thing,
then I just say, well, maybe the student just
doesn't know anything about what I asked, and then I'm done.
So they're talking about something different in order
to distract me, and that's really what I do have to assume.
Let's see.
So answer the question is good advice, and yes.
And then also remember what I was saying
about how it's important to distinguish between a question
about a model from a question about the real world.
So the question says, you know, in a Bertrand collusion model,
is that a question about the model or about the real world?
That's a question about the model.
If there's a question that says, you know, does OPEC fit,
does OPEC actually look like the Bertrand collusion model?
What is that a question about?
Real world.
Then of course you need to know the model to answer the question,
but it's not going to say, well, OPEC does,
because what OPEC does is everybody in OPEC sets a price,
and whoever sets the lowest price gets the entire
world market, and that's not what actually happens
with OPEC at all, is it?
Right? As far as I've never heard about one country
in the world selling all the oil for a year.
As far as I know, that's never happened.
So that would be a good point to say actually OPEC doesn't really
fit the Bertrand collusion model well at all.
Right? And then you could go and point out, the model says this,
like here's what we see in the real world.
So that would be a question about the real world.
Again, normally I will try to be clear by saying something
like in the real world, or other keywords that indicate
that you need to be discussing facts.
Right? You know, so now, you know,
sometimes I'll ask questions along the lines of, you know,
so does this model, like which,
does this model adequately describe your behavior?
Now, again, once in a while, someone will just say, yes,
I always defect in a prisoner's lemma.
So they're saying, hmm, I don't want to call them a liar,
but if they don't say anything else, it doesn't seem
like a very good answer still.
So if the person would just say, look,
people call me really weird and selfish and so on,
but that's just how I am, and I don't care what people think
about me, you know, it's a really good answer.
All right?
Then I believe you.
But if you just give an answer where you say the model says
this, and I do exactly that at the end.
That's where it does, you know,
where again it's possible that's true, but it's one
where the explanation is not convincing,
and so if you just flush it out more.
Yeah, people call me a monster, but I always defect.
All right?
So that just adding that extra line is like, oh,
it's pretty convincing.
It shows that you're paying attention.
So, yeah, so anyway, if there's questions
about your own behavior and you're asked to explain it
in general better if you can give a richer story, and,
you know, a more observant story, right?
You know, even if you are someone
who fits the model very well, you can say, look,
I realize that most people do this,
but that's not what I do.
I do something different.
You know what I'm saying?
So what I do is more, is constant with the model.
Right? So, you know, you might say, look, I know most people,
if they win a prize, go and blow it on some, you know,
some temper on a big party or something,
but that's not what I do.
I go and raise my permanent income by 1%.
That would be a good answer, because that would be my answer.
So, of course, that's a good one.
Yeah. So, anyway, so that's, anyway,
so those are the main things to know.
Let's see.
I know, oh, yeah, so people often ask
about two other things.
So what is, so next class I will give you homework 10
without answers.
There's no answer key, but if you have questions
about a specific problem, I will point you in the right direction.
People also often ask, are there answer keys
for the old final exams?
So remember how the midterms have answer keys?
There are no answer keys for the old final exams,
because demand is much lower for answer keys for final exams.
But, again, if there is a problem that is troubling you,
I am happy to point you in the right direction,
or you can send me your answer, and I can say
if it's a good answer or if there's something
that can be improved.
So I'm happy to help you out on those old exams, too.
Yeah, so those are two other coming through kind of questions.
Let's see.
Any other questions about the exam?
Yeah, Dash?
Oh, it's not strictly about the exam, but about the comp.
Oh, okay.
So, yes, I, yes, I'm totally qualified to answer that, too.
So, so, does everyone know about the comprehensive exams?
Yes, all right, good.
All right, so what's your question?
Just, can you give us any general advice
for answering the question on the comp?
Yes, on comprehensive exams, which, again,
this is not the final exam for this class.
This is that one that's given, what, in August now?
Yes, so, so planning on taking it in August.
Yes, so my best advice there is to, again, look at old exams
and take them under time pressure.
So I, so I try to vary my questions a bit,
but in the end, it is striking
to me how frequently questions occur on those exams.
So there is a high repeat rate,
especially if you go back 10 years.
Then the repeat rate is maybe two-thirds, actually.
So at least when I do it, I usually try to change a word
or two to see whether people can tell and figure
out whether that changes things.
But there's a lot of repeat questions.
Let's see.
So I guess that's the main thing.
I guess, yeah, so there's also the figuring
out who wrote the question, honestly.
So the Williams questions, there you want the Williams answer,
and the Jones questions, you want the Jones answer,
and my questions, you want my answer.
The Williams questions I see
as more distinctively Williams questions,
but you all had him, so.
You have a good idea about how he thinks, so.
That's what I say about it.
But again, practice, practice, practice,
and don't practice by reading notes.
Practice by doing exams.
So just to tell you how much I believe in this.
So right now, I'm prepping my homeschoolers
for advanced placement tests in European history,
microeconomics, and macroeconomics.
And what does our practice consist in?
We are doing 15 years of old micro-macro exams, right?
Which gets really boring.
But we want fives.
So, you know, and so they are my kids, so I'm like,
we've got to do this.
I don't care if it's boring.
We're going to get fives.
We're going to crack this system, right?
So, and yeah, at this point, I'd be very shocked
if we didn't get fives, because, I mean, I've got the,
oh, I have the answer keys.
I grade them exactly the same way they grade them.
I show them the keys.
Every question, you see why you got this wrong?
Because they like it this way.
This is exactly the way to do it.
All right?
Now, this is not a great way of teaching economics.
It's just a way of getting a high score on the exam.
What I, for them, I tried to first give them a great course
in economics, where they really understand it,
and then teach them how to crack the exam.
So I can first teach the subject,
then teach the test afterwards.
So hopefully, we've, hopefully, both things are going on here.
But anyway, when you're going, approaching the comp, you know,
like, since we haven't taught you the test,
you teach yourself the test by getting those old exams
and just doing a ton of practice,
which I know is kind of boring.
But, and again, I would generally recommend trying
to take the exam in a very similar condition
to the actual test.
So I know, I probably wouldn't do this myself,
but even like handwriting it so that you get the pace right.
Or like, if you print the test, if you really print it,
print it, but, you know, like, it's, I know it's tempting us
to type it, because it's easier on your hand.
But then that adds on an extra variable where you're not,
wait, can I actually do it under test pressure, you know,
like, with my hand the same way that I do with typing?
So probably for me, I would, I would type it until, like,
the last two practice tests,
which I would do immediately before the real one.
Something like that.
Let's see, other questions?
Yes?
So regarding the comp, regarding the first semester
and second semester, the answer, this is kind of obvious,
but to ask how much outside extra reading might be helpful
for it, you know, are the readings and assignments
and notes and tests and things that you've done in the first
and second semesters, is that sufficient for?
In my experience, absolutely.
Okay. Yeah, so the stuff that you've been, like, so,
again, it's called comprehensive, but, like,
the focus upon the material that has actually been taught
in these two semesters, I mean, so, you know,
like you wouldn't get penalized if you knew more, but, you know,
like, there's no reason you could not get a perfect score
using only things that you have, you know, using only things
that you have learned this semester as long as you,
you know, let me listen.
If you learned everything that was taught
in these two semesters, you should be able
to get 100% on the test every time.
I'm just thinking of the two volume set
for the Alchin works, if that would be useful to devote time
to or part time dedicated to.
Let me go, so, again, just in terms, so remember that the rule
about equating marginal utility of good one divided by price
of one, marginal utility of good two divided by price
of good two, remember that equation?
Yep. Yes.
My honest answer here, like,
in terms of becoming a good economist,
do some read, some ask.
In terms of passing the exam,
I'd say there's a corner solution
where I wouldn't bother reading anything more
than what William specifically talked about.
Again, that's, they seem cynical, but, you know,
I'm not saying Alchin is great or that you shouldn't read him,
but if all you want to do is get a good score on the exam to go
and read extra stuff that William's already talked about,
he was totally useless to me.
I'm like, 90% useless.
All right, so next class we're going to do last week
and we'll also take any questions you might have
about any material that we've covered at the end.
Thank you.
