And don't participate in any experiments that you know about, because you guys are PhD students too.
So, for you know that.
So anyone not have the answer key slash histogram?
There?
Let's see.
There?
There you go.
Oh, I think I might have to come in after.
Can you say my name?
So everyone else have the answer key and histogram?
Thanks.
And...
Name one sex, Al.
Let's see.
Third lane go?
Yeah, there you go.
And then...
Justin Moore.
Justin.
What do we have down here?
Jay.
Alexander.
Tate.
Jordan.
Maybe I'll put it in the window.
There you go.
Alright.
So...
The exam was a bit easier than I was shooting for, but it's all on a curve, so that should not be a concern.
Let's see.
So we are not going to actually discuss the exam today.
I had a bad experience in a parking lot once, and so I make it a policy to have a three-day cooling-off period before I ever talk about an exam with anyone.
But you do have the answer key, so if you have any questions or you're not happy with your grade, I encourage you to compare your answers to the answer key, and then I'm happy to talk to anyone beginning on Thursday.
So beginning on Thursday, and of course you can answer, I'm happy to answer questions in class, next class, but you don't have to ask questions to the whole group.
You can come to me, you can call me, email me, whatever you like.
But today we're not going to talk about it.
Alright.
So...
Let's see.
Instead we're just going to forge ahead.
We're talking about our emotions?
No, I'm just kidding.
Yes.
That was part of the bad thing in the parking lot.
So, yes.
Alright.
And...
Let's see here.
Alright, and then I've got one spare copy of the week 8 notes for...
So I remember I handed them out, but...
I already got one, but I forgot it.
You guys saw your hand first.
Okay, so we're just going to forge ahead into symmetric information.
Okay.
So remember last class we did expected utility theory, or we started with expected utility theory.
And the whole idea of expected utility theory is that you have to have some utility wealth function, such as u is equal to the square root of your wealth.
And then the idea of expected utility theory is that everybody maximizes a linearly...
Maximizes the utility weighted by probabilities of different events occurring.
So, and the key thing is that the weights are always linear.
So if something has a 30% chance of happening, you put.3 ahead of whatever the event is, and then you plug it in.
So, I think the example I gave last time was in fact just exactly this.
So u is equal to the square root of w, where w is.5.
And then if you were evaluating two lottery tickets, one with a 50% chance of 10,000 and a 50% chance of 0.
That's one lottery ticket, and the other lottery ticket is 2,000 with probability 100%.
So these are the two lottery tickets. Which one do you want?
The way, what expected utility theory says that you will do is for this one you take.5 times the square root of 10,000 plus.5 times the square root of 0.
And then compare that to 1 times the square root of 2,000 and whichever one is higher, so the expected utility theory says you will do whichever one is higher.
Alright, so and if you plug it through, that one comes out to 50, that one comes out to 44.72.
So that is the preferred lottery ticket for someone with that expected utility function.
Alright, now just one math aside if you're curious, if you have never heard of any of this don't worry about it.
Maybe just a small, small snap.
So you might remember when you were doing utility theory, did you ever hear that utility functions are invariant up to a monotonic transformation?
So that means if you maximize utility you can also square the utility function, you can add 10 to it.
Anything that keeps the utilities that were higher before higher afterwards, anything that preserves the relative ranking is a perfectly fine thing to do.
Alright, so that is, we're reversing it.
It would not be okay to say take the cosine of your utility function because cosine is not another monotonic function.
Right, cosine goes like that, okay.
Alright, now expected utility theory, expected utility functions are not like that.
So you can go and do a monotonic transformation of expected utility, which would expect utility function and get a different answer.
So all that you're allowed to do with expected utility function is what's called an affine transformation.
That means you can multiply expected utility by any constant or you can add a constant to it.
And then it's still unique.
So expected utility theory of radical W is the same as like 2 radical W minus 8.
That would also be fine, would also give you exactly the same answer every time.
If you wanted to square it, that would actually change the answer.
So you could not do that with an expected utility function.
Now when you first hear about expected, oh yeah, Ash.
Shouldn't be any positive affine transformation.
Let's see, ah yes, that's true, yes.
So yeah, it's true if you multiply it by negative something, yes, you're absolutely right.
So yes, yes, so that is correct.
So yeah, any positive function, although you can add or subtract any constant.
That's very good.
Alright, now at first glance expected utility theory seems like it's just a tautology and like what else would somebody do?
But expected utility theory actually has some real implications, which can be tested.
And a number of them have shown to be wrong, at least under certain conditions,
although still may be a theory that is generally useful.
Alright, so here is one of the implications of expected utility theory.
Now this one may seem totally obvious to you, but it's not obvious to normal people.
So keep that in mind.
Alright, so suppose that you're in different, so one implication is the compounding result.
It says that consumers are indifferent between a 50% chance of a 50% chance and a 25% chance.
Well of course, who wouldn't be?
Lots of people actually.
There are a lot of people who, if they could either go and roll a four-sided die and they went on a four,
or they flip a coin and see what happens, and then they flip another coin,
if that coin comes out right, they'll say, oh I'll do the second one, that one's safer.
And you're like, what? How is it safer?
Well, there's a feeling of, look, I just do a 50% risk at first, and then I see whether I'm okay.
It's like you jump to a ledge of a mountain, and then you get there, okay, I'm okay.
Now I'll try to jump to the higher ledge.
Okay, and now I made it.
Whereas jumping, just doing one big leap would freak them out.
So, and again, if this seems really weird to you, these are very normal reactions.
And let's see, I'm trying to remember, like when I was on vacation, I heard someone say something exactly like this,
and I just sat there nodding.
Yes, of course, of course, right, you would want to go and resolve the uncertainty sequentially.
That's very important, because otherwise it would be very scary.
All right, so I'm trying to remember, what was it?
Maybe it will come to me, but.
So you may have seen this with, like kids are often like this, where they don't want to just have the dice get rolled.
Let's just roll one die and see how that goes.
And then we'll roll the next die and see how that goes.
Right, I mean, so just think about someone, they have to roll 10 dice, and they have to get a good overall roll.
Imagine someone wants to roll the dice one at a time, because somehow that matters to them.
So if that matters to you, then you do not actually have expected utility theory.
Expected utility theory does not describe you.
All right, now another thing, so linear probabilities.
So in expected utility theory, you won't see a big nonlinear difference in the utility
between having a 0% chance of a risk and a 0.1% chance of a risk.
All right, now, in the real world, a lot of people treat this as a big difference.
But if this works, there's no chance it could go wrong.
Yeah, but there's only like a one in a billion chance anyway, so what's the difference?
And you may say, well, I mean, that could still be consistent with expected utility theory.
Here's the key thing.
If people regard there as being a big difference between 0 and one in a billion,
but a small difference between one in a billion and two in a billion,
that's where we've seen the violation of expected utility theory.
So if going from a small amount to zero matters a lot to you,
and going from a small amount to twice a small amount, a probability barely matters at all to you,
you violated the theory.
All right, now, you may have noticed, for example, that people will try to sell you products
by saying this gives you certainty, like for an extended warranty.
Like you'll say, look, probably you're going to be fine,
but you can be perfectly safe if I sell you this warranty.
Now, there's something very fishy about claims like this because is it really true
that you can ever be perfectly safe with anything?
No.
I mean, what if you leave town and then the store that gives the warranty,
it's too inconvenient for you to go and get your money back?
Well, then you're not perfectly safe.
What if the product kills you and so you're not alive to collect the money?
That's not perfectly safe.
But anytime someone is trying to go and make a big deal out of absolute certainty,
there's the one problem that they can't really sell you absolute certainty.
They're actually doing something like impounding.
They're saying, well, if you're alive and you still live in town and you don't lose your receipt
and 77 other conditions, then it's perfectly certain that you'll get your money back
and we haven't gone bankrupt and all these other things.
But again, that's really just like not only is this a nonlinearity,
but there's also like how is that so great because I still actually don't have anything like certainty.
But the idea is, well, but if all these things happen, then it would be certain.
And that's really valuable for something to be absolutely certain if 77 unlikely events occur first.
How is that particularly good?
I don't understand.
And if that's what you're talking, then, well, you're not really an expending warranty buyer anyway.
So just move along.
All right.
Right now, expected utility theory is not saying you're going to value $1,000 a hundred times as much as $10.
It's only the probabilities that matter linearly, right?
Again, which is one of the harder distinctions to grasp.
So it's the probabilities that matter linearly.
So it just says that no matter how bad an event is, going from 0% to 1% is the same as going from 1% to 2%,
which again seems to be empirically wrong for a lot of people.
There's a lot of value people put on certainty.
I gave a talk on immigration once, and then a guy in the audience asked me, well, if you're wrong, do I get my country back?
And I was thinking of, if you know the movie Fargo, where William H. Macy keeps saying, I guarantee that I will pay you back.
There's your guarantee.
I guarantee it.
All right.
So I was tempted to say, yes, I guarantee you can have your country back.
Just do what I say, and then I'll give you your country back.
But I want to be honest and say, well, of course not.
How could I give you I can't honestly promise to give you your country back.
Just like how can you guarantee me that if computer development occurs, the Terminator scenario won't occur?
I don't have any guarantees.
There's a think tank at Oxford that worries about this all the time.
All I can say is, seems really unlikely, but that's the best I can do.
I can't really guarantee it.
But the good news is, you shouldn't really it's not that important to get a guarantee.
If you've got an expect utility function, then a guarantee is not that much better than having just a marginal risk reduction.
All right.
Okay.
All right.
Now, again, of course, the more you think about it, the weirder it is, because psychologically, these things seem to matter a lot to people.
And, again, so think about where you're really nervous about a standardized test score.
You go and log in, and then, fine, the score is okay, and then your stress goes down from a lot to zero.
Now, that's a little odd because, wait a second, how do you know that you actually logged into the right web page?
And how do you know the results are reported correctly?
And, you know, it could be like the best picture in the Academy Award, and they announced the wrong winner.
So, really, like, it doesn't make sense for your stress to go down from a lot to zero just because you get this information.
Maybe to fall a lot, but as long as there's still some uncertainty, seems like there should still be some concern.
All right.
So any other questions about expect utility theory?
This is a basic building block in any choice under uncertainty, any paper that you see that analyzes choice under uncertainty.
You almost always use expect utility theory, and, of course, there's a whole experimental literature testing expect utility theory.
Normally, you do experiments when you're looking for an error in it, looking for an anomaly.
It doesn't mean the theory is totally wrong or useless.
Yes?
Can you speak a little bit about whether expect utility theory makes or no values cardinal or effective?
Sure.
So the answer is expect utility theory is still just saying it's summarizing what you'll do in every logically possible situation.
So in that sense, you could say that it is still ordinal, but it does contain extra information that a regular utility function doesn't have.
Because regular utility function can only say which of different bundles will you choose.
It can't say which of different gambles will you choose.
And by adding in this additional information, it actually can summarize what you would do for every conceivable gamble.
So there's more information, but it still is technically ordinal.
All right.
So next topic, rational expectations.
All right.
So let's travel back in time to week one.
All right.
Back then, I told you that there are two different interpretations of probability.
There's the objective interpretation and the subject interpretation.
So the objective one is when you look at actual observed frequencies in the past.
So like a life insurance table.
And that's the objective.
Objective probability could also be looking at the odds of winning in roulette or in the game of craps or in poker.
And in all these things, there is a statistical frequency.
Again, of course, for any actual gambling, it's assuming that the game is fair.
Right.
So how do you know that this is a fair roulette wheel?
Well, normally, of course, when people do objective probability, they just sort of assume away the problem, assume it's a fair wheel, which is fine for a homework problem.
Again, in the real world, there's the question, well, is it actually fair?
Like, is the house actually playing honestly?
Who makes these dice?
Who does it?
What are their incentives?
So that's the objective probability normally, there's no concern for that.
And then, of course, there is subjective probability.
Subjective probability is just a degree of confidence in the mind of a person.
So you can have a 10% probability or 73% probability.
You can have any probability you want.
It's all in your head.
So key difference is you can have a subjective probability for something that's never happened before.
You can't have an objective probability for something that's never happened before because there's not going to be any frequencies.
So a game, or what's going to happen in this game?
Well, what's the game?
I'm not telling you.
It's a new game.
What are the rules?
What's it like?
All right.
Well, you can't have an objective probability for that.
But you can have a subjective probability.
And I say, well, I don't know, it seems like you wouldn't go and have me play a game where it's not fun.
So, I don't know, like 50%, you might start there or you might go, no, no, no.
You're a casino.
You're trying to take my money.
So odds are going to win maybe, what, 8%?
So you can have any subjective probabilities you want.
You can have subjective probabilities for things that never happened.
You can have subjective probabilities for unique events.
But they are all in the head.
So whenever called upon to justify a subjective probability, ultimately the answer comes down to, well, it's just how it seems to be.
And you might say, well, I've seen some evidence here.
X was subjective probability.
There's always a question, yeah, but is the evidence relevant?
I don't know.
It seems relevant to me.
So even if someone has been to a thousand different casinos, and you say, well, I have a subjective probability this casino will have the same kind of odds as the other casinos.
Well, why?
You've never been to this casino before.
How do you know this isn't a totally different casino with totally different rules?
You see, why would it be?
All right.
So now it's easy to go and make fun of subjective probabilities until you realize that you've got them too.
And furthermore, you cannot live your life without them.
It is impossible to do anything without them, really, because we're always facing events for which either there is no actuarial table in the world, or we haven't seen the actuarial table, or the actuarial tables that exist might not be relevant.
And then you have to decide for yourself.
So, let me give you an example.
If I go to Tijuana, what are my odds of getting kidnapped in Tijuana?
Well, there's the rate, yeah, but am I an old person?
Do I get kidnapped at the normal rate?
Or do I get captured at the Brian Kaplan rate?
I mean, it might be the easy mark, but maybe I'm not.
I don't know.
And then you think about it.
And, of course, you can ask people what they think, but then you're just eliciting their subjective probabilities.
Then you have to wonder, well, can I trust these people?
Maybe they're in on this.
Maybe they're in on the kidnapping, so they're going to tell you, you'll be fine.
That's as bad as when you tell all the easy marks.
That's when, like, as soon as I ask, you're placing a call into the kidnappers.
There's going to be some nerd walking over the border.
As soon as he's there, grab him.
So that's subjective probability.
Now, the problem with subjective probabilities is they have no necessary connection to reality.
And that seems unsatisfactory because if you look at the world, it seems like there is, in fact, a connection between what really happens in the real world and what people think about the real world.
It might not be a perfect connection, certainly not a perfect connection, but still, if you were to go and come up with a model of the world based upon the idea that there's no relationship between what people think and what really happens,
you would have a very strange model of the world.
All right.
So, now, so I say there clearly is some connection.
You might just look and say, I don't see any connection at all.
You know, the
Some people believe the sky is blue,
others believe that it's orange or purple.
Right, and I don't know, it's just one example,
but who's to say it really is blue?
I mean, I remember it being blue,
but then maybe my memories are wrong.
Maybe we're in the matrix.
All of these concerns occur to people.
Now, what can we do about this problem?
Well, there's a leading theoretical effort
to go and link up these two,
to go and say that there's going to be a connection
between objective and subjective probabilities
is called rational expectations, or RE for short.
So, how many people here have heard of RE before?
Right, so most of you, all right.
So, rational expectations,
actually the earliest papers by John Booth
in the early 1960s, although he didn't call it
rational expectations, but the idea's there.
And then it was actually in macroeconomics
that rational expectations first became a big deal.
This was during a period when people
were trying to understand inflation.
The early proceeding models were all based
upon adaptive expectations,
saying that people would just very mechanically
go and average recent inflation to form an opinion.
And rational expectation says,
no, that doesn't make sense.
People are going to take all the information into account.
And so, for example, if inflation has been rising,
they will perhaps forecast that it will continue to rise.
And then you shouldn't just go and take an average
of earlier periods, you should rather extrapolate
in the future, possibly, things like that.
All right, so, a simple characterization
of rational expectations is to say
that you have rational expectations
as long as your judgments are, first of all, unbiased.
Which means that your mean error is zero.
Your mean error is zero.
Right, so, what would that be like?
Well, for example, when you're forecasting inflation,
sometimes you're too high, sometimes you're too low.
And what rational expectation says
is that your average error will be zero.
So your high value, the times when you overestimate inflation
will balance out the times that you underestimate inflation,
and when you average it out,
your forecast error will be zero.
Right, and furthermore, rational expectations
adds on another condition, which says
that mistakes are uncorrelated with available information.
So errors, uncorrelated with available information.
Right, now, this word available is a reasonable word
because, well, what counts as available?
In practice, when people started doing this in 70s,
available meant, well, was it in
the Wall Street Journal yesterday?
Then it's available.
On the other hand, if it's known
to only a few people working at Microsoft,
I don't know, was Microsoft?
I don't know, late 70s, was already Microsoft.
So it's only available to people
like on the board of directors of Microsoft,
then that's not available.
But, all right, so anyway, this is the simple version,
and this is the one that is used for empirical testing.
But there is a deeper version of rational expectations,
which you can see in theoretical papers
that apply rational expectations.
So the deeper version says
that you have rational expectations.
If your subject of probability distribution
matches the object of probability distribution.
And again, in a theoretical paper, you can make this true.
So theoretical paper, if you know what you're doing,
and a number of people do,
you can work it out so that you come up
with an internally consistent system
where there is, in fact, a distribution of outcomes,
and people's beliefs about those outcomes
have exactly the same distribution as the actual one,
and everything fits together like a glove.
Okay, so just like with Nash equilibrium,
you may remember when, so this is when,
if I assume that everyone else stays the same,
I wanna keep doing what I'm doing,
and this is true for every single person.
Similarly, with this deep version of rational expectations,
the idea is that given the beliefs that everybody has,
there is an objective distribution,
and when there is that objective distribution,
everybody's beliefs about it match.
So it's all the pieces fit together perfectly.
All right, now, of course, you cannot test that empirically,
but what you can do is test for these things,
like unbiasedness, or see whether the errors
are uncorrelated with available information.
All right, now, rational expectations,
real, inspires a very standard modeling technique,
and any time you've ever talked to an economist
where you've said, well, look,
the problem is people have really bad information
about this, and you've gotten frustrated
because, at least I've experienced it many times,
well, people don't know that, right?
Because, well, if you take rational expectations for granted
then you say, all right, well, you're saying
that there's really bad information, right?
Well, this is the truth here, capital T truth here,
all right, and if people have really good information,
then their belief distribution will be
very tightly clustered around the truth,
but if people have bad information,
then their belief distribution will be
widely distributed around the truth.
So, this is bad info, this is good info,
and of course, this is perfect info.
All right, so, in the rational expectations model,
there is endless room for degrees of knowledge,
but it still rules out a lot of complaints about the world.
Like, if you were to just say, well, look,
you know, the problem with private auto safety
is most people don't realize that they,
that an accident could ever happen to them.
All right, have you ever heard that from this?
See, Jonathan Gruber's Obamacare graphic novel,
he says, look, a lot of young people don't get insurance
because they don't know that they could get sick.
It was actually, like, that's almost a quote,
and I'm like, Jonathan Gruber wrote this?
So, you think that young people literally believe
they can't get sick, this is a common view?
Or maybe they actually have the rational view
that they're unlikely to get sick.
Another possibility why someone might not buy insurance,
but it sounds a lot better to just say,
look, these poor people don't have the slightest clue
that they are mortal.
All right, you might have heard your parents
say this in high school, the problem with these kids
is they don't realize they could die.
Well, it's not literally true, I'm good.
Anyway, so, so this is the standard way
that economists, the economists model uncertainty,
which is to say, look, everyone's unbiased,
whether you got perfect information,
good information, bad information,
the average view in all cases is still literal truth,
but, but, the less you know,
the greater the variance will be.
So, with bad information, you got this big variance,
good information, you got a small variance,
perfect information, you got a zero variance, and so on.
Right, now, there are many myths about rationalizations,
and sometimes I feel like some of my colleagues
spread the myths, so, I'll, possibly they've stopped,
I don't know, but, any case, it is a myth to say
that rational expectations assumes perfect knowledge
or assumes away ignorance.
It doesn't, rational expectations totally allows
for ignorance, totally allows for perfect information,
but it does require that it look a certain way.
So it is a theory about what extreme ignorance looks like.
So, if you had an incredibly wide distribution of views,
you, that would still be, you would be highly ignorant,
you would think almost anything could happen,
but as long as your average view were true,
then you could still have rational expectations.
Okay, so it doesn't rule out error,
in fact, any time you see a deviation from truth,
that is an error.
Right now, sometimes Austrians will say,
well, that's not a real error.
A real error isn't when you think something
and it's not true.
A real error is something other than that,
and it's like something worse,
what's worse than thinking something when it's not true?
It's like thinking something that's super not true,
being like a million miles from the truth, no, no, no,
that's just a regular but severe error.
There's a higher kind of error, right?
And I have written about this, but ultimately,
I cannot plausibly explain it
because it doesn't make any sense to me.
All right, so again, the best thing people will do
is someone will say, look, this talks about
the known unknowns, but there's also the unknown unknowns.
You may have heard about that,
but we know something about these allegedly
unknown unknowns.
For example, it's like, well, so what are the odds
of an unknown unknown mattering?
Again, you have an opinion about that.
How often in your life have unknown unknowns caused a problem?
In that sense, you could still say,
well, they're really known unknown unknowns.
So while I didn't think about them in advance,
I had a general idea about things going wrong.
So let's see, so like on,
number of times on bets, the bets that I made,
there's been an issue, like in the real world,
which has allowed me to win, and then someone will say,
well, did you anticipate that that issue
would allow you to win?
I was like, no, I have no clue about that issue.
But I did know there would be issues.
I knew there would be issues.
Like when I have a bet about whether any country
in the EU will officially withdraw by January 1st, 2020.
I chose the language officially withdraw
because I knew that there might be lots
of different unofficial attempts to withdraw,
or preliminary measures which don't go anywhere,
or several steps, and then they stop and delay.
Right, and I said officially withdraw by that date
because I knew there's tons of stuff going on there.
Many things which I would have no ability to articulate,
but I still know they're out there.
Right, or if you have ever, say,
to fill out some bureaucratic paperwork,
and then someone says, well, what are the odds
you think this is gonna work out for you,
that you get your visa or whatever,
and you have a probability on that,
even though you have very little specific idea
about what the problems could be.
It's just like, well, it'll be just like
some bureaucratic problem or other.
As long as you can think of it like that,
then it would be counterintuitive.
Noted that counterintuitive would come
under rationalized negations.
All right, now, rationalized negations
also does not assume that information is free.
In fact, there's an underlying assumption
that it's not free because if it were free,
why wouldn't everyone have perfect information?
If you could get a large and infinite amount for free,
then everyone should just be there.
So presumably the reason why there is this Y,
why there's a Y distribution,
is because it's not free to acquire information.
Right, and of course, doesn't assume
that cognition is free either.
So you can think about, for example,
the cost of solving the game of chess,
a cost no one in the universe, as far as we know,
has ever paid because it's still unknown
what the solution to chess is.
Last time I checked, checkers was solved.
I don't know what the solution was,
but checkers was solved to mathematicians'
eternal satisfaction.
Can I ask a question?
Oh, sure, sure.
So it seems like the way this is modeled,
it's like there's a number,
and you can be above or below that number.
Yes.
What about maybe where something's located?
Like if someone's searching for gold, or, you know,
it doesn't seem like there's a variance
of belief about that.
Hmm, well, so if it's location,
then you just have longitude and latitude,
and you could have rational locations about both,
and then on average, you're at exactly the right point,
but then there's a spread around that.
I mean, yeah.
But why would we expect the mean to be the true value?
Ah, so.
You see what I'm saying?
Like there's no reason.
Well, I mean, so that is a totally fair question,
and so John Muth, on the original article,
at a footnote, giving three arguments
for why we should believe it,
the arguments are not awful,
but they're also not very convincing.
They're sort of like, yeah, kind of, maybe, arguments.
Now, and then for a long time,
hardly anyone bothered with it,
and then psychology and economics came along
and started presenting a lot of evidence
that actually a lot of errors don't look like that.
So, like, as to why should we really believe it,
that's a totally fair question.
Now, one thing is, like, often you could go
and transform the question so that the thing
that you are thinking about for errors
is just on a different axis or something like that,
so maybe it wouldn't literally be location,
maybe it would be rational expectations
about the amount of time it would take
for you to discover gold, for example,
and then you transform it from location to time,
and of course, what you really wanna think about,
well, what's the economically relevant variable?
I mean, economically isn't really, like,
who cares what the actual geography is?
It's really, like, maybe time, or better yet,
how about cost, expected value of the cost
of finding the gold, which is what people
would actually care about.
See how that might work.
All right, so, I mean, plenty of examples here,
so, like, attending graduate school,
no one knows for sure how you'll do,
but rational expectation says, on average,
you'll correctly estimate how well you do in the program
and what completion will do it for you.
Or it could be running a movie, right?
So, until you see it, there's no way to really know
for sure how much you're going to like it,
but rational expectation says that, on average,
your prospective ratings will equal
your retrospective ratings.
So, now you think about something like Netflix reviews,
where you go and you've got a rating
you think you're gonna give it,
there's a rating you actually give it,
and then the question is, on average, are you correct?
And if you are, then you've got rational expectations.
All right, and then, of course, the same would go
for correlation of any errors with available information.
So, if you know the genre, the actors, the director,
then there shouldn't be any correlation
between your errors and that available information.
All right, so, if it's prominently displayed,
at least that would seem to be a problem.
All right, Donald Whitman has an example
on pork barrel spending.
So, back in the 70s and 80s,
there were many public choice economists who said,
well, look, do you know why government wastes so much money?
Because nobody knows what it's doing.
So, of course, there's tons of spending
wasted on stupid bridges to nowhere
when voters don't know what's going on.
All right, that sounds like a plausible story,
but Whitman pointed out it's not a rational expectation story
because rational expectation says, look,
sometimes people overestimate
how much government is spending,
sometimes they'll underestimate it,
but on average, they will be correct.
And as long as you know, on average,
how much money government is wasting,
then you should have the proper level of interest
in a politician who says,
I'm gonna go and try to save you some money.
So, if in fact government's saving very little money,
then some politician comes along to that
and says, eh, we'll just figure problems
and just save you some money.
On the other hand, if on average,
the correct view is that government's wasting a lot,
then you'll be interested in that person, and so on.
All right, now let's give an example
of applied rationalization,
so testing for the rational expectations
of beliefs about the economy.
So, as I said, the first area where rational expectations
made a big splash was in macro.
There was no intellectual reason for this at all.
All right, so even though rational expectations
is psychologically tied to macro,
there was never any reason for that,
and now, so anytime there's a theory paper
that isn't specifically about rational expectations
not holding, normally we'll go
and build rational expectations in the model,
whether it's macro or macro, it doesn't matter.
But anyway, so in the 70s,
there were a bunch of empirical tests
made on things like inflation forecasts
to test rational expectations.
So how do you do this?
Well, very simple.
So suppose you've got a bunch of forecasts of inflation.
Of course, a forecast means that it's what somebody says
about inflation at what time?
Before the inflation's observed,
otherwise it's not a forecast, all right?
So call that F, and then we're gonna estimate this
as a constant plus a coefficient times I,
where I is actual observed inflation later on.
So we can have a bunch of forecasts about inflation,
and even today, there would be plenty of newsletters
and things like that with different investment advisors
give you their forecast of inflation.
In the 70s, these might be in little mail,
I think they'd actually get in the mail,
piece of paper that you might spend
hundreds of dollars a year for
if you think the person actually knows something.
All right, so you've had so many ways.
So I is the actual observed inflation after the forecast.
Of course, you have to wait until after the forecasts
have been, the time, so you have to wait
for the time period of the forecast to occur
before you can go and find out what really happened,
and then compare.
All right, now, rational expectations
makes a specific prediction.
It says that alpha will be zero and beta will be one.
All right, and you can get a lot of data,
and you can then go and test that hypothesis
and see how it turns out.
All right, so that's one example.
And so in the 70s, usually it didn't work exactly,
but especially given that they didn't have
a lot of that many data points,
a lot of students didn't seem to be too bad.
All right, so that's just one example.
And of course, this could be anything.
That could be interest rates, it could be GDP,
anything that people are forecasting.
You would go and collect a bunch of forecasts,
and then collect a bunch of facts,
and then test the forecast against the facts
and see what's going on.
Right, make sense?
Okay, all right, now, another case
that's very interesting to me
is the rationalizations for beliefs about economics itself.
So it seems to me that one of the main goals
of intro econ classes is to correct students'
misconceptions about economics.
Now, what is a misconception?
Well, to me, a misconception is something
that doesn't fit in that model, right?
You know, so like a misconception about free trade
isn't maybe free trade is better than it really is.
Some people think free trade is better than it is.
Other things, it's worse than it really is.
Misconception about free trade to me
is something like people think that imports are bad
and exports are good, and the ideal world is one
where you don't import anything
and you export all your stuff.
That to me is a misconception, right?
Or it could be a misconception to think
that trade must be based upon absolute advantage,
when in fact, trade is based upon, what again?
Comparative advantage, right?
So these things, so, well, to me, are misconceptions,
or, you know, misconception if someone thinks
that price controls have no side effects.
Right, and you're like, does anyone really think that?
Well, I know one person who thought that until he was 17,
which is me, because I had no idea
there could be any negative side effect of any price control.
Never heard it, never occurred to me independently.
Furthermore, I never, I have no memory
of any human being ever saying
there could be anything, any negative effect.
Possibly I was just ignoring everyone.
Maybe every time I walked down the hall,
people were saying, my God, minimum wage
and its negative side effects.
And I was just lost in my own world,
not listening to these things being said,
but it just appeared that these things were never mentioned,
and instead that everyone around me
had the ultra-naive view that the higher the minimum wage,
the better for workers, and the only reason
anyone could oppose the minimum wage
is because you don't care about workers.
And now to me, that would count as a misconception, right?
A view which is not just some people
overestimate the negative side effects,
some underestimate them, but rather a systematic tendency
to think that the negative side effects just don't exist.
All right, so anyway, it seems to me
that most intro econ classes try to correct
students' preexisting economic misconceptions.
Now, of course, it could be that it's the economists
who are wrong and students know what they're talking about,
at least on average.
Might be, well, maybe yes.
So there's some people who are naive protectionists,
but there's other people who think
the free trade will go.
and double global GDP and these two groups balance each other
out, the average view is right.
Could be. But that's not how we normally teach intro econ.
And it didn't sound like what was going on to me.
It got me interested in whether I could get some data
to see whether my impressions might be backed
up by something stronger.
So I wound up finding a lot of different data sets,
but the one that was well-structured
for testing rationalizations about economic beliefs,
something called the Survey of Americans
and Economists on the Economy.
So the survey was done in 1996.
It's already been like 21 years out of date.
But it would cost hundreds of thousands of dollars to redo.
I didn't do it.
So some other people raised all the money and they did it
and then wrote one article about it
and then gave me the data for free.
And then I got like a book and like eight articles out of it.
So they didn't have rational explanations
about how much they could squeeze
out of this data set, seems to me.
But anyway, I'm really grateful they handed it over to me.
And by the way, of course, this is actually better in every way
for me because not only did I not have to raise the money
or do the work, but if I had created my own data set,
proving something that I always believed
and that was controversial,
how much credibility would that have?
Less anyway.
Far better to have some totally neutral people with no dog
in the fight go and create the data and then give it to you.
And then you can say, look, I didn't make this data.
I'm just looking at it just like anybody else.
But here's what I say.
All right.
Anyways, so it asks economists
and the general public identical questions about economics.
And notice, so if we think about economists as having good info
about economics and non-economists having bad info,
there still are some clear predictions
of rational explanations.
In particular, it predicts
that the average belief should be the same.
Average belief should be equal.
All right.
Well, then what's the point of studying economics?
To get the variance down, right?
Which is not a bad reason to study a subject, right?
Low variance is valuable.
But is that all that we get
out of economics is just squeezing the variance
of our beliefs?
Or are we actually getting something better?
Like going from thinking, you know, lie star, right?
Thinking that that's absolute truth and that we know it.
And then realizing, no, not that.
You know, that.
Something completely different.
Right? So starting off with this view of the world
and then ending up with a totally different distribution
with a totally different meaning.
Maybe that's what we're doing.
Okay. So how would you go and test rational
explanations using this data set?
Well, you run regressions of the form belief is equal
to a constant plus a dummy variable time.
We'll plug in plus a coefficient times a dummy variable,
which equals one if you're an economist and zero otherwise.
Because rational explanation implies
that expertise will not change mean beliefs.
Mean beliefs will stay the same.
All right.
So and then rationalization simply predicts
that beta will be equal to zero.
That's the rationalization's prediction.
Right? Now, if your beta is not zero,
there are two different groups that you could point fingers at.
My inclination, of course, is to point fingers
at the people who have never studied the subject.
And say, look at how wrong they are.
Right? But another thing you could do is point your fingers
at economists and say, look at how out of touch they are.
Look at these people who have no idea
about how free trade has destroyed our country.
Right? And aren't they terrible?
And they can't see what any uneducated person can see,
which is that free trade has destroyed our country.
So that is another possible interpretation is you could say
we're testing for rational explanations
of the general public or rationalizations of the experts.
But if beta is not zero, you could definitely say, look,
at least one group's wrong.
At least one group is a systematic error.
And so rational explanations fails for one group,
either the public or the economists.
Of course, it's possible
that both groups are totally glued into it.
Right? So if two groups disagree, they can't,
now they could still both be completely wrong,
but they can't both be right.
Right? Basic logic.
Right? So if one group says that the, that pi is three
and another says that it's seven, well,
one group, minimum one group is wrong.
Possibly both groups are wrong, but it can't just be
like we're all seeing a different part
of the elephant here, man.
Right? So it could be pi is many different things
to many different people.
All right.
So, so anyway, so there's many, so now why bring this up?
Well, this is, in principle, this is true for any regression
where you're using expertise in order to go and test
for rational explanations, but for many subjects, at least,
almost no one will go and claim
that the experts are unreliable.
So if it's math, for example,
and mathematicians all believe something,
and non-mathematicians believe something different about math,
almost no one will say, man,
look at how out of touch these mathematicians are.
They don't understand anything about math.
Or physicists, or like, you know, astronomers.
Right? So there's many areas
where people are just not inclined
to challenge the experts.
But as you may have noticed, for economists, there are a lot
of people who will challenge the so-called experts.
Now, as long as they will not actually specify what their
complaint about economists is,
there's really no way of testing it.
But if someone will actually give details
about their story, then maybe it could be tested.
You know, in the same way that if someone is accused of murder
and they're on the stand, and they say, look,
there's a pile of evidence against you.
How do you explain it?
And you say, look, I was framed.
Okay? Who framed you, how and why?
Who framed me?
I have no idea.
How did they frame me?
No idea. Why?
No idea. Well, there's no way of proving that guy wrong.
However, you will always convict that person.
Right? That's just too easy to just go and say,
I was framed in unknown ways
by unknown people for unknown reasons.
So if you want to go and successfully defend yourself
for the charge of murder because you were framed, what do you need
to do in order to flesh out the story?
You need to flesh out the story.
Yes. Yes.
You need to give some details.
And the details have to be, there's got to be some way back
in there.
I'll say, look, who framed me?
Well, that guy in the evidence locker over there.
Why did he do it?
Because he's hated me since we were three years old
and I killed his dog.
All right.
And how did he do it?
He runs the evidence locker.
All right.
So now at least you're starting.
And then, especially if the person didn't reveal his
conflict of interest, you've got reasonable doubt.
All right.
So similarly, when people are saying they don't trust
economists, if they just say, look,
they're just totally untrustworthy dogmatic fools,
all right, well, there's no real way of showing that's wrong.
But if they start giving details about the way
in which we are dogmatic untrustworthy fools,
that's where you might be able to test it.
All right.
So there are two main stories, which you probably heard both
of them about why economists can't be trusted.
So one of them is that economists are just
self-interested, some kind
of self-interest that's biasing them.
So there's the classic Marxist one
that we have been directly hired by the bourgeoisie
for propaganda purposes.
Right. So are you cashing in on this gravy trade yet?
If you can, it's good.
But.
All right.
So the phrase capitalist running dog or running dog
of the bourgeoisie, this is, there's literal bribery going
on where economists have just been actually bought to go
and say things they don't even believe themselves.
Right. But a more plausible version of this is just
that if, since economists are high income,
high job security, they're white, they're male,
they're middle-aged, they're older,
put all these things together.
And if human beings in general are inclined to believe
that whatever is good for them is good for the world,
then maybe economists have just convinced themselves
that say downsizing is not a big deal
because they got 10 years
and are in no danger of being downsized.
So that's another story.
Another story you might tell.
All right.
Another story, also prominent, is the one that says, look,
well, of course economists think this stuff
because there are a bunch of right-wing ideologues.
So economics is a coven of right-wing ideology.
If you don't believe it, you don't enter the field
because who would want to enter a field like that
if you've got any common sense?
No normal person wants to be in some crummy right-wing
ideological field.
So of course you can get consensus, you know,
in the same way that you can get consensus among, say,
experts in Zoroastrianism about the truth of Zoroastrianism.
Yeah, well, who's going to go and devote their lives
to the subject if they think it's wrong?
So that's another story that you can tell.
All right.
Now what's nice is these claims are specific enough
that you could go and revise the regression in order
to test for them.
So you could, for example, add in a measure of income, right?
And you can add in a measure of ideology, right?
And so on, right?
And if it's income or ideology or any
of these other extraneous variables
that are actually explaining the belief gap,
then once you add them as control variables,
then beta will be zero.
And then you can say, all right, well,
there's rational expectations,
least conditional upon these other variables.
So at least this would undermine the idea that there's some kind
of an intellectual advantage that economists have
where they know something that other people don't.
All right.
So anyway, if you go and add in these control variables
in my work, which I think, well, I think actually I cited
to read in a few weeks, but try to put
in every control variable that I could find.
So in the survey of Americans and economists on the economy,
they got measures not only for income,
they got past income growth, expected income growth.
They got a measure of job security.
They've got, of course, all your demographic variables.
Do you think that those could slant your self-interest?
They've got your self-rated ideology.
They've got your political party.
So when you put all those things in, and yes,
the big punchline is beta doesn't go to zero.
Not even close.
Right? So beta actually stays almost as large after adding
in a ton of control variables as before you put
in the control variables, right?
Which you might say, well, that still doesn't prove
that economists know more than the public,
and the public is biased.
That's true.
It doesn't prove it.
But no empirical work literally proves anything, right?
If you wanted, in the sense of mathematically proves
with certainty, but is that, well, once you realize that,
is that a reasonable standard for empirical work?
Do you want to expect certainty from it?
No. The answer is no, of course.
So what's the point of empirical work
if it doesn't give you absolute certainty?
What's the point of calling up the store to see if it's open?
If it can't be absolutely certain, it will be open.
Yes, Bayesian updating.
Like I've got some information here.
I know something more than I used to.
And for real life, that's all we need.
Fortunately, because we don't have anything better,
except on a math exam.
We've got something better than that.
Even there, how do you know
that you really read the question correctly?
How do you know that it wasn't a misprint?
How do you know that that minus sign isn't actually a drop
of ink?
Right, so even there, not true certainty.
Right, anyway, so someone could go and just say, well,
it still doesn't prove anything.
I'm not convinced.
But again, here is the crucial analogy.
If you go and you get on the stand and you say,
I was framed by this guy for this purpose using
these methods.
And then investigators go and check out your story
and every single part of the story is wrong.
Should you then go back to, well,
who knows whether the guy is guilty or not?
What is alibi appears to be a pack of lies?
Is that a normal inference when someone's alibi turns
out to be completely in error?
Now, what do you normally do when someone's alibi turns
out to be completely wrong?
What do you normally infer?
If the case against them is good, that they're guilty?
Yeah, the person is guilty and he's a liar.
He can't trust it.
It's like, why do you know the frame job wasn't so good
that they covered up all signs of it
and framed him again for perjury?
That just sounds really hard to believe.
It sounds fanciful.
It sounds like what you'd say if you're totally guilty
and you got nothing.
So you start saying, there's a frame job
to say I'm perjuring myself.
So similarly, if people make extreme accusations
about economists of being untrustworthy because they're
biased by their self-interest and ideology
and then you investigate it and it turns out that that isn't so,
not only should you not go back to Gnosticism,
you should then put the people who made the accusations
on your list of people not to trust.
So and then economics has vindicated it,
even more than it was already.
So, yeah.
Yes?
Yeah, just to keep going with the legal metaphor
and going back to certainty,
I mean the legal standard is reasonable doubt.
Yes. No doubt.
Right, right.
Of course.
Right? And the standard for empirical work,
I guess for top journals they almost do have a reasonable
doubt standard or no reasonable doubt standard.
But of course that often means that then the articles are
on topics that aren't that interesting
because it's easiest to go and get a really solid case
from a question that isn't that important.
Right? You know, if you just look around
and say what can I prove?
Right? Well, then the odds are that the thing you can prove is
going to be a topic that isn't that interesting.
And I remember like when I was in grad school there was a guy
interviewing at Princeton and he had a paper
on estimating the demand for fresh fish.
It's like, all right, it's a fantastic paper
about something of no interest to anyone except maybe people
in the fishing industry.
But we're not in the fishing industry.
So, but you know, like the econometrics were very fancy
from what I understand.
But didn't move me.
But of course as you go down the pecking order of journals,
then the odds of being able to publish something
where the evidence is less convincing
by the topics more important is higher.
The other way, of course, you get articles
on bigger questions in top journals is
if you're a Nobel Prize winner.
And then you get to go and write your opinions and say, hey,
I got a Nobel Prize.
So the way things seem to me is interesting.
But the way things seem to Brian, not so interesting.
Not lacking the Nobel Prize.
All right.
So questions.
Questions about testing economic beliefs
about economics for rational expectations.
Two questions.
Sure.
One in reference to this truth distribution.
What does it mean to be positively
versus negatively awake in truth?
Well, so like the most obvious ones are things
like how much money am I going to make from the sale
of this book?
A positive error would be thinking
that you make more money than you're going
to make more money than you actually make.
And negative errors if you make less money.
So, you know, sort of like for any economic variable,
you can think of it like that.
So you can think that the trade deficit will be higher
than it really is or lower than it really is.
You can think that inflation will be higher
than it really is or lower than it really is.
So it means, you know, so anything in that ballpark.
And of course, you know, could be,
personally be taller than you expect or shorter
than you expect as in, well, I thought you would be taller
when you meet a famous person.
Yeah, so.
So I always expect famous people to be tall.
Like the least average or taller.
Right? Unless it's like they're known to be like Danny DeVito
or something like that.
But so anyway, that would be a case
of not having rational expectations.
Because of course, tons of famous people who are short.
I mean, there is at least a story
about why we think they're so tall.
It's like why do we think Tom Cruise is way taller
than he really is?
The camera.
Yes.
It's hard for us to think of a really short man
as being an action hero.
So we just change the camera around and make him look
at least as tall as everyone that he's around.
So you give him special shoes or you just move, like you just do,
like you know, like Hobbit forced perspective shot.
There's lots of ways that you can handle that.
Yeah, oh sure.
So the belief axis, this is belief
in a particular economic proposition.
So the answer is there's 37 different questions
that I look at.
So a lot of them are in the form is, you know,
is X a major property?
So why the economy isn't doing as well as it otherwise would?
A minor reason or not a reason?
So it's one where you can easily rank order them
as like zero, one, or two.
Then there's some where the thing is the following, good,
neutral, or bad for the economy.
And so, you know, then there's a number
of other variations on that.
So sometimes beta is positive, sometimes it's negative.
Yeah, yeah.
But the economists tend to be clumped together
and the general public.
Yeah, so basically this is testing whether the,
so like is beta actually equal to zero?
So you, you know, like essentially you could just flip
the coding of the question and make it positive or negative.
And then is the public kind of all over the place
and the economists clumped together?
Or are the public.
No, no, no, no, no.
So the public tends to be very clumped together.
On most issues, not all.
But especially for like anything involving international trade,
the public just tends to clump together
in extreme paranoia and negativity.
And actually on those, economists tend
to clump together at high positivity.
So, you know, like some of the biggest questions, things like,
is excessive foreign aid a major reason, a minor reason,
or not a reason why the American economy is not doing better
than it otherwise would?
And almost all, almost all economists say it's not a
reason, and almost all non-economists say it's a
major reason.
So things like that.
So you see big differences of that sort.
Yeah, so it does, it does vary.
But say that you actually, non-economists tend
to cluster more.
And how do they cluster?
Basically, almost exactly as my stereotypes of what I thought
when I was 17 before I studied economics, would say.
So, you know, like scapegoating foreigners, extreme xenophobia.
Like on every, any possible issue where foreigners rise,
then people are very nervous that foreigners are doing us harm.
And then, just like a general hostility
to markets, also very strong.
Hostility to anything that might ever cost a loose,
got to cost someone to lose a job.
Very strong.
All right.
That's one where, even a lot of economists will say,
it's not really the public disagrees with us.
It's that we take a long-run view,
and the public takes a short-run view.
But, there was one question that actually asked about the effects
of, of things like downsizing 20 years in the future.
And that question actually is an unusually large gap
between economists and the public.
So just saying there's a difference
in time horizon doesn't seem to be right.
Yeah, yeah, Nathan?
So, it seems like most ideology measures map a left
to right thing.
Yes.
Which works for.
That is correct.
Economists are right-wing ideologues.
But, what if someone were to make some counter-argument
that the very differences that you proposed are ideological.
So, it's not that we're right-wing ideologues.
It's that we're globalist ideologues.
Right, right.
Something like that.
Yeah, fair question.
So, this ideology measure also had an option
of I don't think in left-right terms.
Ah.
So, that, you know, that is not, that is not decisive
because there's a lot of different variations on that.
And of course, you could also say, well,
of course economists don't admit
that they have a different ideology.
They pretend like they're just normal liberals
and conservatives, but they're not.
So, again, the main thing I would say is
that the accusers generally say that it is right-wing,
right-wing ideology.
So, that, you know, so there is another claim about being
about being global, globalist or cosmopolitan ideology.
That's actually a much narrower range of the critics.
It's mostly just saying it's right-wing.
I mean, so, that one actually, if you know basic facts,
you know it can't possibly work
because the typical economist is a moderate Democrat
and is not right-wing in any sense.
So, other than the fact
that they will occasionally endorse a very right-wing view
on something.
But, again, econometrically,
if someone says they're a liberal Democrat,
but they think downsizing is good,
which is actually a very common thing for liberal Democrat,
liberal Democratic economists to say.
If economists were liberals and Democrats,
say something that is very different
from what other liberals and Democrats say.
And what does that do to the value of the econ coefficient?
What does it do to it?
It makes it big.
Because the whole idea of regression
is that you are trying to compare people
who are alike in every other way, but different in one thing.
So if economists tend to be in the group that's especially
worried about downsizing, except because they're economists,
and only because they're economists,
they have a very different view, then
that actually amplifies the effect of economic training.
So other questions?
Yeah, Ash?
Just on that notion of subjective
versus objective probability, do you know,
this is a weird question, but do you
know if there's any literature that
relates objective probability to cardinal probability
and subjective probability to ordinal probability?
So I don't know anything about ordinal
versus cardinal probability.
It's a very small topic.
Sounds like it is a topic, but it's not a big topic.
So again, what an ordinal probability would be like?
If you say, well, I can say that one probability is
more likely than another, but I can't tell you
how much more likely?
All right, so I guess you can imagine a,
I'm sure a mathematician could design that system,
but it would be hard to explain, at least to me.
Certainly hard for me to explain.
It would also be hard to explain it to me,
because I would sit there saying, what?
No!
What?
All right, so moving on then.
All right, now, we are back in week two.
We already did a very general model of economic action
under uncertainty, which is the Erdo-de-Bruin model.
You can remember the complete contingent claims market
model, so that is a model of choice under uncertainty.
But complete contingent claims markets
is a highly unrealistic assumption.
There are most of the time, you can't go and say, look,
I want to go and get a computer, but I only
want it if the processing speed of computer chips
grows at a slower rate than this.
How much will you charge me for that computer?
And normally, you'll say, we just won't.
No, leave our store.
We don't want to go and start making weird contracts
with every crackpot who comes off the street
and want something different.
Say, look, we got three options here.
We got this computer, that computer, and the other.
But I want 2 thirds of the first one and 1 third of the second
one.
We can't say no.
All right, so is there any other approach
to economic action under uncertainty?
And the answer, of course, is yes.
There's a very general theory of economic action
under uncertainty, and its name is associated.
Partly, I teach this because I've
had a horrible experience at some economic conferences,
and I want to make sure that none of you
are ever part of the problem.
So you'll all be part of the solution.
So I've been at several economics conferences
where economics professors get in front of an audience,
and I've literally heard more than one person say,
well, as we all know, economics assumes perfect information.
Oh, god.
And then I say, especially then, I look around
and I see some journalists in the room.
I'm like, what would any decent journalist be thinking?
Wait a second.
So you're a professor of a subject, right?
And your subject assumes perfect information.
You just said so.
And I ought to trust you.
This would be a very basic thing for you to get wrong.
And when in the real world do we ever have perfect information?
Never.
So when does your subject describe the world?
Never.
So why do you exist?
What is the point of this field?
So to me, whenever I hear economists say this,
I do want to curl up to a ball and either that
or snap my arm up.
Hey!
Wrong, professor!
So of course, it is absolutely untrue
to say that economics assumes perfect information.
There are some economic models with perfect information,
but it doesn't mean the subject assumes perfect information.
Of course not.
That is ridiculous.
There are multiple Nobel Prizes for economics
with under uncertainty.
So how could they possibly say something so wrong
and don't know?
Can't figure out what would possess a person
to say something so ridiculous when they know better.
I mean, it's kind of like, what about Akerlof?
It's like, what do you mean?
Well, he gave us some models of economic action
under uncertainty, so what you said was wrong.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah, economics assumes it, but some famous economists
don't assume it.
Oh, yeah, they develop poor careers doing it.
So search theory is one very general model
of economic action under uncertainty.
So this came out, so originally, it was a stigma.
And just for history of thought, this came out a year or two
before Israel Kirzner did anything on entrepreneurship.
So this is not a case where a Chicago economist was just
formalizing what an Austrian had said.
Far from it.
So it's more a case of possibly when an Austrian eyes
what a Chicago economist had said.
Any case.
So stringly general theory.
It has the following basic assumptions.
So first one we can call these just the assumption of effort,
just as we put more time and effort into searching,
increase your probability of finding
whatever you're looking for.
Pretty simple point.
The next assumption, which is not absolutely theoretically
vital, but is important in the real world,
is to say that searching ability differs between people.
It's like my mom can find something in her refrigerator
that I could not find.
At least she could take far less time for her to find something
than I would take leave.
So she has superior ability to search her own refrigerator
than I do.
And then third assumption, rational expectations.
So this can be relaxed, of course.
By standard model search theory, rational expectations
is built in.
So when people are trading off between the amount of time
that they're going to put in studying or putting in
searching, they are on average making the correct choice.
And the main conclusion is that people
keep searching until the expected marginal benefit
of search is equal to the expected marginal cost.
You can also add in a risk aversion adjustment if you want.
That's the basic idea.
So we say things like, I'm looking for my socks.
First of all, if I put more effort
in trying to find my socks, I'm more likely to find my socks.
I don't know.
I guess I'm in the plane.
I was sitting next to a woman who lost an earring at the end.
And then she conscripted my daughter
to help with the search on the floor of the plane.
She'd been nice, so we were perfectly happy to do it.
So putting more effort.
So you could just hope that you step on the earring
and you'll find it, but she did not.
So she's getting on her hands and knees
and enlisting a small child to go and do the search,
and help her.
And then searching ability.
So while my daughter's trying very hard,
I think her actual ability to find her earring
is pretty low.
She might not know what an earring is.
We want to be a little hazy on her anyway.
And then finally, rationalizations.
So she was saying, well, maybe it's just time to give up.
Oh, no, there it is.
But certainly while she was stuck on the plane,
there was very little to lose in putting some more time
into searching for this earring.
I think she cared about it enough
that she was going to wait for everyone to go and leave,
and then do a more thorough search
without other bodies around.
But when she finally saw it right next to one of the screws
that screws one of the seats down,
it was very, very well hidden.
But she kept saying, I know it's got to be
around here somewhere.
That sounds like rationalizations.
It's got to be around here somewhere.
Earrings don't just disappear.
They don't run around.
They don't bounce that far.
They bounce once or twice.
Now, there are endless applications of search theory.
So there's things like doing R&D,
so you're trying to find a cure for AIDS, for example.
So effort.
You're more likely to find a cure for AIDS
if you actually start hiring some AIDS researchers
and giving them some money and running experiments
and testing things.
So of course, it's possible that someone will just get lucky.
Like the story of this discovery of penicillin.
Someone just accidentally dropped two things together.
You've got chocolate in my peanut butter.
Now we have a cure for a bunch of bacterial infections.
And then, of course, the difference is ability.
So you could hire a bunch of people who've never done AIDS
research or medical research of any kind.
But you have an idea that some people would just
be better at this.
So who is more likely to cure AIDS?
Me or a random AIDS researcher.
It's possible I will do it.
But it seems a lot more likely that an AIDS researcher will
do it because they know what's going on.
And then, again, rationalizations.
You have an idea about the odds.
On average, you have correct beliefs about the odds
of being able to or there were different probabilities
of success and your ability to enforce those odds.
Of course, you knew this for hunting and fishing,
which were the main human economic activities
for tens of thousands of years.
So if you go and leave your village
and start looking around for animals,
you're more likely to find an animal.
And then there's differences in ability.
There are the trained hunters who
have honed their skills for decades.
And then there are the people who don't really
know what they're doing.
And it's possible that the novice will kill the deer.
But it's much more likely that the trained person who
is at just the right combination of age and experience
will be successful.
So Robin is really interested in foragers.
So I think your maximum foraging ability
is when you're about 30 to 35.
It's when you've had a lot of experience,
but your body still works pretty well.
And then, of course, younger people, their bodies work well,
but they don't know what they're doing.
And older people know what they're doing,
but their bodies don't work very well anymore.
And then you can find the rationalizations.
You have this idea, well, where are we, in fact,
likely to go and find deer?
Where do they usually go?
What is the typical patterns?
What is a high-uncompetent probability?
So on.
There could be prospecting for gold.
You're more likely to find gold if you put in some effort
into finding it.
But that's no guarantee.
But nevertheless, some people have greater ability
to find gold than other people.
And then, of course, rationalizations.
If I told you that I was just going
to spend tomorrow looking around for gold,
you would not have much hope that I would succeed, would you?
Nor should you have such hope.
You're unlikely to succeed.
Then it could be looking for investment opportunities.
So you can think about an entrepreneur
as someone who hunts for profit.
So there's profit out there in the world.
Where is it?
I don't know, but I'm going to find it.
So there's some key.
So step one is, of course, put some effort in.
So try.
But another thing that's important is ability.
Some people are actually good at finding possible profits.
Other people, not so good.
Then again, rationalizations.
If I had to bet on, say, my brother
to become a really successful entrepreneur,
my brother's had a bunch of different failed, half-baked
business ideas.
So when he says he has a business idea,
I'm not very optimistic.
On the other end, if I heard, say, Charles Koch
was going into a new area, I'm like, hmm, all right.
Well, that's probably going to work out for him,
because things have worked out a bunch of other times.
No guarantee.
Maybe he's going to lose, but still.
And an example that will be highly relevant to you soon
would be searching for a job.
So effort.
If you try, you are more likely to find a job.
So when I was in graduate school,
we were urged to apply the McDonald's test.
Do you know the McDonald's test?
It's very simple.
Would you rather be a professor at this school
than work at McDonald's?
If the answer is yes, you should apply to that school.
Because it's only one more resume,
and only a cost of a couple stamps.
So that makes sense.
So more effort improves your chances.
Of course, there are some people who just
lay in bed and get job offers.
So Joseph Stiglitz got hired as professor at MIT
when he was still, after his third year in grad school.
He didn't have his PhD, and was hired to be professor at MIT.
Right away.
So he could just sort of sit around and be Joe Stiglitz,
and get a job at MIT.
But most people are not in that position.
So most people need to go and put in some extra effort.
Then of course, ability.
Some people can find jobs really easily.
Other people have to struggle.
Great effort.
Then of course, there's rational explanations
where you can think about, what are your odds of being
able to get certain kinds of jobs?
So you might say, well, I'm going
to go and apply to Stanford.
But what are the odds that Stanford
is going to hire a George Mason PhD?
Not too good.
So in that case, maybe it's not even worth a stamp.
Maybe it's so outside the realm of possibility,
it's not even worth doing that.
Even if you think that Stanford might hire you,
you're not going to go and apply to departments of brain surgery
or something like that.
Maybe they need an economist.
Maybe no one there is weighing the cost
of bed beds and brain surgery, and they need me.
And maybe it's going to work because no one else is trying.
So there's that.
Unlikely.
Then of course, there is dating.
So I have a former student who will remain nameless
who says that this very part of this very lecture
forever changed his life.
Because after this lecture, he said, well,
let's deal with something.
I said, look, effort.
People who put in more effort get more dates.
So ask more people out, put more effort in your parents,
on and on.
Then of course, there's differences in ability.
Some people can generate a large number of dates
with the same amount of effort than other people.
Then of course, finally, rational expectations.
You could go and email supermodels and say, hello.
You may not know me, but I'm a fan of your work.
And would you care to send your private plane
to collect me from Fairfax so that we
may pursue a relationship?
You could try that, but it seems like a highly unlikely scenario
to work out.
And what he told me is, look, this lecture, this part
changed my life.
And he said, so after this, I started
asking out 100% of all women I'm attracted to.
And he also went and got his teeth whitened
and went to a better barber and got great clothes.
And his claim is, this has been incredibly successful for him
and it's wonderful.
But then also, there's ability.
There are some people who could do all these things,
and still, I don't think their success would be so great.
He had a number of pre-existing advantages.
So physically presentable, reasonably good manners.
So charming would be too far, but not actively anti-charming.
And then again, rationalization.
As far as I know, he doesn't go in cold email supermodels
or anything like that.
So he does consider what could possibly work out.
But his judgment is, anyone I physically see could work out.
So that's a possible way that he might apply this.
I'm not recommending it.
But all right.
Yes, and if you are into evolutionary psychology,
then you may have an additional reason
to rethink this, which is, since human beings grew up
in these very small, closely knit tribes,
the social stigma of being humiliated
was genuinely very large.
There's only 20 or 20 to 40 people in your tribe,
and you are humiliatingly rejected.
This may actually ruin your life.
Because almost all your options may fade away
as everyone laughs at you, like, oh, that person's a loser.
Every word of mouth quickly spreads
to everyone in your tribe.
And then you're kind of locked out.
And this provides a pretty good explanation
for why people kill themselves over cyberbullying,
things like this.
Because our emotions are so geared to a world
where it really matters if a few people that you know
are like, try to treat you about, like, humiliate you.
But in the actual modern world, how much does it really
matter what the people in high school thought about you?
Barely at all.
It's an incredibly big world.
It's unimaginably large.
You would go and make a fool out of yourself 1,000 times,
and then you find group 1,001.
They have no idea about any of these 1,000 other groups
that you have not done well with.
And another opportunity.
So if you combine this with the idea
that people actually are unreasonably afraid
of rejection, and that actually the objective cost
of rejection is almost nothing now,
then of course this would inflict
the rational expectations.
But it's a way to get more gain out of the theory
than you might think if you realize, wow,
there's just so many great things in life
that just happen to people who ask for them.
And all you have to do is just get over your basic human fear
of rejection and total humiliation.
And then so many opportunities will open up to you.
This is very relevant for grad students
and assistant professors, because there
are many grad students and professors who
fail because they won't even submit their articles.
And it seems that they are so afraid of rejection
that they would rather just not submit and then fail for sure,
rather than submit and then get rejected.
But what happens when you get rejected from a journal?
Do all the economists then say, oh, he
got rejected from public choice.
He'll never work in this town again.
No, of course not.
Nobody's talking about you.
So you'll just keep trying and trying and trying.
I think my most rejected paper was rejected eight times.
Kept trying.
I won't claim to achieve the Vulcan level where
I can be rejected and just say, well, who cares?
I'll just submit it again.
It's still bitter, but still, it's only bitter.
Steal yourself.
Well, no point.
Read the reports.
And if the reports are like, well,
this person has some complaints that no one else in the world
has about the paper.
So odds are no one else on Earth does have the same complaints.
So why not send it again, throw the dice again?
So that is my dating advice, straight from George Ziegler.
And why don't we take our break now,
and then come back in 10 minutes.
Let's see.
If you do not have your midterm, so again,
so please pick up the answer key.
And to repeat, I will not discuss the exam today.
I have a happy discuss beginning on Thursday.
OK.
So this is the last answer, right?
And what's your name?
Alex.
You should know this.
Name?
I'm not a king.
I'm not a king.
I'm just a valedictorian.
Well, first of all, I'm a valedictorian.
I'm sorry, did you say J?
Oh, this is the king?
Yes, this is the king.
Yeah.
J.
J.
J.
Oh, I didn't know you had a mark.
I didn't know you had a mark.
I just have a name.
No, no.
I won't discuss it.
You will want to hear.
Many of you will want to discuss it,
but I find it's not a good idea to discuss it the same day
that I did it last year.
So starting on Thursday.
I'm going to let you know.
This is the king.
So I'm now going to hand out homework three to you.
I'm going to hand out homework three to you.
All right.
So, continuing with search theory.
All right.
Another example I like is rational amnesia.
So, you ask your friend to pick you up from the airport
and they don't show up.
And then you say, what happened?
And they say, I forgot.
All right.
Well, normally you do not find this a very good excuse.
And, of course, the reason is that they could have put
in some extra effort to not forget.
They could have put it in their calendar.
They could have set their alarm.
They could have put a tattoo on their hand.
Don't forget to pick up at this certain time.
So, there are many different things that you can do in order
to change the probability of forgetting.
So, by putting in extra effort,
you can raise the chance of remembering.
Of course, there's different levels of ability.
So, generally, older people have more trouble
remembering things.
So, there's that.
And then, finally, rational expectations.
You can also have rational expectations about your ability
to remember things as well as to influence those probabilities.
So, I will often, when I'm ordering for another person,
order for the other person first before I forget what they want.
Like if a kid says, I want to get chicken nuggets with,
you know, without the spices and so on, then first thing order.
All right.
So, first, chicken nuggets without the spices,
these things, and then that way I reduce my chance
of forgetting because I know I'm likely to forget.
I have a good idea about things that I tend to forget.
All right.
And on the other hand, of course, there's many things
that I have not in any way worried that I might forget.
So, normally I'm correct about those.
So, there's things like you're watching a movie,
you're like, have I seen this before?
And it's like, well, no, this movie is so weird.
I would remember it if I'd seen it.
On the other hand, it's a very generic movie.
Yeah, maybe I saw it before.
I could easily forget a movie like this.
It's very forgettable.
All right.
And there's that last one on comedy I will just skip.
But general idea is part of the essence
of comedy is something has to be surprising or unexpected.
So, what comedians do is they look around
for surprising funny observations to make.
Many things are surprising but not funny, right?
But in general, once you've heard a joke before a bunch
of times and it ceases to be funny, so there's that.
All right.
Now, another application of search theory is what happens
if there are some people who do not search very hard
for a good price?
For example, because the value of their time is very high.
What occurs then?
Well, if some people are not searching very hard
for a good price if the value of their time is high,
then they are likely to go and take the first offer
that anyone offers to them.
And in that case, if you can find those people
who are very busy and offer them what they want,
you have a chance of making a very high profit.
So, for example, when I was a tourist in Istanbul,
I didn't sell you.
I only had a few hours.
I wasn't going to go shopping around for souvenirs.
But it didn't matter because souvenirs literally came to me.
People would just say, you, you're a tourist, right?
And they would come up and say,
I have a bunch of different products here.
And they actually have like an overcoat where they would go
and display their wares, right?
And if you said, I want something like that,
and they'd stand right here.
And they'd go running, and they're like,
where are you going?
And come back, here's what you want.
Okay. All right.
So, and what they're doing is they are making all the effort
to search for people who would want to buy the stuff
because the people that want to buy it have a very high value
time, so they're not going to search.
So then it gets naturally outsourced to other people.
And search theory also gives us an economic way
of understanding what it means for something
to be overpriced or underpriced.
Right? Because in supply and demand terms,
it doesn't really make sense if something is overpriced
or underpriced.
If it's available for sale at all, then you can't go
and charge extra because no one will buy it.
And if you offer for less, then you're just giving away money.
So why would anybody do that?
But with search theory, this actually opens
up this common sense possibility that you're getting a really good
deal or a really bad deal.
Okay. So, you know, one example of this.
So, once you have been working at a job for a while,
it is common that headhunters will call you.
A headhunter is a professional job searcher who calls up people
and tries to steal you away from your current firm.
All right.
Now, why in the world would they be trying to go and call you up
and steal you away from your current job?
Well, first of all, like why would you even listen to them?
Yeah.
Because there's a possibility
that you're currently underpaid.
Right? And why do they make the effort to find you?
Yes. Because even after you move, they still think you're
going to be underpaid.
Right? So the fact that you are having a lot of trouble going
or that people are hunting you down and trying
to offer you a job, it's a sign that you're underpaid
and it's a way, and it's a why haven't you solved your
own problem.
Maybe the value of your time is so high that for you to go
and spend the time looking
for another job would actually not be worth it,
but it would be worth it to outsource to somebody else.
There is a Great Simpsons episode
where there's the James Bond villain who's starting
up a new nuclear power plant for world domination.
And it begins by him trying to hire away Smithers.
And he like follows him down the road in a car saying, hey,
do you want to work for me?
He's like, no, thank you.
No, thank you, spoken for.
And then finally Smithers gets so annoyed that he says,
can't a man walk down the street in America
without being offered a job?
So that is a possibility.
Now on the other hand, when you're looking for a first job,
that's when you usually have exactly the opposite experience
where no one is calling you to offer you a job.
Instead, you are trying to reach
out to every possible person you can in order to get a job.
And most of the time people are just ignoring you,
not returning your calls, slamming doors in your face.
So this is what we call hitting the pavement where you have
to go and do a bunch of really discouraging interviews,
face a lot of rejection.
So and the search theoretic story here is
that headhunters arise when you are underpaid.
On the other hand, people put all this effort
into finding a job when you're overpaid.
When the job is actually really too good for you and the amount
of money they're paying you is actually more
than you're really worth,
that's when people will put an enormous amount of effort
to find a job because it's great if you can find
that job because it's really more than you deserve.
So I remember when my wife was trying to get her first job
in law school and I say, wow, like clearly the wages
for inexperienced lawyers were way too high.
It would be far better if they were way lower
because then it wouldn't be so hard to get a job.
Right? So she didn't appreciate that so much.
But then, you know, once she actually had a job, it didn't take
that many months before she starts getting phone calls
from headhunters and I said, see,
now you're on the other side of the story.
Now you're on the side of the market
where you're actually paid less than you're worth.
Right? Now this does raise interesting questions.
Why aren't wages more carefully matched to current productivity?
Like it's very standard that you get a raise once a year,
but your productivity in your 12th month of working
as a lawyer is far higher than your productivity
in your first month as a lawyer.
Your first month you probably have highly negative
productivity because you don't know how to do anything
and you interrupt people who do know how to do stuff
who could be making money.
So in that case, you know, so there is this puzzle
about what's going on.
But.
I don't know.
Could it just be like metering costs?
I don't know.
Metering costs are pretty high.
Yeah, it could be, but like what would be so hard
with just saying, look, here's the formula.
Like every month that you have here, you know,
it's like the wage adjusts monthly instead of yearly.
That's what an apprenticeship used to be like.
You pay to work.
You learn.
And then at some point you get paid.
Right. Although even there,
there's the weird non-continuity.
There's a discontinuity of it.
Where there's a period where you're paying
and then do your magic.
And then suddenly now you should be paid.
When it would seem like there's a little difference
in the day before.
The last day of the apprenticeship
and the first day of your job,
you seem like you're virtually an equivalent worker
and yet the market treats you very differently.
Yes.
Yes. Economic theory comedy.
No, there's no literature.
It's just an example for me.
Yes. Yes.
I mean, it probably wasn't in terms of search theory though.
It's probably in terms of Smithian psychology,
which is connected, but not quite the same.
All right.
Anyway, here's my plan.
If the economics of perfect information does not make sense,
then at least try search theory.
And it explains almost everything else.
So there's a common sense idea that it's much harder
to get a job than to buy a loaf of bread.
And if this isn't true, what is?
Of course it's way harder to get a job
than to buy a loaf of bread.
Right. And the search theoretic answer, of course,
is for buying a loaf of bread,
there's very little search involved.
Right. There's the store.
I know where the store is.
I may not know the aisle, but I just look
up at the aisle numbers.
There's the bread.
I go there and I buy a loaf of bread.
And you offer some money and they don't say, well,
what kind of money is this?
The same kind of money everyone else is using.
So there's no big issue.
You know what the bread is.
They know what the money is.
It's easy to put buyer and seller together.
So buying a loaf of bread is easy.
On the other hand, if you want to get a job,
that can be very hard because there it's like, well,
for most people what you have to offer is worthless.
You know, like if I just were to go to a random person
and say, hey, you need an economist, right?
No. All right.
Well, I'd like your money, but yeah, that's still useful to me,
but I guess you have no use for me.
So that's a problem.
And again, even the people who need an economist,
but why do I need you?
Who are you exactly?
What in the world is going on?
Why should you even be in the running,
much less be the person I hire?
It's like, well, because I'm really great.
Right. And how do I know any of that?
And why should I believe anything you're saying?
So all of this in search theoretic terms, why is it
that firms structure their interviewing process the way
they do?
Why is it so hard to get an interview in the first place?
Right. When you hear about firms throwing away 90%
of the applications they get,
why don't they just interview everybody?
Yes. Yes.
Effort. Yes.
So the cost of just interviewing someone is really high.
How high could it really be?
Well, if you're interviewing to be a lawyer and you're going
to burn up two hours' worth of partner time, then that's
like $1,000 per chance that they give people.
Right. And law firms are not in the business of giving chances.
They are in the business of making money.
So that is why they are very concerned
about who should we even bother talking to.
Right. Now, later on, we'll talk about, you know,
go into this more, but, you know, this does mean,
for example, that you could be completely awesome
and yet no one will even, you know,
no one will even talk to you.
So if most people who fit your profile are not worth talking
to, then maybe no one will talk to you.
And then you could be an unemployed diamond in the rough.
You could be fantastic.
But if you can't get your foot in the door,
then no one will pay any attention to you.
This is, of course, the classic Hollywood problem.
How do I get my big break?
Right. And he said, only people saw me at the big screen.
They don't know how great I am.
But how do I get there?
How do I get there?
Right. Well, you can go and try doing your auditions, but,
you know, there, that you may only get 10, you know,
if you're lucky, you may get 30 seconds.
Next. Move on.
No, no. No, what about it?
All right.
So. All right.
Now, there are some economists, and especially
around here Austrian economists who resist search theory.
So what is the problem with search theory?
So it's not that Stigler sold Kirzner's idea,
because I think Austrians know that Stigler came first
and then Kirzner went and started arguing with Stigler,
but it wasn't that there was a formalization
of a preexisting Austrian idea or anything like that.
So as far as I can tell from reading what Kirzner has written
on this, and Kirzner is aware of, well,
what value do I add to Stigler?
Right. And it comes down to these philosophical objections
to probability theory.
It's the idea what probability theory can't capture radical
uncertainty or the unknown unknowns
or something like that.
Right. Now, my view is you can always think
about these unknown unknowns as being in a broader category
where we can think about them.
So say, look, when you start a business,
you just don't know what's going to happen.
There's all these unknown, unknown factors
that could mess up the business.
Well, in a sense, that's true, but do you have some general idea
about how often new businesses are successful?
Right. And once you know that,
then you really know the important thing.
And the other stuff, to me, is just a bunch of details.
Like, who cares why your business is going to fail as long
as you know that nine out of ten will?
Right. You know, you have knowledge
about the fact that it's important.
And the other thing, the exact details of what it is.
All right.
Maybe if you knew what it was, you could prevent it.
But, of course, part of the reason why people don't prevent
it is because it's so complicated.
But it doesn't seem like that's such a big deal to me.
All right.
So questions about search theory?
All right.
So can change your life if you want to make it change your life?
All right.
Yes. So when we do, when we actually do behavioral economics,
I think actually one result that I am very convinced of now is
that in the modern world, people really just don't try enough.
And they just don't throw the dice in life
in nearly enough times.
So if the worst that's going to happen is you'll be rejected
or humiliated, in the modern world, there are so many millions
of possibilities, and the word
of mouth does not get around very easily.
So why not just go and throw a whole lot
of dice and see what happens?
Right. So. All right.
So moving on.
All right.
So measures of risk aversion.
All right.
So remember we started with expected value maximization
and expected utility maximization
as an improved theory.
So you could imagine a theory of economic action under uncertainty
where all that everybody does is maximize the expected value
of whatever they do.
So in that case, if you have a one in a million chance
of a trillion dollars, or you could have $100,000 for sure,
then everyone would go for the one in a million chance
of a trillion dollars because that is a higher expected value.
All right.
So. And if your intuition is, yeah, I would totally go
for that one in a million chance of a trillion dollars,
then this might make sense to you.
But most people don't think that way.
And most people don't think that most people think that way.
So that's where we bring in expected utility maximization
as an improved theory that can explain people's reluctance
to go and take these extreme long shots
with high expected value.
All right.
So anyway, those are the cases of risk.
Now suppose that you choose between X dollars
with a probability of one, or you're going to have X over Q
dollars with a probability of P equal to Q.
All right.
Now a simple taxonomy that economists use is
if you're indifferent between the sure thing
and the gamble, then you are risk neutral.
All right.
If you prefer the sure thing to gamble, you are risk averse.
And if you prefer the gamble to the sure thing,
you are risk preferring.
Non-economists often say risk averse
when what they mean is low expected value.
So and I've even heard people say, well, of course,
I'm risk averse.
Who wouldn't be risk averse because I'd rather not have the
risk than have the risk.
That's not what risk aversion means.
So risk aversion does not mean that you would rather get rid
of a risk at no cost.
Rather, it means that if you have a choice
between two gambles and one is,
and they both have the same expected value,
but one is certain and one is not, risk aversion means
that you strictly prefer the one that is certain to the one
that is not.
So the expected values are the same,
but of course the actual distributions are different,
right, because the certainty has certainty of one outcome
and the one where it's not certain means there's a range
of possibilities.
Okay. All right.
Now most economic models assume that actors are risk averse.
It's a standard to assume that actors are risk averse.
So actors.
Although it's also very common
to assume that firms are risk neutral.
It is abnormal to ever assume that anyone's risk preferring,
although you can do it.
But normally we think of individual people
as being risk averse and firms as being risk neutral.
Why would firms be risk neutral?
Common story is well, since the shareholders can diversify,
no one needs to actually have a lot of stock in any one company,
in which case there's no reason to worry about them gambling.
It's long and you just want them to go
and do the highest expected value thing.
There's a lot of evidence that even
if the firms are not risk neutral,
or firms are actually not risk neutral, but there is a story
about why firms would be different, which is
that you can diversify away from the risk.
Okay. Right now, if you are graphing these possibilities,
right, if you're graphing these possibilities, then if we go
and draw our utility wealth function,
if you draw a utility wealth function,
then a risk averse agent has a concave utility wealth function,
which means that if you draw a line, you draw a line
between any two points on the utility, between any two points,
then the utility function is always going
to be above that line.
What that means is that you would prefer something
with certainty, with the same expected value,
to either of the more extreme endpoints.
So saying, look, you could either that or that,
but this line here between them, that shows a whole range
of combinations with the same expected value,
and this says that you're always going to,
with your risk averse, you always prefer
to have the intermediate result, the average result,
with certainty, than to take the gamble of the possible endpoints.
Okay. So, and you might remember the formula for a line,
so you've got AX plus 1 minus AY, right, is always preferred
to the gamble of X with probability A,
and the line on the right hand Y with probability 1 minus A.
Now, on the other hand, of course,
if you have this utility function, then the line is
above the utility function, and that says that people,
and that says that actually a certain thing is not
what people want, a certain thing is not what people want,
people actually want to have the other way around, right,
and then if it is a straight line, a straight line,
that means that you are indifferent
between the gamble and the certainty.
Okay. All right.
Now, this brings us to the concept
of certainty equivalence, which says that if you're indifferent
between a gamble and X star with certainty,
then X star is the gamble certainty equivalence.
So, in other words, imagine a gamble,
it could be any gamble at all, and then say, right,
what exact amount of money would you pay to own that gamble?
What exact money would you pay to own that gamble?
What amount of money would make you indifferent,
for if you either have that amount of money for sure,
or the gamble, what amount would make you indifferent,
and that would be a dollar value.
So, you could say, all right, look,
if I could either face the expected risk of deportation,
right, or I could just have a certain,
or I could just pay a certain fixed amount of money
to be left alone for sure, right, how much money would I pay
in order to get rid of that danger, that worry?
Okay. All right.
Questions?
All right.
Now, there's a lot of different ways in order
to quantify risk aversion, right,
and when I was taking this class, I had to suffer,
this is the most horrible lecture I ever experienced
in all economics, I just suffered
through David Card copying his notes on the board
for 90 minutes, with almost like a silent movie,
just copying the notes, filling up six blackboards,
proving that five different measures of risk aversion
were not enough, and then I had to suffer.
So, I had to suffer.
I had to suffer.
I had to suffer.
I had to suffer.
I had to suffer.
I had to suffer.
risk aversion are all mathematically equivalent.
And then it's sort of, put that and walk down.
Right?
So, and what I'll say is four out of five,
I never saw a GIN, I never need to know a GIN.
So I'm not gonna do that to you.
Instead, I'm going to just tell you
the most common method of measuring risk aversion
and explain how it works.
Okay, so, and the most common measurement
that people use, or economists use,
is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion,
sometimes abbreviated CARA,
coefficient of absolute risk aversion, right?
And the coefficient of absolute risk aversion
is equal to negative second derivative
of the utility function over the first derivative
of the utility function.
All right, now, at first glance,
it is not obvious why that would mean anything,
but I will show you some examples
that show you it means a lot.
All right, so, let's just start with
this one we've already seen of
U is equal to the square root of W,
so your utility function's equal
to the square root of your wealth.
All right, so, in that case,
so the coefficient of absolute risk aversion will be minus,
and then, let's see, let's do the first derivative first.
So remember, this is the same as W to the 0.5.
So, the first derivative of W to the 0.5 is going to be?
0.5 W raised to the minus 0.5, yes.
So, 0.5 W to the minus 0.5,
and then, the second derivative,
we just differentiate that again,
and we get minus 0.25 W raised to the minus 1.5.
All right, and then, if we go and simplify that,
we get 0.5 W to the negative one, right?
And what this says is that with this utility function,
you have positive risk aversion.
So, with this utility function,
any number of, any coefficient of absolute risk aversion
greater than zero indicates risk aversion.
Zero indicates no risk aversion.
Negative indicates that you're risk preferring, right?
This also says something interesting
about this utility function,
which is that the bigger your wealth,
what happens, as your wealth goes up,
what happens to your degree of risk aversion?
So, this is the same as 0.5 over W.
So, as wealth increases, what happens to your risk aversion?
It goes down, it goes down, right?
And as W goes to infinity, what happens to risk aversion?
Goes to zero, right?
So, this says that as your wealth becomes infinite,
then your risk aversion becomes non-existent, all right?
So, with this utility function,
you're definitely risk averse.
You risk aversion all levels of wealth,
but the wealthier you are, the less risk averse you are.
Now, what if we do U is equal to W?
So, remember, that's the same
as expected value maximization, right?
That's the same as expected value maximization.
It's gonna do whatever it is
that gives the highest average value.
And we then go and calculate some negative.
And then, what's the first derivative of W?
First derivative of a variable?
One.
One, right?
And then, what is the derivative of one?
Zero.
Yes, that's zero.
So, this says that when you have that utility function,
the expected value maximization utility function,
then you have no risk aversion.
All right, that makes sense.
And then, if you go and were to try and say W squared,
then you find out that will actually give you
negative risk aversion,
which means that you will, in fact, be risk-affording.
And so, and as long as you just have utility
as a function of W raised to some power,
then the breakdown is pretty simple.
Says that if the coefficient is less than one,
then you're risk-averse.
The current coefficient is exactly one,
then you're risk-neutral.
And the coefficient is more than one,
then you're risk-affording.
Okay.
All right, so, questions about that?
Everyone happy about that?
All right, so, and everyone happy
that we didn't do 90 minutes on this?
So, with this, you might actually use at some point.
So, the coefficient of absolute risk aversion
does come up every now and then.
And it is a rule where you can go
and just take any utility function and differentiate it
and see what, or whether this applies
to the person who's risk-averse,
or risk-neutral, or risk-affording.
So, useful to that extent.
All right.
Okay, so, questions, questions?
All right.
Now, application of what we've been doing
is demand for insurance.
So, let's try that.
All right.
Okay.
So, let's think about a simple insurance problem
with an agent who satisfies expected utility theory.
And to make it interesting, let's give him risk aversion
so he actually wants insurance.
Okay.
So, suppose we have someone who expects utility
given by U is equal to W raised to the 0.8 power.
So, as I said, so W raised to the 0.8,
is this person gonna be risk-preferring,
risk-neutral, or risk-averse?
Risk-averse.
They have risk-averse, that's correct.
All right, and then he wants to insure his income.
So, suppose that without insurance,
his income is $1,000 with probability of 0.6,
and $0 with probability of 0.4.
So, that's the lottery ticket that he's dealing with.
All right, and then there's an insurance company
that offers him I dollars worth of insurance.
So, I dollars worth of insurance,
and this insurance pays off if this thing happens.
So, if that happens, then the insurance company
gives you some money.
All right.
And let's see.
So, it offers I dollars worth of insurance,
and it offers it a price of 0.4 times X times I,
where I is the number of dollars,
and then if X is one, then this insurance
is what we call actuarially fair.
Actuarially fair means that the premiums
are exactly equal, the payouts are exactly equal
to the average premiums.
So, is it fair to expect a business
to provide actuarially fair insurance?
No.
Yeah, it's highly unfair,
because it would mean that they would have to
do their job for free, right?
And would have no money for their workers or anything else.
So, actuarially fair insurance is unfair.
By almost any standard, I guess you might just say,
look, people in the insurance industry
are our born servants, and they should just be happy
to go and provide us insurance for nothing, but otherwise.
So, the insurance company sells insurance
at a price of 0.4 times X times I,
where I is the number of dollars,
and X is this price variable.
All right.
So, now, when the customer decides
how much insurance does he want,
he's gotta go and solve the expected utility problem.
And again, remember, the way that insurance works is,
suppose that you get insurance
and the bad thing doesn't happen.
You still pay the premium?
Yeah.
Of course.
Yes?
In fact, that's what you're hoping for normally.
Yeah, I just hope that I send in my premium
and I get nothing for it.
So, that's the good case.
Is that you didn't get it in an accident,
your house didn't burn down,
so on, you didn't get cancer.
All right.
And then, similarly, suppose the bad thing does happen.
Do you still pay for your insurance
if the bad thing does happen?
Yeah.
So, what happens is you pay the premium,
but then they also give you some money, right?
Or whatever it is they're supposed to cover.
All right.
So, we're gonna go and maximize our utility
with respect to I.
Remember, I is the choice variable.
We're trying to find out how much insurance
a person is going to want.
What will be utility maximizing?
And this person satisfies expected utility theory,
so we're gonna maximize 0.6 times 1,000,
which is, what happens, 0.6 of the time,
minus 0.4xi, which is the premium.
All that raised to the 0.8 power,
plus 0.4 times minus 0.4xi, which is the premium,
plus I raised to the 0.8.
Remember, plus I because in the bad state,
which happens 40% of the time, you get to collect.
So, you buy I dollars worth of insurance,
and if the bad thing happens, you get a check for I dollars.
You still, of course, have to pay the premium.
All right.
So, that is what we're maximizing.
So, if we simplify and then differentiate
and set equal to zero, then we will get the first line
on the last page of the notes.
So, we get 0.6 times 0.8 times negative 0.4x,
all times 1,000 minus 0.4xi,
all raised to the negative 0.2 power,
plus 0.4 times 0.8 times one minus 0.4x,
all of this raised to, or all those times 1.4 of 1.4x,
that times that times I, all that raised
to the negative 0.2 power, set that equal to zero.
This simplifies to something
that still doesn't look very simple.
So, that's line E, right?
But then we get to do something
that we don't normally do in economics,
which is to take a negative 0.2 root of both sides.
All right, so we take a negative 0.2 root of both sides,
and then we can go and just define this variable theta,
just to go and capture everything going on.
I say, wait a second,
how did a negative five power get in here?
Well, remember, if we are taking a root of 0.2 power,
point to us that is the same as a 1 5th root.
So, when we invert that,
then we're going to get something raised to the 5th power.
Right, make sense?
Okay, and we solve, and then we do get our optimal I,
I star will be equal to $1,000
over theta times one minus 0.4 X plus 0.4 X.
Now, this may not mean that much even now,
but if we then go back to that actually fair assumption,
we get to an interesting result,
because if the insurance is actually fair,
then theta winds up being exactly equal to one.
And you say, like, how can that thing be one?
Well, take a look.
So, in there we've got five times one minus 0.4 X.
So, if X is one,
then we have one minus 0.4 is equal to 0.6.
And if we multiply that by five,
0.6 by five times five is three.
And then in the denominator, three times one is also three.
So, if three over three, the whole thing's one,
then one raised to any power, one.
So, if the insurance is actually fair, theta is zero.
And in that case, what do people want?
Let's see, well, in that case,
people are going to want amount of insurance
equal to $1,000 over one minus 0.4 X plus 0.4 X.
So, cancels, cancels.
So, this says that when the insurance is actually fair,
then everyone is gonna wanna buy
$1,000 worth of insurance.
All right, and that's interesting,
because the good outcome is $1,000.
Then people also want $1,000 worth of insurance
at the actually fair rate.
So, in other words, what this winds up saying
is that if people are risk averse,
so people are risk averse,
and they can get actually fair insurance,
they want to have absolute certainty about their income.
And so, how can you get absolute certainty
with actually fair insurance?
You just make income the same in both periods.
So, you buy enough insurance
so that after subtracting out the premiums,
your income in both periods are equal,
and it's actually fair.
This means that you're just going to have
the average in every period, in every situation.
So, since you have $1,000 with a 0.6 chance,
zero with a 0.4,
this means that you buy enough insurance
so you have 600 in every period.
In other words, if you're risk averse
and you can get rid of your risk for sure,
at no additional cost,
other than that you have to pay the actually fair amount,
what do you opt for?
A life of perfect certainty and perfect mediocrity,
where you get rid of all upside and downside risk
by just getting a flat amount of income in every scenario.
Okay, and then you can also go and show
that if theta, or rather, if X is,
that if X is actually greater than one,
so the insurance is not actually really fair,
then even risk averse agents don't fully insure.
So you can show that you can prove that as well.
So in other words, if X is, say, 1.1,
then you cannot get rid of all risk for no cost,
and this says that then even risk averse people
will live with some uncertainty.
And in fact, if X were big enough,
you could get risk averse people to sell insurance.
So if you had a really high price for insurance
in a barter market,
then very risk averse people would go and sell insurance,
and who would the risk averse people sell their insurance to?
Even more risk averse people.
Yes, so that's totally possible.
So, questions about problems like this?
All right, and now then let's move on
to efficiency implications
of symmetric or perfect information.
So remember, the title of this week
is symmetric information, not asymmetric, symmetric.
All these models that I'm talking about
act as if information is, although imperfect,
is equally imperfect for everybody, essentially.
Sorry, can you quiet down there, please?
Sorry.
All right.
Oh, sorry.
Yes, oh, did you have a question?
So when X equals to one, C doesn't equal to one.
Theta, so let's see.
I think that I just, you know,
so you're talking about line F?
So let's see, so we have theta equals.
When X equals to one, C doesn't equal to one.
Oh, let's see here, hold on.
Let's see.
So I think it does, but let's just double check.
So theta is equal to five times one minus.4X,
all this over three X, right,
raised to the negative.5 power.
It's a very minor question.
So, hold on.
So we have five minus, and we have one minus.4,
or no, it should be five times, five times.
It's five times that over three, right,
and raised to the negative.5,
and that will be equal to five times.6, right,
over, let's see, five times.6, yes, over three.
That equals three over three equals one.
And so I think it's right.
All right.
Okay, so why do a whole week on symmetric information?
Well, partly just because people normally skip
straight into asymmetric information
as if it's the only thing that happened,
and there's actually a bunch of models
where it's not asymmetric,
so it seems obvious to start with a symmetric one.
But in any case, here's the deeper reason.
It is very standard for textbooks to say
that the market outcomes are inefficient
if there's imperfect information.
It's a very standard claim in textbooks.
So there's a list of things, markets work unless,
and notice that they do not say it,
markets might not work.
Normally the phrasing is markets only work
as long as we have these conditions,
or markets work unless we have these problems,
so there's no other way of saying
that any one of these problems will mess markets up.
All right, and it turns out
this is actually a gross overstatement.
So market efficiency and imperfect information
are often totally compatible.
They're often totally compatible
contrary to what many textbooks say.
And so we're gonna see this particularly clear
when we got symmetric imperfect information,
so this is when everyone's equally in the dark.
So let me just give you some examples.
Suppose that I don't know
how much I'm gonna enjoy my consumption model.
So my utility is going to be x to the a
times y to the one minus a plus epsilon,
where epsilon is just a random variable,
zero mean, standard deviation, or a variance sigma squared.
So what is my optimal decision?
Despite the imperfect information,
my optimal decision is still completely clear,
and that is to spend a on a share of a times my,
or spend a times my income on x,
and one minus a times my income on y.
Because the uncertainty,
although it does make my utility higher or lower,
it is in no way even relevant to my behavior.
So you do whatever's optimal,
and then you just get a good day or a bad day
on top of that.
So that would be a case of symmetric imperfect information.
And in that case, market behavior's totally optimal.
Or imagine that you don't actually know your own tastes.
Suppose you don't know your own tastes.
So it's possible that the coefficient
in this utility function is.5,
so there's a 60% chance your coefficient's.5,
and then there's a 40% chance that it's.9.
So you don't really know
whether you like horror movies or not.
Who knows?
60% chance I like them.
40% chance I don't.
What should I do?
Right?
And the answer is you just want to maximize.6
times the one utility function,
plus.4 times the other utility function,
and that's the optimal thing to do.
All right.
Now, when would this not be optimal,
or might not be optimal?
Well, suppose that your mom knows
what you really want.
So your mom knows your real utility function,
and you only think you know it,
but you've got this uncertainty.
In that case, though, it's asymmetric.
So if someone knows better than you,
then you may do the wrong thing.
Although even there, there's a pretty obvious remedy.
So if I know better than you what is good for you,
and you don't, how could I help you?
And hire you.
Hire me, or I could just, how about that?
I could just tell you.
You don't like horror movies.
All right, you may think you do,
but I know more, and you don't.
Right, and you say, how do you know?
I know everything.
I know it all.
Right?
Yeah, so Robin Hanson used to have a cartoon
on his door where there's a kid playing video games
and a grandpa, and the grandpa comes up,
and he's like, grandson,
in my 80 years of life on this planet,
I've acquired a lot of wisdom and experience.
Would you like me to share any of it with you?
And then there's a panel,
and the kid just keeps playing video games,
and then doesn't even bother looking up.
No thanks.
This is Robin's view of the world.
Robin thinks that the old often do know more,
but the young just don't want to listen to them.
Right, as to why that would be is an interesting question.
In any case, so or, of course,
the policy relevant one is in politics,
who do people normally think knows better than individuals?
The government.
All right, and if this were true,
then the obvious remedy would be for the government
to simply announce what's true.
Say, hey, you people think that opioids are dangerous,
but they are.
All right, so just for consumption now, go.
All right, and the most the government might want to do
is, well, maybe everyone wasn't listening,
so let's go and track people down and say,
hey, excuse me, did you hear that according to the government
opioids are dangerous and the government knows better?
Do you hear the government knows better than you?
All right, well, you didn't know that, did you?
All right, re-optimize.
All right, so that would be a possibility.
But in any case, if, again, like this is the idea,
is if nobody actually knows any better than anyone else,
then it would be surprising if someone could still
make things better simply by going and requiring people
to do something when you don't know any better than me.
So if you do know better than the U.S., the U.S.
how can you go and on average improve anything
given that you don't know any more than anybody else does?
That would seem to be surprising.
All right, anyway, so a general point is this.
So just because you're ignorant doesn't mean you're stupid.
So if you are uncertain,
you can adopt more general purpose strategies
to take account of all the possible outcomes.
Right, so like with search theory.
Yes, you don't know what every possible employer wants,
but you can still form general strategies
about to figure out what in general would people like.
So maybe there's some employers that like people
who don't dress in suits, but on average they do.
So the natural thing to do is to go and dress up
in a way where that will actually be pleasing
to market overall, which might mean
that you lose out on some opportunities,
but on average you're still playing the odds
and doing your best.
And furthermore, there are actually our theorems saying
that as long as information is symmetric,
then there is in fact no welfare loss.
So any textbook that just says that perfect information
in general leads to suboptimal outcomes is wrong.
It's just grossly overstating the result.
Once I actually got to be a referee on such a textbook
and then I got to, ha, all right,
now I'm gonna stop one more book
for a textbook for being wrong.
I don't think the book was ever published,
so we can probably find somebody else,
but say look, what you're saying is incorrect.
You don't think it can be proven?
I mean like most obviously,
if someone says that perfect information leads
to inefficient results,
you only need to come up with one counter example,
but there's actually a stronger result
that as long as the information is totally symmetric
at every level, then in fact,
there is nothing efficiency enhancing to be done
and the market outcome is optimal nonetheless.
So questions about that?
Everyone happy about that?
All right, now let's move into the fun
of asymmetric information.
And of course there is a reason why economists
in practice focus on asymmetric information.
So why would they focus on asymmetric information
if the symmetry information doesn't actually imply
any efficiency losses?
Well, to like how good,
like how much credit you get for writing papers
saying no, there's a problem?
Oh, it's no big deal actually, it's fine.
Right, not much of a big one.
On the other hand, saying here's a new market failure
that no one else has ever noticed.
So there's a lot more professional payoff for that.
Okay, so now we're doing asymmetric information.
So now there's an A in front.
So we're doing everything that we didn't already do,
everything we're going to do in this area.
All right, so anyway, in the real world of course,
information is never literally symmetric.
It's not everyone will be equally in the dark.
There's always somebody who knows more than somebody else.
All right, and economists of course call this
asymmetric information.
So information isn't just imperfect,
but it's also asymmetric.
Then inefficiency may result, may.
So even with asymmetric information,
there's still no theorem saying
market outcomes will be inefficient.
Right, all that it does,
it opens up a possibility of inefficiency in that sense.
All right, now let's start with the very simplest case
of asymmetric information.
The very simplest case is just moral hazard.
Which has been known in the insurance industry
for hundreds and hundreds of years.
All right, and yet some economists still got
jobs and great careers by talking about something
that was known by everyone.
I think in this case, economists just even took the phrase.
I don't think economists even claimed originality.
They just went and grabbed the phrase moral hazard
from insurance companies.
It doesn't sound like a phrase that economists
would invent on their own, does it?
Moral hazard sounds very philosophical
and holistic and so on.
So, but anyway, so this is a case where I'm almost sure
that the term was, the phrase was already in common use.
An economist just took it up.
All right, so here's the idea.
All right, it is efficient to insure risk averse agents.
But the insured normally knows more about the risk
that he undertakes than the insurer.
So examples, auto insurance.
You know more about how you're driving
than the auto insurance company does, right?
You know about every bad call you made today,
every questionable call.
Imagine that an insurance company pricing agent
were in the car with you.
Is there any way that you would have driven differently
today, right?
Imagine someone was there saying,
well, I'm just gonna sit here and with my little checklist
and based upon your driving today,
I'm gonna figure out what price we're gonna charge you.
There are probably many different decisions
that you would have made.
All right, so I'm just guessing.
Seems likely.
You can do that, although those things can only detect
certain kinds of bad driving.
And also, at least the companies that I've heard of,
like it's an option.
They don't actually say like you could do it if you want it.
And I think you can get a lower price.
All right, and then another example, employment contracts.
So we don't usually think of an employment contract
as being an insurance contract,
but actually when you think about what employers are doing,
employers are always providing insurance to some degree.
So you work as a waiter in the restaurant,
suppose it's a really slow day.
You get lower tips, but you don't get
proportionately lower tips,
or as proportionately lower pay,
because you have some base pay,
which is a variance to the number of customers,
and then your tips will be adjusted.
And of course, most people actually don't work for tips.
So in that case, suppose that you work in an office
and there's no work to do today.
How much do you still get paid?
Your normal daily pay.
And then how is that possible,
given that you didn't produce anything of value today?
Well, your employer ate it.
Your employer went and suffered a loss,
paid you money for nothing,
and so it effectively provided you with insurance.
This has been a longstanding criticism
of Marxian exploitation theory,
which is, well, suppose the firm loses money.
Did the workers then exploit the employer?
And Marx's answer is no.
Still a little hazy on why, but I know the answer is no.
All right, so at any case, that's the idea.
What's that?
A good goal is avoiding your employer.
Yes.
So, I don't remember,
there's some kind of like definitional things,
and it's not possible, but any case.
So risk averse agents want a constant wage,
but if pay has nothing to do with performance at all,
then you don't have much of an incentive to do a good job.
Especially, of course,
if you combine that with total job security,
then the only reason anyone's doing anything
is that they actually want to do a good job.
Comes down to preferences, right?
So, whenever I actually pay attention
to how poor the incentives
for good teaching are in colleges,
I'm amazed that the quality of teaching is as good as it is.
Because the actual awards for good teaching
versus bad teaching in any university that I've seen,
almost nothing.
Almost nothing.
So, especially for economists.
So the difference between being like the best teacher
in a department and the worst teacher in a department
is maybe an hour's worth of consulting income per year.
So, and how many hours would it take
to move from being the worst teacher to the best teacher?
Yeah, I mean, maybe thousands of hours.
Or like probably, my guess is actually
the worst teacher in the world
simply could not become the best teacher.
The best teacher in the department
couldn't become the best one,
no matter how hard they tried.
They just had personality issues.
But, in any case, financially just ain't worth it,
but so then why isn't it way worse?
So, I think actually a lot of professors
care about doing a good job.
I know it's hard to believe,
but people devote themselves to a subject
and then they actually have an interest in it.
Seems strange, but okay.
All right, so anyway, so then once you insure
a risk-averse agent, then they're gonna wanna
take additional risks, or of course,
if you insure a worker, then they're going to wanna
put in less effort, right?
And then if you want to go and prevent the incentives
from being terrible, then you've got agents
are gonna have to choose between a combination
of two suboptimal outcomes.
So, one of them is less than full insurance,
and that's suboptimal because risk-averse agents
actually really like that insurance, right?
But on the other hand, or you could also have
inefficient risk-taking, where you could get
full insurance and then just live with the extra risk.
Like even partial insurance actually
that encourages some extra risk-taking
and then you've gotta live with an extra risk.
So, classic example would be the insurance deductible.
All right, from a point of view of risk aversion,
deductibles are bad.
So, it means that you get sick randomly
and then you have to pay some extra money.
And then you're like sick and you lose some money,
so you get this bad shock, right?
On the other hand, of course, if you made
the insurance deductible super high,
then you'd be getting almost no insurance.
So, you have to worry, well, if the deductible
is really low, then there's going to be extra risk-taking
is really high, then there's going to be,
then there's gonna be a risk-averse agent
who is suffering the anxiety of the risk-aversion.
So, we've gotta go and get some combination
of the two here.
All right, so, questions about this?
All right, now, in the real world,
and of course, this is also true in a model,
you can often, not always, but you can often
infer behavior from outcomes, especially, of course,
if you get to observe someone for a long time
so that random error tends to balance out.
Okay, so, for example, suppose there's a worker
and you don't monitor them all day long,
you don't know what they're doing,
but you know their capabilities
and you know how long they worked.
Right, so you know, look, if you're working,
you can produce 100 widgets an hour,
you work for eight hours, so,
while I wasn't paying attention to what you're doing,
if you actually did what you're supposed to do,
you'll have 800 at the end of the day.
All right, and then all you do is count it,
and then you can infer whether or not
the person was doing what he's supposed to do very easily.
Right, so, if you take a look at a student's homework,
say, look, I know what you can do
if you put in the required amount of time,
and this amount either does reflect
what I know you can do, or it doesn't.
Right, and as long as you know
whether the person did what they're supposed to do,
then there's no problem.
So you can say, look, there'll be a very harsh punishment
if you did what you were supposed to do,
and here's the nice thing about this harsh punishment.
Since I only impose it if you didn't live up
to the agreement, you have a great way
to make sure you never suffer the punishment.
So I execute anyone who I catch playing Tetris on the job.
But there's a really simple solution
if you don't want to get executed.
What's the simple solution?
Don't play Tetris.
Right, and as long as there's no ambiguity
about whether you played Tetris or not,
well, really easy.
Okay, so you can often infer behavior from outcomes,
sometimes perfectly, especially in a homework problem,
but in the real world, you can again often get
a pretty good idea about what's going on,
like, well, I know how smart you are,
and I know how well you did on this test that I gave you,
so I can then back out how much time you put into this.
Not with certainty, but you can get a pretty good idea
about how someone was doing.
And again, of course, there are many things
that when you see them, if the person said,
I tried really hard, you might say, no, you didn't.
So if someone, you know, has,
on a residential street, has crashed a car
into somebody's garage, and they say,
look, I was driving perfectly fine,
and the car just took over,
and the wheel turned all on its own, and rammed,
and the accelerator went down to full,
and ran that garage, like, hmm,
that sounds like a complete lie.
And this couldn't happen if you were doing
what you're supposed to do.
If you were doing what you're supposed to do,
then you would have stayed on the road
at a reasonable speed, and this garage door
would not be destroyed.
So, you can do it that way.
All right, so anyway, so if you can perfectly infer
behavior from outcomes, then information asymmetries
don't make very little difference, really no difference,
because there's a bunch of things that you don't know,
that there's asymmetric information,
but you know enough to figure out what happened,
and as long as you know enough to figure out what happened,
the fact that you don't know everything
isn't very important.
Okay, all right.
But inferences from behavior and outcomes
are, in the real world, of course, less than perfect,
so the moral hazard problem does persist to some degree.
So, you know, maybe the person driving the car
had a sudden blackout, and they've never had a blackout
in their life before, so they had no way of knowing
that there would ever be a blackout,
and that's what happened.
All right, so that could occur.
All right, now moral hazard is not an efficiency problem
if the agents are risk neutral, of course.
Then you just live, then you don't have any insurance,
and you just let people live with the risk,
and if people live with the risk,
then there's not gonna be any issue.
So imagine a risk neutral CEO.
There is a really simple way that you can go
and handle the problem of good incentives
to the risk neutral CEO, and then sell them
the whole company.
So you turn the company into a sole proprietorship,
and then, once you own the entire thing,
if it is, you know, the only reason why you wouldn't go
and put in a million dollars worth of,
or if there's something that will make the company
worth a million more, the only reason why you wouldn't
put in the effort to do that is if the effort
subjectively costs you more than, what?
More than, yeah, so like, you know, you get out of bed,
and you can save the company a million dollars.
Why don't you get out of bed if you're the sole owner
of the company?
Staying in bed's worth more than a million dollars.
Yeah, staying in bed's worth more than a million dollars.
Could that ever be?
I mean, once you're a billionaire, I would imagine.
Yeah, seems like it.
Okay, all right, so the idea is then you would exert
management efforts if and only if the expected gain
exceeds the expected effort cost.
So, and in Landsberg, he talks about the problem
of the moral hazard involved in splitting a check.
Right, so you go out to dinner with 10 people,
you don't even like each other very much,
just to make the problem more interesting,
and then there's the question of how do we split the check?
Well, the person, like one convenient answer is
we all just go and put in an equal amount.
The problem with that, of course, especially if people
know that's gonna be the rule,
suppose you know that's the rule,
then what does this lead everybody to do?
Free ride.
Free ride, how?
Order expensive, order lots of expensive stuff.
So yeah, there's that approach.
Of course, the opposite end is have everybody go
and pay for exactly what they paid for,
so everyone pays based upon exactly what they bought,
but that requires a very extensive monitoring,
that seems like, that's pretty hard, that's quite hard.
And then Landsberg comes up with a really weird contract.
Here's the contract where everyone pays the full check.
So that's computationally very simple, right?
Everyone pays, if the group check comes to $800,
everyone pays $800.
Why would anyone go to a restaurant where everyone
has to pay the full check if they're in a group?
And Landsberg's answer is, well,
restaurants would pay you to come in.
Restaurants would actually go and say,
look, here is a $770 voucher for every person who comes in,
as long as you're part of a group of 10 people
and you don't like each other.
All right, so that would be a possibility.
Again, the idea there is that at the margin,
if you're thinking, should I go and order this $10 dessert,
if you know that you're paying the full check,
you will order the dessert as long as you value that dessert
at $10 dessert more than $10,
because you know this will raise my check by $10.
It'll also raise the checks of a bunch of other people
that I don't care about by $10,
but I don't care about them, so too bad.
I guess if you truly dislike them,
you might actually enjoy impoverishing them.
Just say a bunch of people where you're like,
I could take them or leave them, whatever.
So why you're eating with these people is a fair question.
All right, so anyway, this Landsberg thought experiment
is the same idea behind selling the whole company
to the CEO so that you turn every company
into sole proprietorship.
Now, another solutionable hazard,
and this is one that is 100 times more realistic
than Landsberg's one, maybe even a million times
more realistic than Landsberg's one.
It's one, as I think I mentioned already,
Robin Hanson in his dissertation,
he had a whole chapter on this idea.
It's one of these ideas that is common sense and it's great
and still hardly anybody does anything with it.
In a way, it's too obvious, but it's so doable
that it's frustrating that it gets a little attention.
So here is another remedy from lower hazard,
and that is for a contractual punishment.
So here you solve the Maranza problem,
not in this weird way of having everyone pay the entire check.
You solve it by saying, look, if I,
the following things count as cheating on this deal.
If I'm ever caught doing these things,
I owe you a lot of money.
I owe you more than the money that I took from you
by cheating.
So for example, you have a contract that says
if the boss ever catches you playing Tetris,
you owe the boss $5,000.
And you sign that contract.
Now you might say, I don't know, that contract
seems pretty dangerous.
Maybe he's just gonna go and falsely accuse me.
All right, well, if that's your concern,
then don't sign the contract.
But you would say, fine, I'll go and agree to a $500 fine.
So something that, like, any time that you arrange it
so that it is, the fine is large enough
that it's not worth it for you to do it.
And then, of course, the employer doesn't need
to put a lot of resources into monitoring you.
They only need to do an occasional random audit.
They can just have some dice.
And if the dice all come up the wrong way,
today's audit day.
Of course, you don't tell people that.
You just go and do a surprise inspection.
And then you find out what's really going on.
All right, so I think, remember, like,
I think it was Tetris actually had a boss coming button
where you click it and then it's,
it hides the Tetris instantly.
There isn't even, like, a minimized Tetris icon.
It just completely disappears.
So you could do that.
But anyway, so the idea is if the less informed
can pay to observe the more informed,
then they can enforce good behavior at a low cost
with random monitoring combined with severe punishment.
Severe punishment.
So it can't be heads I win, tails I break even.
In that case, everybody's going to want to cheat.
But on the other hand, if it's heads I win,
and tails I go and I lose three times my gain from cheating,
then the expected gain from cheating is negative.
And in which case, the boss may need to put in
very few resources in actually monitoring you.
Right, and that is the idea.
Now, there are many examples of how this can be done.
You may say, well, isn't it already done?
Well, so to some extent,
but as I think I already mentioned,
in all countries where the law descends
from that of England,
there is a rule saying that you cannot agree
to a punitive punishment.
So you can contractually agree to compensate someone
for what you have cost them,
but you can't contractually agree to more.
Right, and then Robin points out,
well, that's highly inefficient.
Essentially, it's saying, you can sign a contract saying,
heads I win, tails I break even.
You can't sign a contract saying,
heads I win and tails I lose.
And of course, to convince people not to take a risk,
you really need to put in that data,
that actual benefit that you're getting.
That actual bad outcome, or else it is a good gamble.
Yes.
Isn't this what a bond is?
You put it up the money beforehand.
Yes, I bet you, so again, they're probably,
like in English, in English law systems,
the person who forfeited the bond might actually be able
to go and sue and say, you know, this contract,
the way I signed it and knew everything that was going on,
it's punitive because the value of the bond is more
than the loss that I caused him.
And if the person on the other side were to say, yes,
but my odds of catching him are only one in three,
so it needs to be punitive, you just lost.
Right now, of course, if you've got a good lawyer,
then you could just go and say, oh, no,
it's not punitive at all.
It's just that when someone plays Tetris,
it costs my firm $5,000.
And how is that?
Well, yeah, when you really understand the way
that a candy factory operates, you will realize
that the playing of Tetris can endanger the candy,
like a whole batch is going to be ruined
if the person just looks down from their desk for one second.
The candy could be destroyed, millions of dollars
worth of candy, really, it should be more.
And if you convince a judge that this is true, then you won.
And then you did impose your punitive punishment by stealth.
But there are many uses of contractual punishments
that are currently not done.
Things like trying to get an opportunity to get a job.
So right now, you could offer to go and work for someone for free.
But if you said, look, I'll go and work for you,
pay me a normal salary, but during this trial period,
if you decide that I'm not worth it, I owe you more,
I owe you not only all the money that you paid me back,
but I actually owe you double or triple that.
Right? Or you can try posting the bond.
Here's a bond where any time you decide you don't
like me, just fire me.
Right? Now, again, there's always the fear
that this could lead
to the employer deliberately making up accusations.
But again, there's a simple answer.
If you're worried about that, don't sign.
Right? And this, of course, gives an incentive
to moderate the contractual punishment down to the level
people feel comfortable with.
But still, that's probably a very large amount.
Right? And enough to go and solve a lot
of these moral hazard problems that we see.
So, I mean, right now, if, say, you sign a life insurance
contract that says that you don't,
and you get the rate for a non-smoker,
if you die of lung cancer,
then probably there will be an investigation.
And you will, and that's, they'll say, well, wait,
did he work in an asbestos factory?
No. Then he was almost certainly a smoker,
and we're going to prove it.
Right? But even if they prove you were a smoker,
the worst that's likely to happen is
that they don't pay the insurance policy.
But with a contractual punishment,
actually your estate could owe the insurance company money
because you lied.
Right? And if you're willing to sign a contract like this,
this is a way that you could get a better rate
than you currently get.
There are, you know, so, again, there's all kinds of things
that you can do to endanger your life.
Right now, for like health or life insurance, if you were
to say, look, if I am ever caught doing any
of the following things, not only do you not have to pay me,
but my estate owes you money.
And, of course, contractually you'd say, and you are,
and in my, this supersedes any other will that I make,
and the insurance company must be compensated first
for my dishonesty.
Right? And this would be a way, of course, to get,
and why would anyone sign the contract?
To get lower rates, to get better coverage.
Right? And this way you could get around a wide range
of moral hazard problems that right now we just feel
like we have to live with.
Now, another interesting thing about moral hazards.
So, you possibly, I guess you're about old enough
to remember the Obamacare debate.
Now, during the Obamacare debate,
you might remember a bunch of supportive economists saying,
look, you can't really have a free market insurance
because of these fundamental problems of moral hazard
and adverse selection.
We'll get to the adverse selection problem in a minute.
But now, just think about moral hazard.
Right? So, what in the world does any system
of government funded medicine do about moral hazard?
What's that?
Yes, exacerbate it.
Yes, it doesn't look like you.
In other words, they just, like the normal thing is
to say everybody gets total coverage, and yes,
this leads to a lot of extra risk taking.
What are we going to do about it?
Nothing. We're just going to let people do,
have totally unhealthy lifestyles
and do whatever they want and get full coverage.
Now, once in a while, there are very specific measures
that people say are due to the existence of government funding,
things like motorcycle helmet laws.
We say, well, since the government would have to pay
for you if you got in an accident,
you have to wear a helmet, or things
like anti-smoking programs.
So, since government has to pay for you,
if you get lung cancer, then we're going to go
and discourage smoking.
There's some famous work by Kip Viscusi and others showing,
as far as I've heard, no informed person actually
disputes it, that smoking actually saves taxpayers money.
Because you're a lot more likely
to die before you even collect Medicare.
All right?
So, actually, if anything, by this reasoning,
the government should be subsidizing smoking.
Like, again, basically the kinds of unhelpful behavior
that kill you quickly and young.
Right? And, again, that's purely in terms of Morazzo, but.
Yes. So, what's striking
to me is that economists were supportive of Obamacare.
We're very quick just to go and repeat a bunch of slogans
out of the textbook, rather than going through them one by one
and seeing, wait a second, does this slogan actually have
anything to do with the program we're talking about?
Or might there even be a possible tension between it?
Right? And, again, so you can certainly imagine,
like a fully socialized medicine program
that would do things like this.
So, you could say, fine, we cover everybody,
but every year there's an annual way, and we go,
and you have to pay extra taxes if you're too heavy.
And then, like, we go and we monitor your physical activity,
and you have to pay extra taxes if you're physically inactive.
And you could imagine a whole bunch of different fines
that you would have to pay based upon your behavior.
I don't know of any country, even Singapore,
that actually goes and imposes things like this.
But, and, again, like, why not?
Well, it's certainly not because they're aware
of the Morazzo problem, and this is some clever solution.
It's more like either they are unaware
of the Morazzo problem, or they just said, you know,
we're going to do about it.
Like, we're just going to live with really bad incentives.
Because we think that no one should ever have to worry
about their health insurance coverage.
Right? Now, there's also something odd about this
when you think about the populist idea.
Look, everyone should have the best possible coverage
because health is the most precious of all things.
Well, if it's the most precious of all things,
then how do you explain all these people
who take all these dumb risks?
How do you explain all the unhealthy lifestyles?
Well, they don't know that it's the most important
of all things.
Right? Well, then why don't we go and give them incentives
to go and teach them to do the things
that are actually best for them?
No, no, no.
That would go and be a horrible abridgment
of their freedom, right?
So it's one thing, like, it's terrible to go and not pay
for everything, but also terrible if you go
and impose any rules upon the recipients.
Right? Again, well, how about you could have free coverage
as long as you agree to abide by all of our rules?
No, no, that's dehumanizing, too, so can't have that.
All right.
So, anyway, bottom line, contractual punishment,
great idea, very underused, strangely illegal,
barely studied, right?
So it seems like it deserves way more attention,
and especially if you could do something empirical with it,
I think it would be awesome, right?
And Robin Hanson is right here.
I'm sure he'd love to talk to you about it.
All right.
So now we come to next topic.
So this was the economic argument for Obamacare,
which actually is relevant to Obamacare.
All right.
So, I mean, like, so I got a post-pricing, I'll say, like,
adverse hazard, moral selection, whatever.
It's like, don't even care about exactly what the term is.
We're sort of throwing out a word salad of arguments.
All right.
But, anyway, adverse selection.
So this is a much more complex form of asymmetric information,
and the basic idea of this is you know your
own characteristics, but other people treat you based upon the
average characteristics of people
who look like you superficially.
People who are superficially like you.
What this means is that if you happen to be above average
for people who look like you on the surface,
then you are more likely to decide there's no point being
in the market, and when the people who are better
than average leave, what does this do to the average?
It lowers the average, and then this means
that there's another, there's a new person who's now the best
person who's way above average, and he may want to leave,
and then the next person may want to leave,
and as a result you may even theoretically, it is possible,
not certain, but possible, to get this full unraveling result
kind of like with the centipede game,
where the entire market disappears.
All right.
So then imagine a system where I say, look, I go
and I fail the bottom half of every other class.
Right. Well, then anyone who knows they're going
to be the bottom half of the class drops, right.
What's the point of being in class
if you know you're going to fail?
But if then I say, well, gee, now there's a new person
in the class, and I fail that bottom half, right,
and then that bottom half drops out, and then the bottom half
of the remaining ones, and then eventually we're left
with just one person, and then I don't know what the rule is.
I guess 50-50.
So that would be a case of unraveling if I'm down to either
one or zero students, depending upon how you define the rule.
Okay. So that is the idea of adverse selection.
Right. And of course this was indeed a key argument
for Obamacare, and it's one that has been noted in many contexts.
So you've heard of the adverse selection death spiral.
All right.
Well, this is what we're talking about.
The death spiral is the extreme case, but it's one
where if everybody can go and get insurance
at the same price regardless of their health conditions,
then the first people who want to go
and buy insurance are the sickest people.
And as a result, the price of insurance is high.
And then who doesn't want insurance?
Healthy people.
Who doesn't want insurance?
Healthy people.
And then who doesn't want insurance?
Healthy people.
Because I don't want to pay $10,000 a year
when I've got no problems, especially if I know
that if I ever get really sick, I can go and buy insurance
for the same price that it's currently at.
All right.
And we will pick up with this next class.
Small surcharge.
Yes. With a small surcharge.
Yes. That is a first step to going
and reducing adverse selection,
but of course it depends upon how severe it is.
Okay.
