But it has a lot of absurd implications,
such as everyone would be happy to take a one
in a trillion gamble of getting a quadrillion dollars,
rather than get $500 for sure.
And almost no one wants deals like that.
I mean, when the numbers get that big,
it's a little confusing.
But you can see how many people would
want a one in 1,000 chance of a million dollars,
rather than, say, $500 for sure.
So it seems quite unlikely.
So we just have paper towel.
You can get that.
Can we get rid of this?
It'll work, I promise.
Oh, all right.
Thank you.
Hold on.
We're going to do this one.
Oh, great.
All right.
So anyway, expected value maximization
rejected for these obviously absurd conclusions.
And so then economists normally switch over
to the expected utility theory, which many people misinterpret
as being the same thing.
But it's totally not.
What's the big difference?
The big difference is that with expected utility theory,
we give everyone a utility of wealth function,
such as utilities equal to the square root of wealth.
And then people maximize the expected value of that.
You'll maximize the expected value of that.
And this is a way where you can easily
build in both risk aversion and risk preferences
we're going to see.
The procedure for expected utility theory.
Step one, you assign numerical waste outcomes via
an expected utility function.
Then linearly weight outcomes by the probability.
So it's a linear weight.
What else can you do?
In principle, you could go and weight everything
by the square of the probability.
Well, the square root of the probability.
These are all logically possible ways of doing it, right?
Still, you say, yeah, I just go and do
whatever has the highest value of the square
of the probability times utility function.
But that's not how expected utility theory works.
And then you just choose whatever gamble
has the highest linearly weighted expected outcome.
So like I said, if we have this function,
and you've got either a 50% chance of $10,000,
a 50% chance of zero, or 2,000 with certainty,
all that we do is go and do 0.5 times the square root of 10,000
plus 0.5 times the square root of zero,
and compare that to the 1 times the square root of 2,000.
And why 1 times the square root of 2,000?
Because the probability of that thing happening is 1.
Now, you might remember back when
you were learning basic utility theory,
and you heard that basic utility theory
is invariant up to any monotonic transformation.
So what that means is that for any regular utility function,
you're always going to have to square it.
You would cube it.
You would take the square root.
And it gives you exactly the same answer regardless.
Remember when you start off with a Cobb-Douglas function,
and then you take the log of it, and then it
turns into this other thing that looks very different?
And that's perfectly fine, because the log function
is monotonic.
Whatever number was higher before you logged it
is still higher after you logged it.
Number six?
Vaguely?
Vaguely?
All right.
Now, expected utility theory is not like that.
Expected utility theory, if you square it
or take the square root, it changes the answer,
which means that with expected utility theory,
there's extra information contained within that utility
function.
And all that you're allowed to do
to expect utility functions, you're
allowed to multiply them by a constant,
and you're allowed to add a constant.
Those are perfectly fine.
And there is a technical term.
This is called an affine transformation.
But don't worry about it.
The main thing to know is that expected utility functions
have extra information packed into them.
And so you're not mathematically allowed
to just square them or take the square root
and assume the answer will be the same.
In fact, that assumption would be wrong.
Now, so there are some implications
of expected utility theory that seem
pretty obvious and trivial, given the axioms.
And yet, if you remember what human beings are actually
like, and remember those creatures, human beings,
you may still feel like one after all this economics.
Or maybe you don't.
Maybe you now feel like you are superior
to regular human beings.
But either way, important to remember
that it's supposed to be a theory about them.
So if you remember these things, you'll
realize that these are actually problems.
So one implication is the compounding one,
which says that you'll be indifferent between a 50%
chance of a 50% chance of something
and a 25% chance of something.
And you say, well, everyone is like that, aren't they?
No.
Have you ever talked to a toddler?
Toddlers will sometimes, they won't
want to go and roll all the dice at once.
They'll want to first roll one, and then they, OK,
now I'm halfway there.
And then they want to roll the other one.
And you're like, what's the difference?
And they're like, well, I can't stand
to have it all determined at once.
It's too stressful.
You're like, it doesn't matter.
It's 25% either way.
I don't need to hear that.
Just give me, I'm going to roll one die at a time.
That's the only way I feel safe doing this.
I mean, it just seems like only kids would do this.
I've seen adults do the same way about it.
So if you think about this, if you're
at a casino in Las Vegas, can you
imagine someone flipping the cards over one at a time
instead of all at once?
That is a violation of compounding.
That's one where somehow they get
a weird sense of insurance out of this metaphysically
nonsensical procedure.
And but here's the thing.
If human beings act in a metaphysically nonsensical way,
then the model has got to account for that.
It's got to, yeah, well, the world can't have a contradiction,
but a person can contradict himself.
Perfectly fine.
Puzzle, like a human being being contradicted.
Now another implication.
This is one that is very important in the real world.
If you're selling insurance or if you
are trying to fear monger the population into voting for you,
there's the linear probabilities.
So with expected utility theory, a 1% chance of something
is just a little bit less, if it's a bad outcome.
Say a 1% chance of a bad outcome is a little bit worse
than a 2%, which is in turn just a little bit better.
And then in turn, so wait, hold on, this is a bad outcome.
So a 2% chance of a bad outcome is just a little bit worse
than a 1%, which in turn is a little bit worse.
OK, so bad outcome.
So 2%, this is worse, a little bit worse,
and then this is best.
But here's the thing.
So with expected utility theory, this is linear.
So moving from here to here should psychologically
be the same as moving from there to there.
Going from 2% to 1% is exactly the same as a move from 1%
to 0%.
And yet, if you are selling any kind of insurance product
to people, it is standard to try to say,
you are guaranteed this cannot happen anymore,
so you're going to stop worrying about it.
And that seems a lot more rhetorically persuasive
to people than saying, you know that 2% risk you face?
After this, we'll only get 1% risk.
But you're telling me there's a chance.
Yes.
Yeah, yeah, as long as there's a chance.
You're telling me there's a chance.
Now, but think about it a little bit more.
You say, but wait a second, that's
wrong because there's a chance the insurance company goes
bankrupt and doesn't pay me.
There's a chance that they rule that it doesn't really
count as the thing that I would think it would count as.
And so again, I don't get paid.
So you haven't really given me assurance, like a certainty
at all.
But if you are selling the insurance,
don't bring up that stuff.
Instead, just bring up, there'll be no chance.
You're totally safe.
Totally safe.
And again, if you are going and trying
to beer monger with a group of voters, what do you do?
You just say, look, we don't want the smoking gun
to be a mushroom cloud.
What probability here?
Look, you just don't want that to happen at all.
And this will vote for us, and it's zero.
So everything's fine here.
Now, you could question the empirics and say,
it's not really zero.
In any case, just the movement, like,
why is it so important to move it to zero
rather than one in a trillion?
It's almost the same thing, right?
You could live a million years, and you'll probably never
see a one in a trillion probability occur.
So why is zero so much discreetly better than one
in a trillion for people?
And yet, psychologically, it seems
that people are this way.
And even for seemingly pretty trivial things,
there's no chance you'll miss lunch if you do this.
How bad is that?
I've missed lunches before.
I survived.
Sometimes I barely even noticed until a few hours later.
But nevertheless, this putting great weight
upon certainties or zeros and treating those
as being different in kind from movements
within the one non-zero, non-one probability of another,
so the speculative theory says that won't happen.
And yet, it seems like in the real world,
people do think this way a lot.
All right.
So now this is saying that you value $1,000 100 times as much
as 10.
It's the probabilities that matter linearly.
So the rewards totally can matter non-linearly,
but not the probabilities.
And that's what the inverse of the equation is.
All right.
So any questions?
Questions?
All right.
So let's now do rational interpretations
in a river of generality.
Symmetric information.
Many of these models you may have heard before,
but usually they are not grouped together
as symmetric information.
It's common to group all the asymmetric information
together, but not the symmetric information together.
But it's worth thinking about it as,
that's why I do cluster them, that there
is a whole area of different models of information
where it is symmetric, where everyone is
in the same boat of ignorance.
Now, back in week one, seven weeks ago,
I believe that it's been that long.
All right, we went over two different versions
of probability.
And what are those?
Objective and subjective.
That's right.
All right, and subjective is much more generally applicable
than objective.
Subjective, you can have a subjective probability
about anything.
Things that are unique, things that have never occurred,
you can have subjective probabilities for those.
Objective probability, on the other hand,
is based upon observed frequency.
So it's never happened.
Then all you can say is 0 out of 0 times as it occurred.
All right, so undefined.
Now, the problem, as we said, is that subjective probabilities
have no necessary connection to the real world at all.
And this seems weird, because it does
look like there's some connection between the way
the world really is and what people think.
Like, normally, if an extra country is formed,
then people start believing that country exists.
Or if there is mass hunger in the street,
people switch their view that there is now
mass hunger in the street to some extent.
All right, so what can we do about this?
Well, the leading theoretical effort
to link objective and subjective probabilities
is called rational expectations, or just RE for short.
There are two different ways that rational expectations
generally is explained.
There is the one that is simplest
and is most commonly actually used for empirics.
And this just says that you've got rational expectations
if your errors have a mean of 0 and are uncorrelated
with available information.
So again, a standard characterization
of rational expectations is that your errors are distributed
normally with a mean of 0 and constant variance.
Then those errors are uncorrelated with each other.
Now, there is a little bit of weaseling here,
because we say it was uncorrelated
with available information, with what counts as available.
But when you're doing empirical work,
you normally say, well, it was in the Wall Street Journal
yesterday that it's available.
Why that?
That's normally the way that it's done in practice.
Now, there's a deeper version, which is primarily
used just by theorists, because you can't really
do much with it in the real world.
But this version just says that you have rational expectations
if your subjective probability distribution matches
the objective probability distribution in the real world.
This is really hard to actually test,
but you can do it in a model very cleanly.
So basically, if you see a rational expectations model,
the normal approach to doing rational expectations
is you solve for the equilibrium where
the belief distribution exactly matches
the distribution of events.
And it all works out perfectly if you've
done the model correctly.
All right, now, a standard way of modeling
is this, just to say that if rationalization is true,
then everyone has unbiased beliefs.
So their mean error is zero.
And then what does it mean to have imperfect information
or error in a world of rational expectations?
There is a caricature that just says
people who believe in rational expectations
think error doesn't exist and everyone
has perfect information.
That's totally wrong.
So wipe that thought from your consciousness
because it's utterly in error.
What rational expectation says is, sure,
there could be tons of error.
But the error has to look a certain way.
Namely, if this is the actual truth, T star,
then the distribution of beliefs has to have a mean of zero.
So on S. So you're equally likely to be above or below
the actual true value.
I didn't even notice that over there.
So basically, it says that even though people
may have really big errors, and nonetheless,
their average belief is true.
Now, for one individual, this isn't that helpful
because for any given question, you just get one realization.
And then, well, I don't know, maybe I'm really wrong.
But I could just as easily be really high or really low.
So in a rational expectations world,
what does it mean to say that one person is well-informed
and one is poorly informed?
Well, a well-informed person is a small error
around the true mean.
That's a well-informed person.
And on the other hand, a poorly informed person
has a big distribution around the mean.
So this is a poorly informed person.
However, on average, their views are the same.
It's just a difference of the spread.
So just by the definition of variance,
you can see that a poorly informed person on average
is much farther from the truth than a well-informed person.
And of course, a perfectly informed person has no error.
And then their belief distribution
just is a straight line overlapping the truth.
So that's what rational explanation says.
Again, it's not claiming that people are omniscient
or anything like that.
It's just saying that there is a very specific structure
to how error works, which is that no matter how oblivious you
are, still, on average, you're right.
And the difference between the well-informed and poorly
informed is just how far the scatter around the truth is.
And furthermore, of course, rational explanation
does not assume that information or cognition is free.
In fact, if it were free, you'd expect
that there'd be no error, right?
And essentially, if you were to go and raise
the price of information, you'd expect
that this would increase the error.
So it's a pretty simple story.
The greater the price of information
is, the less effort you're going to put into acquiring more
and reducing the error, and then the greater
the expected spread.
On the other hand, when information gets cheap,
then you'd expect that beliefs will squeeze in
towards the center.
And you can apply this idea to any number of possibilities.
Like it would be for attending graduate school.
So no one knows for sure how well they'll do.
But if rational expectations hold, then on average,
you do know the truth.
On average, you know the truth.
And you also know what completion
will do for you, and so on.
Yes?
So if information isn't free, and different people
have different information, then are we just
saying that people are on average well-informed,
or on average poorly informed?
Well, here's the thing, is that for any one belief,
every individual only gets to really well to die once.
So here's the thing.
For one individual, it's super hard
to find out whether they satisfy the rational expectation
assumption.
Just like if you only have one observation,
how do you statistically test anything?
So in practice, if you wanted to test rational expectations,
you would wind up going and getting a big group of people
and seeing whether the average belief winds up
being zero, which is an implication
of rational expectations.
But there is another possibility.
It could just be that everyone's bias is biased,
but there's different biases.
But then how do you prevent, I guess,
skew from appearing as the cost of permissions
that increase or decrease?
So the answer, how do we prevent skew?
We assume it away.
That's what it does.
Again, you might go, so now people that are really into it
say, well, why would we ever think there would be any skew?
And so, you don't have an answer?
All right, well, we don't have to worry about it.
Of course, when you think about it a bit more,
there's lots of reasons.
What if the truth is bounded by zero?
How many hamburgers did we eat yesterday?
It can't actually be a normal distribution
because there's a minimum of zero hamburgers.
You can't eat negative hamburgers.
So there's a problem there.
And the actual amount of effort, intellectual effort
that's spent on things like that,
throwing it out when you're zero,
that's a pretty obvious issue.
Or you could do it for renting a movie.
Or actually now, since no one rents movies,
you do it for Netflix ratings.
So on average, are Netflix ratings accurate for you?
And there, of course, if one individual
had to give a bunch of observations for yourself,
you can determine, are they accurate for me,
on average, at least?
Or you can do a bigger one and see,
are they accurate for people overall?
Or something else you could do is
you could go and do a bunch of guesses
on many different issues, and then you
could test yourself for actualizations.
You can't do it just for one observation
because then how do you know that it wasn't just random error?
But if you do a lot.
In fact, this would be a useful thing
to know about yourself, right?
How accurate am I, really?
And there is the crummy way of determining your own accuracy,
which is to wait for things to happen and then self-assess.
Was I right?
Oh, yeah, totally, totally, always so right.
So Philip Tetlock calls this self-scoring.
And it's corrupt, and you shouldn't do it.
It's nice to do it.
People that do this all the time and don't
seem to have any interest in coming up with some other thing,
there's many alternatives to self-scoring.
One of them is just to state what you
and your prediction clearly in advance
and then come back later.
So then at least you don't wait for things to happen and go,
ah, just as I foresee.
You say, well, why do people do self-scoring if it's so crummy?
Well, it's very easy to do well with self-scoring.
In fact, I don't know anyone whose self-score is that.
There must be someone out there who's said, oh, my god,
I'm so terrible.
And then even with making your predictions in advance,
there's a problem that you can go and pick
a bunch of really easy questions.
And then it turns out, wow, I made 20 predictions.
I was right on all of them.
Of course, they were all like whether Norway would invade
Sweden.
So this is one where it's better if you
go and find someone who disagrees with you
and is willing to agree to some terms.
And then you get another human being
on the opposite side who is there
to make sure that you don't just scoop up
all the easy bets for yourself or all the easy predictions
for yourself.
Or like another application of rational explanations.
So economist Donald Whitman considers this old argument
that there's a lot of wasteful government spending
because voters are ignorant.
And he says, well, the fact that they're ignorant
doesn't mean that they underestimate
how much wasteful government spending there is.
They could just as easily overestimate it.
And unless we have some reason otherwise,
why not just figure rational explanations will hold?
And some people are overestimating
the wasteful government spending.
Some are underestimating.
But it isn't a general explanation
for why there'd be government waste.
Now, how would you test for any of this in the real world?
So rational explanations first became big in macro
in the 1970s when Keynesian economists hit a log.
They had a lot of egg on their face for making
a bunch of bad predictions.
And this is when Robert Lucas and some other people
came along and started pushing another model.
Actually, they were borrowing from an earlier economist,
John Muth.
But anyway, there were a bunch of empirical tests.
They started performing on things like inflation forecasts
to test them for rational explanations.
So how would you do this?
Well, in order to test for the rational explanations
of inflation forecasts, you need two things.
You need inflation forecasts, and you
need actual inflation numbers.
So you need two different things.
And then what people started doing was just
try regressing forecasts on a constant plus a coefficient
times i, where i is actual observed inflation.
So notice, this would be like the forecast for 93
being regressed on the actual observed inflation in 1993.
The forecast, of course, come before 1993,
by whatever happened in 1973.
But in the regression, we go and take
the forecast for the year in question.
And then compare them to what actually happened.
And rational explanations implies two things,
alpha equals 0 and beta equals 1.
If you've ever done an hypothesis test where
you have two conditions that you're testing,
that's what they were doing.
An F test that you have to do if you've forgotten F tests.
And basically, what this means is that, first of all,
on average, the forecast equals the truth.
And then furthermore, if the truth goes up
by 1 percentage point, the forecast goes up
by 1 percentage point.
So if there were a positive value of alpha,
this would mean that would mean there's a general tendency
to overestimate.
Negative alpha, general tendency to underestimate.
And then again, if beta were greater than 1,
this would mean that when inflation goes up
by a point, by 1 percentage point,
forecasts are going up by more than that.
So that's what the rational expectations forecast would be.
And you could imagine doing any number of macroeconomic
or other forecasts and testing for rational expectations.
Now, something that's been very interesting to me
is testing economic beliefs themselves
for rational expectations.
Because at least when I got into economics,
the reason why I liked it is because the economists
were telling me the opposite of what other everyone else had
told me.
That's why I liked it.
So I liked economists saying, you
know all the stuff that teachers and parents and media tell you?
Wrong.
And not just sometimes too high, sometimes too low,
but predictably wrong.
Like the economist saying, you know
all this complaining about free trade you've heard?
Wrong.
Free trade's great.
Or you know all this stuff about how the more regulation
of drugs, the better?
Wrong.
Regulation of drugs can kill people.
Here's how.
You're murdering people with regulation.
Negligent manslaughter.
Anyway.
Or you know how everyone's always
talking about the disemployment effect of the minimum wage?
No.
Exactly.
They should be.
They're acting like there's no disemployment effect.
But there's got to be a disemployment effect.
A minimum wage is $1 million an hour.
So anyway, that's what got me interested in economics
was economists going and saying, these
are the results of our study or our work, which
can paint a very different picture than the regular one
in a very predictable direction.
So anyway, this is why I got excited.
Now the fact that it excited me doesn't mean it's true.
Unfortunately.
The world should work that way, but it does not
have to work that way.
And when I got into grad school and I
tried making any of the arguments that got me
interested in economics, normally people would just say,
now this.
So you can't say that people underestimate
the benefits of free trade.
No, you must assume that on average they're correct.
All you can say is maybe sometimes they
might be too high, sometimes they may be too low.
That's all you're allowed to say in a rational explanations
framework.
But maybe rational explanations is wrong.
All kinds.
Anyway, so when I started working on this,
I expected there to be at least some decent empirics.
Really, a lot of cases there's none.
And this is more of just a convenient assumption.
And it can be convenient in two ways.
One is it's just empirically convenient
because if this is the way the whole world works,
there's so many questions you don't have to study anymore.
So I went into it like, well, let's just
find what the truth is, and then we know on average
that's what everybody believes.
So that simplifies your life a lot.
And then of course, if you just like
to think the world works fine the way that it is,
this is also very politically convenient.
So you just want to put your blessing on the status quo,
then very naturally something like this
is going to appeal to you.
But I say, look, if most people think that education is good,
that means it's good.
And if you disagree, then almost certainly you're wrong.
It's like, what are the odds that you're right
and everyone else is wrong?
It's like, oh, man.
If that's where I ran, I would never have gone into economics
if that's what I thought.
I would have found some other area where most people were
screwed out then.
Would have moved into that.
But anyway, so this is what I was dealing with.
So one of the first projects in the undergraduate school
was actually trying to get some data on this.
And it turned out some other people
had already created all the data, which
was a very expensive data set, hundreds of thousands of
dollars.
And then they published one paper
in the Journal of Economic Perspectives using the data,
and then dropped the whole topic.
And when I asked, they just gave me the data for free.
And out of that, I got six papers, a book.
So this is the kind of thing, don't look a gift horse
in the mouth.
Don't say, well, why did you do this whole study
if you were barely willing to write one paper on it?
Instead, just say, thank you for sharing.
And a more general lesson, there are actually
a lot of data sets that are out there that
have barely been used.
So for example, there are at least a lot of variables
that have barely been used.
I think it's confusing as to what's going on.
Presumably, people just had more money than they had questions.
So they needed to know about the questions they cared about.
So for example, in the General Social Survey,
if you go look at that, if you go to Google Scholar
and just put in different variable names,
it's got to be a variable name that's distinctive,
like the word help poor, one word.
So it's not a lot.
Other than the General Social Survey,
there's not a lot of people who use that word.
In fact, it's probably only there.
If you go to Google Scholar and put that in,
you'll find there are many questions
in the General Social Survey that no one has ever
written a paper about, ever.
So why shouldn't you be the person that writes that paper?
And no one has ever done this.
And that's original.
If no one's ever done it, that's called original research.
And what rewards do we give out for original research?
Citations.
It's a job for life.
So yes.
So it's all, of course, when you find these 20 door
bills sitting on the sidewalk, you
don't want to make sure are they real.
But if they are, well, great.
Don't say, how can this be?
Go for it.
Anyway.
So there was something called the Survey of Americans
that Consumed the Economy that asked economists
and the general public identical questions about how
the economy works.
And I got this data set.
And then, right setting up tests for rationalizations
for the public's economic beliefs
to go and do some empirical tests on the kinds of stories
that got me interested in economics in the first place.
And a very natural way to do it is
you got some measure of the beliefs of the public.
And now, this is the endemic.
So here we actually have forecast and truth.
Now, unfortunately, for how the economy works,
it's hard to get an uncontroversial measure of truth.
So how can you do empirics?
Well, we can do this.
We can at least say, look, according
to rational expectations, laymen and experts
should have the same average belief.
Because all that should be occurring
when people learn more is that it should be compressing
beliefs around the truth without changing the meaning.
So we can go and test rational explanations
by going and getting people's beliefs
and regressing on a constant plus a coefficient times
a dummy variable for whether you're an economist, where
1 equals you are and 0 equals I don't know.
Now, these regressions leave open the possibility
that it's economists who are biased and the general public
that is correct.
So there is that problem.
At least we can say one group is wrong.
And then we can also entertain arguments either way.
So there is the argument that when people study a subject
for a long time, they generally know more about it.
It seems like a good starting place.
There are counter-arguments about why experts might be
biased, but that's false.
Yeah, you had a question?
What if both groups are wrong?
Yeah.
Well, so that's another possibility.
So we could just find them both.
So actually, even if they had the same view, it's possible.
It's possible that they're both wrong.
But this is still a test of rationalizations
in that it is possible we'll find one or the other is wrong.
But yeah, it could be that they're equal,
and then rationalization still fails.
But yeah, as soon as it's a case where
we can say the rationalization is wrong for a group,
but still you can't get the decisive proof that it's right.
But can we ask some questions, like not the 1, like 0, 1, 2,
but some actual questions like the inflation?
Yeah, we can say the same.
You ran the regression.
So you can do that, too.
There were very few questions like that in this data set.
So there are other data sets out there,
which I was going to say give very similar results.
What was nice about this is that they
asked exactly the same questions, both groups.
So you can't just say that they're
answering different questions.
Because there's a lot of surveys of the economic beliefs
of the general public.
And then there's totally different surveys
of the economic beliefs of economists.
And you might say the questions are similar.
But again, someone could say, well, maybe they
just gave different answers because the questions
were different.
I mean, it reflects the belief on the actual data.
Pardon?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, so that is another thing
that can be done.
Actually, in my book, I do talk about cases like that.
Ones where you have like the budget, budget numbers,
for example.
Writing it there, you will see that the public
has really crazy views about the budget and very predictable.
Essentially, the kinds of spending
that they think are out of control
are the kinds of spending they don't like.
So there's a general view that foreign aid spending,
which is a popular, is also enormous.
And if they didn't give numbers, then you might just say, well,
they're speaking politically.
Because you think it's bad, then any amount excessive
is too much.
But as a percentage of the budget, how much is it?
The numbers the public gives are absurdly large.
You're wondering, how do they even do this?
Seems to me this is what you call moral causation,
like who is bad?
And then from this, I will deduce
what their quantitative importance is.
You can't do that.
Watch me.
Watch me.
I'm going to do it.
All right.
So anyway, so you go and run regressions like this.
And as I said, this only tests for the public's
rationalizations of the economists themselves
that rationalize nations.
Then there's a lot of people who you may have heard of or even
met who just don't like economists.
Have you ever encountered someone
that found out you were an economist
and they looked at you with distaste or disdain?
Never mind George Mason economists.
Just regular economists.
You, yeah, disgusting, despicable.
You are to blame for all horrors in the world.
You may even remember when there's a transition period.
You start off as a victim as an undergraduate,
but eventually you become an economist.
And then they may feel sorry for you when you are an intro econ,
but they view you as part of the problem
if you advance to even major.
All right.
Anyway, if a person makes a specific claim
about why economists are biased, then again,
in principle, it's testable.
There are actually some standard stories
that get repeated a lot.
So one big one is just self-interest or what's
called self-serving bias.
Says that economists imagine whatever is good for them
is good for the world.
And it only starts off with some truisms,
like economists have above average income.
Totally true.
Economists have above average job security.
Also true.
But if that is your story, then there
is a standard econometric way that you
could go and deal with it, which is just
add in some control variables.
So add in some controls for interests.
So it could be a measure of income, measure of job
security.
You could put in age, put in race, put in gender,
all that stuff.
And then you could see, well, what
happens to the coefficients once you add those control
variables in.
And again, if self-serving bias is the whole story,
then beta should go to zero after adding those controls.
And then there's another story that's also common.
This is a story of ideology that says, well, of course,
economists think this stuff because there are a coven
of horrible right-wing ideologues.
And so really what's going on is just
that people don't share that ideology don't go in,
in general.
And again, that has clear implications,
which is we should be able to add in a measure of ideology
or different political measures and see
whether adding that in makes the beta go to zero.
Now, we're going to talk about this more in the,
oh yeah, we're going to talk about this more in a few weeks.
But just to give you the preview, so first of all,
so out of 37 economic beliefs that were in the data
in the data set, about 34, 35, you
see beta, beta significantly different from zero.
Generally, very different.
Often, it's night and day where the public clusters very
strongly the view that foreign aid is a huge drag
on the economy.
And economists structure a cluster very strongly
around the view that it's not, and it's not barely a problem
at all.
Or things like supply and demand.
So it was originally given in 1996.
The price of gas has just gone up.
And you're given the choice of basically,
so did it go against supply and demand or collusion?
The public very strongly goes with the collusion story.
And economists very strongly go with supply and demand stories.
I'd say that 90% of economists go with supply and demand.
And something like 70% of non-economists
go with collusion.
So night and day.
And then when you go and add these control variables in,
controlling for interest very modestly
reduces the size of the coefficients.
You can average something like 18% reduction
in the absolute value.
Or in other words, 82% of this large difference
persists, controlling for this stuff.
You look more closely, you'll often see that the sign is,
it has the wrong sign.
So for example, like higher income people
are less worried about the economic effects of welfare
than low income people.
That's odd if it's self-interest.
And then for the ideology, actually,
controlling for that generally makes the belief gaps
a little bit bigger.
Because here is the thing.
If you go to the AAA meetings and just do a straw poll
of the political views of the people that are there,
economics professors in general, what
is the actual normal political view of a academic economist?
Center left.
Yeah, center left.
Perfect.
Yeah, it's totally normal.
So if you know their biographies, the better.
Normally, you start off as full left as a teenager
and then learn some economics and then
you moderate the center left.
It's a very standard story for top academics.
So then it's like, well, then how
can they have these strange views?
Well, interesting.
So your center left economist still generally
will strongly believe the supply and demand story
for the price of gasoline.
And if people that would be ideologically
inclined to disbelieve it believe it anyway,
this means that the effect of economic training
winds up being measured as even bigger
than it looks on the surface.
So basically, if someone who's center left
has a view that would be considered ultra free market
for a right wing or ultra right wing non-economist,
then you get this result.
So questions about that?
So later, we'll go over a lot more details
and what are the papers that's assigned
so you can satisfy your curiosity,
depending upon whether what hooked you
into economics is the same thing or something like the same
thing at the end.
Questions, questions?
We're happy.
So yes, the clock has not been adjusted for daylight savings.
It probably never will be.
All right, so just keep that in mind.
Maybe if you look at it, you will feel even more energetic
than you already do.
Even more chas to be here, learning
about rational integrations.
All right, so questions about testing for rational integrations?
There's some moving on here.
OK, so moving on.
So search theory and expectational equilibrium.
So you might remember that when we did the Arrow-DeGros
general equilibrium model, we found out
that there is a way that you can put uncertainty
in the model.
And that's what we're going to do.
So we're going to do a little bit of a search theory.
We found out that there is a way that you can put uncertainty
into general equilibrium.
And that's by treating every possible state of affairs
as being a different thing, being a different good.
So good x in situation y is then good xy.
And we just plug it all into the model that way.
All right, but in order to actually get a result,
you need to assume complete contingent claims markets.
In other words, you need to assume
that there is the biggest stock market
or biggest financial market that has ever existed in the universe by many orders of
magnitude.
It's basically, it's not enough to have 10,000 different financial instruments selling.
There need to be every conceivable instrument selling under every conceivable condition.
That could be quadrillions of different financial assets.
Unless you've got that, then it still seems like you've got a problem.
Is there any other approach?
The answer is yes.
There is another approach, very general one, and it's called search theory.
Search theory has a few basic assumptions.
First, we call the assumption of efforts.
If you put more time and energy into searching for what you're looking for, you're more likely
to find it.
Simple result.
This could be for socks or gold or a job or a date.
Any of these things, just put in more effort and it raises your odds.
Then another assumption, which usually you wouldn't even bother putting into the model,
but you need it to understand the world is just a different searching ability.
So like a professional gold miner has more ability to find gold than I do.
You put in a small amount of effort and still it's way more likely to detect it than I am.
And then last, normally search theory assumes rational expectations.
So on average, people are correct in estimating their probability of finding things, their
ability to influence those probabilities, and so on.
Now the main conclusion that comes out of search theory is people keep searching until
the expected marginal benefits of search equals the expected marginal cost.
And you can add in a risk aversion adjustment if you want.
That's fine too.
All right.
Now there's lots of different applications to this.
In fact, there's almost, we really just talk about this endlessly, so this is my let's
say like doing R&D.
So I suppose you want to go and find a cure for cancer.
All right.
Well, first of all, you're more likely to find the cure if you put in some effort.
All right.
It's a good place to start.
Try.
You can wait around for the cure to fall into your laps, but it probably will not happen.
It's highly unlikely, so put in some effort.
All right.
Then secondly, there's a matter of ability.
Some people are a lot more likely to cure cancer than I am, such as professional cancer
researchers.
Their odds may be really small, and yet better than my odds.
At least they know what cancer is, for example.
Whereas I am, oh, it's like your cells, something, like your cells are dividing the wrong way,
those people smoking and rats and tar and stuff.
All right.
Yeah, I wouldn't say I have very little ability to go and explain it.
But then finally rational expectations.
So I've got, I think, rational expectations about my ability to cure cancer, which is
it's so close to zero, there's no point in me even looking into it.
Whereas someone else who knew better, more experienced in training, would think that
they would have a higher probability.
Well, of course, these are the people that I talk to who I understand the most say, there's
no one thing called cancer.
Well, there's one thing called cancer, but it refers to so many different things.
It's totally unhelpful to think about curing cancer in general.
You need to think about curing a bunch of very specific kinds of cancer in very specific
circumstances.
And already they sound more knowledgeable than me, and that by itself sounds like a
promising insight.
It's like, oh, well then, good.
All right.
What's the next step?
Yeah.
So, you know, search theory for doing R&D.
Of course, you can also apply it to some of the oldest activities of mankind, like hunting
and fishing and searching around for berries.
So, you know, like put in more effort, you're more likely to find a deer to hunt, or more
likely to find some fish in the stream, or more likely to find the berries.
And there's different levels of ability.
Like a trained hunter is more likely to go and find the animals than someone that is
just darting out.
Or if you have experience in a given area, more likely to be able to find the animals
that reside in that area than if you are a newcomer to that area and you aren't familiar
with local animals and their migration habits.
And again, the rational explanations.
So even if you're no good, you can still have a good idea that you're no good and then not
bother doing it.
Like you might say, look, I've never fished before, and that means I'm almost certainly
really bad at it, and so I'm not going to do that.
I'm going to focus on something that I'm actually good at.
Or it could be prospecting for gold.
Like you put more effort, more likely to find the gold.
Some people know a lot more about finding than others.
Again, rational explanations.
So some people know, you know, so you have an idea about how good you are, where it's
likely to happen.
The more information you have, the better idea you have about where it's actually likely
to work out.
I would just start, of course, with places where other people have found gold.
But then it's more complicated.
It's like, well, until too many people have been there and they've mined it all out, and
then you're really unlikely to find gold there at that point.
Right?
Or you do this for looking for investment opportunities.
So you think of this as a theory of entrepreneurship.
You know, step one, if you put more effort into trying to find profitable investments,
you're more likely to find them.
Step two, differences in ability.
Some people are really good at finding above-market opportunities.
Others are bad at it.
And then step three, rational expectations.
Like, who are you going to bet on coming up with another great business idea?
Like me or Mark Zuckerberg?
It seems reasonable to think that Mark is going to beat me for new business ideas.
So that would be a good, so of course that could be wrong, but it seems plausible.
All right?
And then something that will be, let's see, you've all probably experienced some point
that it's going to likely come back to you as searching for a job.
Right?
So in the real world, so like the supply and demand model labor markets, there is one puzzling
thing about it, which is, suppose I said I want you to buy a loaf of bread and bring
it back to the classroom within the next hour.
Does anyone here feel unable to accomplish that?
I mean, I think you could actually walk to the Giant across the street, buy the bread
and get back here in an hour and you're done.
Right around that.
Is there anywhere on campus you could buy a loaf of bread?
Maybe.
All right.
But anyway, so that's not that hard.
On the other hand, if I said I want you to find a tenure track academic job in the next
hour, most of you would have trouble with that.
Right?
It's just there's something different about bread versus jobs, even though supply and
demand gives us some insight, yet there's something different, which again seems like
it is closely related to imperfect information.
It's like, well, where are the, not only where are the jobs, but also is any one individual
actually able to do the job that the people doing the hiring are looking for?
Right?
So someone may say we're looking for a macroeconomist, but that doesn't mean, but you say, well,
great, I do macroeconomics, so I'm sold.
It's like, well, first we have to talk and learn more about you.
Like, well, you didn't say that, so what do we do anyway?
Are you the kind of macroeconomist we're looking for?
Couldn't you have said that in the ad?
Or couldn't there just be like a pay scale based upon exactly what kind of a macroeconomist
you are?
And then I just go, like, I'm going to type beta, sold.
But that's not how academic markets work.
They're unlike how almost any labor market works, actually.
So anyway, for finding a job, you know that you put more effort that improves your odds.
And you've probably been told about a bunch of different kinds of efforts.
And always worth learning more.
So general, so when I was first on the job market, they told us about the McDonald's
test.
It's a very good test.
Just says look at a job entry in the Joe, job openings for economists, then ask yourself,
would I rather work there than McDonald's?
And if the answer is yes, then you apply to that job.
It's very simple and cool.
All right, but then there are a bunch of other things you can do.
So like the quality of the paper, put more effort in there.
Or you could go and try to make contacts.
You know, like, so one of my standard pieces of advice to people is go to conferences where
people that you want to hire you go.
And then try to meet those people and impress them.
I mean, it sounds pretty obvious, like isn't everyone trying to do that?
Actually a lot of people are so oblivious they're not trying to do it.
So no reason for you not to.
You know, in general, so think about this, like how many times have you just gone through
a faculty roster and looked at all the people that might be able to help you and then tried
to meet all those people?
And how much of a time investment is that?
It doesn't seem like it's a lot.
And like what are the odds that it could work out?
It seems pretty good considering the time investments.
But anyway, so more effort improves your odds of things working out.
So although some people can just wait around and the phone will ring for them, but not
many.
You know, different levels of ability.
So some people find it much easier to get jobs than others.
There's some people whose phone just rings off the hook and they just have to choose.
Oh my God, this is so terrible.
My people won't give me any peace.
All right, or as Smithers once said on the episode of The Simpsons where there's the
James Bond villain who's hiring people, can't a man walk down the streets of America without
being offered a job?
So ability and then finally rational explanations.
So it's pretty, so it's probably none of you are going to be applying for jobs as doctors,
like medical doctors when you finish.
We have a couple students who have gotten jobs in medical schools.
Someone blew out that possibility.
Why would a medical school hire an economist?
Actually, health econ, health econ.
So yeah, pays really good.
So there's all kinds of things.
So it's not impossible.
So keep that in mind.
All right, anyway, searching for a job also applies here.
You can also use this for dating.
In fact, there was a student years ago who was in your position who said this lecture
changed his life because after the lecture he began asking out 100% of the women he's
attracted to.
And he told me it worked out wonderfully for him.
But anyway, so effort.
He took that effort assumption to heart.
If you just try, put in more effort, and he put in lots of kinds of efforts.
He also got his teeth whitened and practiced his smile.
I saw him at work and said, wow, that's a very sweet smile.
My hair, like getting his hair cut every week, all kinds of different margins that he clearly
was maxing out.
All right, he's close to maxing out.
So put in more effort.
He also had unusual ability.
There's a lot of people who could try as hard as he did and yet still, they're just not
working with very much.
They start off, you know, so someone who when he put in effort could look very good.
And then he had rational expectations.
Even he does not like cold email supermodels and say, hello, I'm an economist.
I like your blogs.
Perhaps you would care to send your private chat to pick me up.
I'm very entertaining, can I teach you economics?
I would gladly.
All right, so he said this changes life.
And another way you think about this is a theory of forgetting things, rational amnesia.
So we all forget things all the time.
And what would it be like if you didn't forget anything?
How much effort would it take to not forget anything that occurred today?
You could have one of those life cameras that you go around with all the time and just be archiving it.
Even that wouldn't really solve the problem because you'd have so much footage, where would you even know where to start for any particular thing?
All right, but anyway, so you can put in way less effort.
But if you really want to remember something, there's all kinds of things you do.
You can write it down.
If you've seen the movie Memento, you can tattoo the really important things on your body.
All right, so like remember Sandy Jenkins.
It's a great movie if you haven't seen it.
All right, there's that, and then there's differences in ability.
Of course, as you get older, your memory generally gets worse.
So I feel like I'm noticing this strongly already.
My mom has severe memory loss but is in complete denial and is therefore extremely annoying to everyone.
When I'm at that, I expect to get to that point at some point, but I want to prepare so that I'm not antagonizing others with my deficiencies.
When I'm 80 and someone says I forgot something, I'm just going to say, you must be right, clearly, especially to someone I can trust.
Like my older sons, I can trust that.
The younger one might tell a lie to take advantage of me, or just for fun.
So there's a difference in ability there.
I mean, like even issue by issue, there are some things I've never been worried about forgetting.
Like I wasn't worried that I would forget the due date for my wife's pregnancies.
I didn't bother writing it down.
I heard it, it was very important, and so it was easy to remember.
Whereas other things just go in one year and out the next.
And again, rationalizations.
One thing I will say to myself, I have a very good ability to predict what I'm going to forget.
So 90% of the things my wife says, I want you to remember this, and I'm like, well, either I can get up right now and write it down, or I'm going to forget it.
Those are the two possibilities.
There's no way I'm going to remember to go and call your mom for a feast day.
This is not unlikely, it's going to be astronomically unlikely.
So the least I know what my capabilities are, and that's just not the kind of thing that will stick with me.
One of my favorite heuristics is when someone asks me to order something from a restaurant, I always do their order first.
Because other people's orders just slip right through my head.
And usually I'm like, I can't imagine why anyone would want that food.
So if that is my reaction, well, I better say it immediately before a cub salad.
You want that.
So I'll order that first, because I'm not going to forget what I want.
But I'm very likely to forget what you want.
And then last one, so you also think about this as a story about why some people are funny and other people are not funny.
A standard part of comedy is if you tell a joke too many times, it stops being funny.
So something about comedy is an element of the unexpected.
But not all unexpected things are funny.
In fact, most unexpected things are just boring or annoying.
So you think about a comedian as someone who searches through the vast space of unexpected things to find the small minority of them that are entertaining.
And then they share those things.
And again, effort, ability, and if you're a good comedian, comedic rationalizations.
Although you could also have good rationalizations if you never tell jokes because you realize you're not funny.
That would be another way that you could be totally satisfying the assumptions.
Say, look, no one ever laughs at my jokes, no matter how hard I try, so I'm just not going to try to be funny.
And then people will at least be spared the embarrassment of me not being funny.
Alright, so of course there are many other applications. Yes?
So the searching here doesn't mean searching information?
It's not about searching information?
Well, in a way you could say that certain information is one thing you search for.
Or you could just say I'm searching for information about where the gold is.
Or I'm searching for gold.
Virtually the same thing.
In terms of business, you might say I don't actually find the gold, I search for information about the gold, and then I sell it to the people that physically go there.
So that's a more meaningful way where you can distinguish between searching for the information versus searching for the thing.
I have an algorithm that gives useful predictions about where gold is likely to be found.
I don't personally ever go there, I just sell the information to people who are professional gold finders.
Now, a nice application of search theory is what if there's some people with a very high value of time and so they don't do much searching?
Well, then you'd expect that sellers will actually search for consumers.
So for example, have you ever been a tourist in a place like Istanbul, where for the tourists generally a much higher value of time than the natives for two reasons.
One is they're richer than the natives, but also the tourists may only have 10 hours in Istanbul, whereas the people who live there have their whole lives there.
So someone who's a resident, one more hour of Istanbul is worth two or three dollars to them.
But for the tourists on the other hand, an hour in Istanbul can be worth $200.
You wouldn't even have bothered to get there unless you thought the hours spent there were going to be really good.
Now this happens when some people have a much higher cost of search than others, it makes sense to have specialization.
Where people who are there go and search for you, and then they save you the time.
So in a place like Istanbul, if you look like a tourist, people actually come right up to you on the street and offer to sell you things.
And the result of this is that you have to spend very little time finding souvenirs in Istanbul.
So when the souvenirs just come to you, you walk around and someone will come with a trench coat and open it up.
And it's a perfect fully clothed person with a whole lot of souvenirs.
And I actually found that if they don't have the souvenir you're looking for, they'll just say, wait right here, and they'll run.
And they'll come back and they'll have exactly the souvenir you're looking for.
Now you generally are paying enormous prices compared to what you would pay if you were to go and actually bother to go to a souvenir shop in Hagel.
But this is still an enormous bargain relative to your value of time.
So you might go and spend $10 for a book that actually as a marginal cost only a dollar if you know where to buy the book.
However, as a tourist it might take you 30 minutes to go and find that book.
So then you would be saving $9 by burning up say $100 worth of time.
So this might be your only time you're ever going to be in Istanbul.
And search theory also gives us a very nice story about what it means to be overpaid or underpaid.
Or what it means for there to be a bargain or a rip off.
Because in supply and demand, when someone says something is a bargain or a rip off, a rip off is basically just complaining and whining.
There's no economic meaning to getting a bargain or a rip off if there's a single price that everyone in the market pays.
But with search theory there is a good story.
So basically if someone is overpaid this means that they've found, they've sought out an unusually good deal.
Or again if they're being underpaid you could say they've actually settled for an unusually poor deal.
But again there are reasons for trying both sides of it.
Like you might want to really hold out for a long time to search a lot if the value of your time is low.
In that case you spend a lot of time searching and then when you finally do get an offer it's probably going to be a really good offer.
On the other hand you might be someone who's really new and just feel like look I just don't have time for this.
And then you might just go and settle and just take the very first offer you get even though it's a pretty crummy offer.
Right now in the actual world of employment there's two interesting sides of it.
So when you're looking for your first job normally this is when people tell you to hit the pavement.
This is where you have to endure the humiliating ordeal of sending out every application you can and then getting tons of rejections.
And then even out of the offers of the interviews you get you're rejected from almost all of those.
And it's like a desperate demoralizing humiliating affair.
At least that was my feeling about it all.
And a lot of people are in the same boat.
And when my wife was trying to get her first job as a lawyer my reaction was wow clearly law students are grossly overpaid.
And I'm like well why?
Well if they weren't so overpaid they would have been in a lot of trouble.
pay, then it would be easy to get one of these jobs.
It looks like they've raised wages up to the point
where you have to search really hard to get even a crummy job
as a law student.
So of course, generally, when someone is feeling frustrated
by the search, it doesn't really help them,
just to point out that they're quite a great deal.
They will be getting, if it ever pans out, like, great deal.
It's just like a crummy entry level job.
Well, if it's so crummy, then why
are you so desperate to get one?
It's an interesting question.
But anyway, here's the good news.
Once you get one of these jobs and have
like a year of experience, it is totally normal for your phone
to start ringing with people that
are called headhunters who want to hire you away
from your existing job.
Now, it's the other side.
It's like, well, why are they calling you?
They wouldn't call you if they were
going to pay you exactly your marginal productivity.
Otherwise, where's the headhunters fee come from?
The reason that they are calling you
is that they're planning on paying you
less than your productivity.
Well, then why would you accept it?
Because it's more than what you're getting.
Well, why are you still there?
Because it's a pain.
Because once you have a job, then it's kind of a pain
to go and find these opportunities.
So again, search theory can explain all this.
Yes?
So if we use search theory to kind of explain
why there would be a bias and perfectly rational expectations
on it's easy to get low quality info on free trade
or whatever, and so the general public
doesn't invest a lot of effort in getting good info on that,
and so this is why they have a bias.
Or is rational expectation just kind of embedded in search?
Well, again, it's moderately embedded.
It's a standard assumption, although you
can totally change it.
That's fine.
Rationalization, so search theory by itself
doesn't explain why there wouldn't be rationalization.
It's just because if people know that they're
getting crummy information, they should just be very agnostic.
And actually, the standard thing for very poorly informed
people on political questions is to be
ultra-dogmatic, like my dad.
So how many economics textbooks has my dad ever read?
None.
And yet, how confident are his views
on all economic questions?
Astronomical.
So my dad has long believed that all of America's
economic troubles could be solved with two civil policy
changes.
One is a naval blockade of Japan.
Or it actually has been expanded to all of Asia.
Like China is one of the really sucks in now.
But just the whole continent, nothing good
comes out of it for my dad.
And then the other policy of Berlin Wall, the Mexican border.
And we just do these things, and everything will be great,
like they were in the 50s.
And if you go and you'll tell my dad,
like try giving my dad any other information,
he'll just say, well, I didn't agree with that.
So that's how would you acquire information except by reading
things you didn't already agree with?
Well, so this is not the way he thinks about these issues.
So anyway, so main conclusion.
So if the economics of perfect information
is not giving you a sensible answer,
then you can try search theory.
And it will explain a great deal of the other things
that are going on in the world.
All right, now there are some people,
and especially Austrian economists,
who just don't like search theory.
So sometimes it's really radical dislike,
where they just say, wrong.
Everything about it's wrong.
And sometimes it's more moderate, where it's like,
look, there's something else higher than search theory.
Search theory may be fine for your mundane affairs
of fishing or whatever, but it does not
apply to something important like entrepreneurship.
Something like that.
So what is the problem?
So I've written papers on this, talked a lot about it.
The complaint does seem to be that search theory is not
taking into account the unknown unknowns,
or what Austrians will sometimes call radical uncertainty
or radical ignorance.
And I guess I will say that's true,
but then is it true that there is such a thing called?
Does radical ignorance actually describe anything,
or is it just a philosophical concept that some people like?
But what would it mean?
So yeah, I think I did tell you the story about Israel
Kirzner's effort to go and clarify the distinction.
And at the end of it, I was even more
confused than at the beginning.
So obviously, I'm not the ideal person
to convince you that search theory is inadequate
on these grounds.
But just to alert you that there are objections to it.
My favorite objection to this comes from Jeff Riedman, who,
so what he says is, look, it is impossible for anyone
to rationally decide to be ignorant about anything.
And why?
And he says, look, before you can
decide something is not worth knowing,
you must first know it.
And when my reply to this is, so does this
mean you can never hang up on a telemarketer?
Because until you hear his whole pitch,
you can't have a reasonable opinion
about whether it's going to be worthwhile to listen to him?
Or you can never delete a spam email based
upon it being a bunch of all capital letters and rambling
on.
You have to read the whole thing.
You have to send him the money in order to find out.
And until then, you cannot have a reasonable opinion
about whether this is likely to work out.
And he had no reply to that, but he
was very upset with the counter-examples.
Again, this is my version of it.
I genuinely puzzled as what his version of the disagreement
would be.
But I said, look, of course, yes, you totally
can be reasonably ignorant of things
and decide that something is not worth further investigation.
Like we do it all the time.
You do it all the time, chef, so how can you say that?
But he was like, so if I were only a philosopher,
I would see the appeal of this.
Until you have studied it, how do you truly
know it is not worthwhile?
Well, I just take a guess.
And every now and then, I audit and just double-check
that my guesses are accurate.
But I just think it would be very unlikely that my view
that a study in ancient Assyrian history
will not make me rich was wrong.
Seems like it's really obvious that won't make me rich.
And it's possible.
So I am going to be having a conversation slash debate
with Nassim Taleb next month.
And I kind of think he's going to say something like this,
but I'm pretty confused as to what he's going to say.
But I was also advised not to do anything
that would antagonize him then, or he might cancel.
So just don't repeat that, because that
might antagonize him.
So just don't.
So the event will likely to very likely
recede if I don't say anything further.
And then I want to find out what's
going to happen at the time.
So I don't know.
It's going to be really weird.
But anyway, he's got a lot of great publicity.
So we're doing this.
I don't know where that event is going to be held yet.
So I believe it's just going to be at the law school
in Arlington, just like most of the other.
So it's going to be a doubleheader.
So there's going to be a conversation with Tyler
first, and then I'm going to talk slash debate with him.
I don't know.
And again, I don't want to actually ask him
what he wants to do.
So I just want to just look.
We've agreed that we will both be there.
And now I'm just going to show up.
And then I'm going to find out what happens.
All I had to do to get him to travel here
is he said he'd like to read his book, including
the anti-fragile, including the appendix.
So he's very, that's like, you must read the book,
including the appendix.
Fine.
Fine.
That's good.
So that's what's happening.
All right.
So now why don't we go and see.
So why don't we go take our 10-minute break now.
And again, at this point, I will not
be taking questions about the exam.
So please don't ask at this point.
And let's see.
And I've got the exams for Jim.
All right, so any questions about anything
we've talked about today?
Everyone full of energy and enthusiasm
for PhD level microeconomics?
The heart and the center of your life, intellectually,
emotionally, spiritually, on all levels?
All right, good.
Now we'll come to one of the most spiritual parts, which
is measures of risk aversion.
So all I can tell you is I had to once sit through a 90-minute
class where it was basically like a silent movie where
the professor just went and silently copied down
his proof that five different measures of risk aversion
were equivalent.
And it was one of the worst 90 minutes of my life.
All right, so anyway, I'm not going to do that to you.
I'm just going to give you the highlights.
All right.
Anyway, so measures of risk aversion.
So remember we talked about expected value maximization
versus expected utility theory.
So we've got expected value maximization
versus expected utility theory.
And the difference between them comes down to taste for risk.
And now let us think about this a bit more deeply.
Suppose that you're choosing between either x dollars,
probability one, or you have x over q dollars
with p is equal to q.
So basically, you could either have, say, $10 of certainty,
or you could have $100 with a 10% chance.
Something like that.
Now, just as a matter of language,
if you're indifferent between these two things,
if you're indifferent between these two things,
then you are risk neutral.
If you're indifferent between these, you are risk neutral.
If you prefer the sure thing to the gamble
of the same expected value, you are, by definition,
risk averse.
If you prefer the gamble to the sure thing,
then you are, by definition, risk preferring.
Sometimes people will say things like, well, I went and,
this is going to be a really bad example, or rather
a good example of a bad thought.
It's like, I wear a seat belt because I'm risk averse.
It's like, well, maybe you wear a seat belt just
because you want to have some extra safety at a low cost.
It doesn't mean that you have to be risk averse to do that.
Risk aversion would not just be that you take any measure
to avoid risk, but rather that you
are willing to go and give up some,
to reduce the expected value in order to reduce the variance.
You'd rather settle for a somewhat lower mean
in order to reduce the variance.
And that's what is risk averse.
So it is not true that everyone is automatically risk averse.
It's actually a very specific claim.
Now, the way that it only gets graphed is like this.
So you start off with the utility function.
So it could be like this one.
So utility is equal to the square root of wealth.
And remember, what's the graph of the square root function
here?
This is u, this is w, like that.
All right.
Now, if you're risk averse, what you will see
is that you've got a concave utility wealth function.
And if you've forgotten what that means, what it means
is that the curve will always be above a straight line drawn
between any of the two points.
Curve is always above a straight line
drawn between any two points.
What this intuitively means, suppose this is outcome x,
this is outcome y.
What this is saying is that if you
could get the average payoff with certainty,
your utility is there.
And you prefer that to having this probability of this
and that probability of that one.
So basically, if you were somewhere along that line,
what is that?
That's like a third of the way along.
So you'd rather have 1 third x plus 2 thirds y with certainty
than have a 1 third chance x of x and a 2 third chance of y.
And that is the part of being risk averse.
And on the other hand, of course,
if your utility function like this
would be the other way around, then you would be convex.
And then the line would be above the utility function,
indicating that you would rather have the gamble.
You would rather have the gamble.
And of course, if your utility function was a straight line,
then if you draw a line between any two points
in a straight line, you stay on the line,
indicating that you are indifferent.
Indicating that you're indifferent.
Now, a related concept is the certainty equivalence.
So if you're indifferent between a gamble and x star of certainty,
then x star is, by definition, the certainty equivalent
to that gamble.
So think about any gamble and then say,
what is the amount of money you could
have with certainty that would make you indifferent
between that amount and the gamble?
And that is the certainty equivalence element.
And if you think about the risk premium,
the risk premium is just the difference
between the expected value and the certainty equivalence.
So basically, the expected value is
above the certainty equivalent, which it normally will be.
Then there's a positive risk premium.
You're willing to pay something to get rid of the risk.
On the other hand, so if you really just love gambling,
you couldn't bear to be, we couldn't
bear a world of certainty.
You were suffering in that world.
Then you would actually have a negative risk premium.
You say, hey, I'll pay something.
I'll worsen the mean if I can just
get some excitement in my life, just get some variance into it.
All right, now there's a bunch of different ways
you can quantify risk aversion.
I think there's five different ways.
There's only one that economists really ever use in practice.
It looks like this.
Use these frequently.
So I'm just going to teach you that one.
If you're curious, you can go and read about the other ones.
I'd be surprised if anyone were, but great if you want to be.
And this is called the coefficient
of absolute risk aversion.
That's the coefficient of absolute risk aversion.
That's the coefficient of absolute risk aversion.
And it is equal to the negative of the second derivative
of the expected value function or expected utility function
over the first derivative.
And then the higher this coefficient is,
the more risk averse you are.
The higher, the more, a bigger positive number
means more risk aversion.
Zero means risk neutrality.
And a negative number means that you're actually a risk averting.
So if we had that u is equal to the square root of wealth,
then the first derivative of that
is going to be equal to 1 half w raised to the minus 1 half.
Remember, when you're over, you can go to the opposite.
The double prime could be equal to minus 1 quarter
w raised to the minus 3 halves.
And then to get the coefficient of absolute risk aversion,
we just take minus that over that.
And then we find out it's going to be equal to 0.5 w raised
to the negative 1.
In other words, 0.5 over w.
And is that thing going to be positive for all positive values
of wealth?
So you're always going to have a positive value of wealth.
Otherwise, it's undefined, right?
So utility is equal to the square root of w.
It's not defined for a negative 1.
Yes?
And you said earlier, bigger positive number
means greater risk aversion.
Exactly.
That's correct.
So yes, the more positive.
So a million means you have a coefficient of absolute risk
aversion.
A million is bigger.
That means more risk aversion than 1,000.
So what you see here is that with this utility function,
for all levels of wealth, you are risk averse.
For all levels of wealth, you are risk averse.
Although you can also see that as w
goes up, what happens to your coefficient of absolute risk
aversion?
Goes down.
You become less and less risk averse.
And as w goes to infinity, then your risk aversion goes to what?
0.
0.
Risk aversion goes to 0.
Now, if we just had utility equals w,
then we would see that the first derivative would be equal to 1
and the second derivative equal to 0.
And then our coefficient of absolute risk aversion
would be negative.
That equals negative 0 over 1 equals 0.
So what we see here is that with any linear utility function,
you're going to have a coefficient of absolute risk
aversion, which of 0.
So any time that your utility is just
a linear function of your wealth,
then you are automatically risk neutral.
And then as you might guess, is so remember that linear function
means that the coefficient or that it's
w raised to the power of 1.
And what you might guess, which you can confirm for yourself,
is that if the coefficient there is less than 1,
then you're going to be risk averse.
On the other hand, if the coefficient's greater than 1,
then you will be risk averse.
So if you were to do w squared, that
would be a risk-preferring utility function.
But so would u is equal to w raised to the 1.1.
That would also be a risk-preferring utility
function.
And this here captures the intuition
that normally as wealth goes up, risk aversion goes down.
And the idea that a billionaire is
more willing to gamble a dollar than someone
on the edge of starvation, which makes some sense.
So everyone happy with this?
This is all we ever have to do with this.
And I think this is all you'll ever have to know.
So as long as you just know coefficient
of absolute risk aversion, of 0 means that you are risk neutral.
Positive means that you're risk averse.
And negative means that you're risk preferring.
Then you've got the basics down.
And again, if you remember that formula,
then you could even go and calculate
what the coefficient of absolute risk aversion
is for any given utility function.
And hopefully, you'll be able to do that.
And you'll be able to calculate the utility function
at the level of wealth.
And you can remember that.
All right, so questions about that?
Happy?
Thank you.
All right.
Now, one application of expected utility theory
is solving textbook problems about insurance.
So let me show you a textbook problem about insurance.
All right.
So nice, simple problem.
So start with someone with an expected utility function
of, say, w raised to the 0.8.
So as I say, is this going to be risk averse, risk neutral,
or risk preferring person?
Risk averse, right?
Because the coefficient on w is less than 1.
So it's going to be risk averse.
OK.
So suppose he wants to insure his income.
And then, since it's a homework problem,
we'll set it up very simply.
Suppose that his income is going to be 1,000,
with probability equals 0.6.
And 0, the probability equals 0.4.
So that's if he doesn't buy insurance.
But then, you can also go and buy an income insurance policy.
And let's see.
So let's see.
The company offers i dollars worth of insurance.
And it pays off in this situation.
So basically, if that happens, then the insurance company
pays.
And it offers it at a price of 0.4 xi.
And it pays off in this situation.
All right, so what this means is if x is 1,
then it is selling you insurance at the actuarially fair rate.
So that means that there's a 40% chance that I have to pay.
So I'm going to have to pay 40% of the amount of dollars
that I will get in this event.
Now, according to normal common sense morality,
is it fair to expect companies to sell
your insurance at the actuarially fair rate?
No.
Is actuarially fair insurance fair?
No.
No, well, what's unfair about it?
It's expecting the insurance company
to give you things for free.
Yeah, it's expecting the insurance company
to work through your slaves, to do everything for free.
So you would never expect them to actually do that.
But it's still a useful starting point
just to see what that would mean.
And then you can go and vary that markup.
So anyway, so you'd expect that x would always
be greater than 1 in the real world
because they need to have some way of covering their overhead.
There's overhead for insurance companies,
different employees, people.
They need someone to develop a phone tree that
disconnects you after taking different steps.
So that doesn't happen on its own.
It takes work.
So that's where it goes.
Now, this person here that has an expected utility
problem to solve, he's going to maximize with respect
to i.
So he's trying to decide how many dollars of insurance
to purchase.
And he's going to be maximizing this expected utility function.
So 60% chance of $1,000 minus the premium.
Now, the charming thing about insurance premiums,
suppose that everything works out great.
Do you still have to pay your insurance premium for that year?
Sure.
So the whole idea of the premium is that whether or not
you actually collect, you still pay the premium.
So you're going to subtract out the premium, which
will be 0.4x times i.
Then, the utility of that outcome
will be raised to the 0.8 power because that's
what your utility wealth function looks like.
And then there's a 40% chance of the other thing happening.
The other thing happening, you get $0 of market income,
and you still pay the policy.
So you also have to pay the premium even in bad years.
Good years, bad years, you always
write the check for the premium.
But the good news is in the bad state of affairs,
the insurance company gives you i dollars.
So you bought i dollars at a cost of 0.4 times x times i,
where x is whatever the market for overhead.
And then we need to raise that to the 0.8 power.
So this is a bit messy, but nothing
that you haven't encountered before.
So if we just simplify it, and then we differentiate it,
and then we set it all equal to 0,
then we will get the mess at the top of the next page.
So you get 0.6 times 0.8 times negative 0.4x times
that thing inside raised to the negative 0.2 power.
Everyone remember the following negative 0.2 powers.
And then plus 0.4 times 0.8 times 1 minus 0.4x times
all that mess also raised to that.
You also raised to the negative 0.2 power.
That equals 0.
Now, if you're getting very nervous,
the good news is if you've got something
raised to a weird power plus another thing raised
to a weird power all equal to 0, you can generally
go and separate it out and then rearrange terms.
And then you just get one expression
raised to that weird negative 0.2 power.
So if you do, you would see that in line E.
And then all you have to do is take the negative 0.2
root of both sides.
Remember when's the last time you took the negative 0.2
root of something?
Like I said, it's probably been a while.
But it can be done.
You're familiar.
You remember how these things are all possible.
You can take any kind of odd root that you want.
It's all doable.
And then if we go and define theta
as being that mess there, all raised to the negative 0.5
power, we get the answer.
So we get I star, which is the optimal amount of dollars
insurance to buy, will be equal to 1,000 all over theta times
1 minus 0.4x plus 0.4x.
All right.
Now, at this point, this probably still
seems like it isn't really telling you anything
interesting.
And especially this hour a day, you
may be baffled by the math or what in the world
is going on here.
But here is something interesting,
which is that if the insurance really is actually fair,
so x equals 1, then that theta thing
simplifies down very nicely.
So in fact, theta then becomes.
So if x is 1, then theta is equal to 1.
And if theta is 1, then look at how nicely everything
simplifies.
Because then we've got 1.
So we have 1.
So that's 1.
Then this can be 1 minus 0.4x plus 0.4x.
The 0.4x is canceled.
That leaves 1 in the denominator.
And then I star is going to just be equal to 1,000.
So this says that if there's actuarially fair insurance,
then a risk averse person will fully insure.
They will buy $1,000 worth of insurance at a cost of $400.
And then they will have $600 regardless
of the state of the world.
And that's exactly what you'd expect a risk averse person
to do if there's actually a fair insurance around.
Because basically, what is actually a fair insurance?
It is an opportunity to get the average income
at every possible state of the world.
And if you're risk averse, isn't that exactly what you would want?
Of course.
So that makes sense.
And then as you increase the markup, as you might guess,
this means that you'll buy less than that insurance.
So even though you're risk averse,
as the price of insurance goes up,
you are willing to tolerate more and more risk.
Make sense?
And then if x were to get really high,
even risk averse people wouldn't want to buy any insurance.
Wouldn't want to buy insurance at all.
And instead, they would go and sell insurance to others.
Who would risk averse people sell insurance to?
People who are?
More risk averse?
Well, even more risk averse.
Yes, so the people that have w raised to the 0.8 utility
function might sell insurance to the people with a w raised
to the 0.7 utility function.
Or w raised to the 0.1.
So it is possible, then, you could have insurance markets
in a world where everyone's risk averse.
Just like in a world where everyone
hates the smell of garbage, there's
still going to be some garbage men.
And who will the garbage men generally
be in the world when everyone hates the smell of garbage?
People who hate it the least.
Yeah, people who hate it the least.
So it's a nice intuitive result.
Now, in an economist model, the economy overall,
it's very common to say, well, let's
assume that consumers are risk averse
but firms are risk neutral.
Although, when people actually go
try to study what firms do, it seems
that firms also act as if they are risk averse.
Possibly because firms are run by humans.
Interesting possibility.
Although, you may have also heard there are cases where
firms seem to be risk averse, risk aferring,
or act as if they are risk aferring.
Like, have you ever heard of zombie whatevers,
like zombie SNLs?
But again, normally, like I was saying,
have you ever heard this expression, zombie SNLs?
Basically, if you've got a firm where you're already
like you're allowed to keep doing business
even though you have negative net worth.
So this is a situation where if you just accept the average,
then you lose money for sure.
Whereas, if you do a gamble, then either you
will lose even more money, but there's limited liability,
so no harm done.
Or you will get lucky and then things will work out for you
and then you will be back in the clear.
So, anybody else?
All right, so questions.
Questions about insurance?
Happy with insurance?
Anyone want to start solving problems like this?
If you're itching, as soon as class lights out,
you will be solving insurance problems.
That's the basic idea.
Now, last topic for symmetric and perfect information.
So there are a lot of textbooks that
give a list of conditions under which markets fail.
And a standard condition of market failure
that you will see in many textbooks to this day
is imperfect information.
Information is imperfect and therefore markets fail.
This turns out to be just a gross overstatement.
It's just wrong.
Because it's totally possible to combine market efficiency
with symmetric and perfect information.
And actually, as we're going to see,
even when it's asymmetric, it might work out.
But when it's symmetric and perfect information,
and again, remember, that's when everyone is equally in the dark.
There's no one who knows better than anybody else.
And then it's very easy to show cases
where, even though people have imperfect information,
still everyone is acting optimally
and there is no failure of any kind.
So let's just go through some examples.
So suppose I don't know how much I'm
going to enjoy my consumption bundle.
So I might have my utility function
is going to be x to the a times y to the 1 minus a plus
epsilon.
Epsilon is normally distributed with mean 0.
And what's my optimal decision?
My optimal decision is exactly the same
as if the epsilon were 0 all the time.
So basically, what's happening here is you optimize.
And then the universe just gives you either better or worse
utility regardless of what you did.
So in that case, there's no reason
to think that there's any change.
And there is no change in front of the outcome.
So if the outcome is optimal before,
then despite the imperfect information, remains optimal.
Or it could be that suppose you don't know your relative taste
for x and y.
So this one's more fun.
So suppose that you're maximizing, again,
so you've got utility of x and y.
And it's going to be given by x raised to the a,
y raised to the 1 minus a.
But then, what is a?
Well, a could actually be unknown.
So it could be that a equals 0.5 with a probability of 0.6.
Or a could equal 0.9 with a probability of 0.4.
And you're dealing with that.
And again, then what's the optimal thing to do?
The optimal thing to do is say, well, 60% chance
we're in this world, 40% chance we're in that world.
And I'll just go and do expect utility.
And the fact that I am deeply confused about what I like
doesn't lead to a suboptimal outcome.
It leads to the optimal outcome.
Now, this is only true if it's a scenario where, in this case,
this needs to be symmetric.
So now suppose that this is what I thought,
but then the government knew, no, no, no.
This is what your preference is for sure.
I just know.
You're an idiot.
I know.
In that case, then the government
might be able to help you because it's not symmetric
anymore.
But if no one knows any more than you do,
then there's no way of actually proving upon this outcome.
And if you go to Robin Hanson, he'll even say,
no, he wouldn't tell you, sir.
There are theorems saying that as long as the information is
truly symmetric, and again, that includes symmetric not just
for market actors, but for all creatures.
It's got to be symmetric for all creatures,
including the government.
But as long as it is symmetric, then there
is no reason to think that the market outcome is
any worse than normal.
So it's just not true that a perfect information
in general causes market failure.
So the more general, so intuitively, here's
the thing is, just because you're ignorant
doesn't mean you're stupid.
So if you're in this situation, you could either say, my god,
I don't know what my own utility function is.
What am I to do?
What was me?
I'll just act randomly.
But that would not be what a sensible person would
do based with this.
The sensible thing is just to go and plug the numbers
into expected utility theory and do that.
That's a sensible thing.
So anyway, so just because you're ignorant
doesn't mean that you are stupid.
So if you don't know exactly what's going on,
you could just fall back on more general purpose strategies.
Fall back on more general purpose strategies
to take account of all the possible outcomes.
Say, well, let's see.
So this job seems more fun, but it's higher risk.
So let me weigh the pros and cons.
And again, if there's someone that actually
knows better than you, then of course there is, well,
how about just listen to them?
But on the other hand, if nobody knows any better than you do,
then whatever your best guess is is, as far as anyone knows,
the best guess about what anyone should do.
What you should do.
And that is the solution.
So we say, well, look, mountain climbing.
Mountain climbing is a market failure
because people don't know if they're
going to make it to the top.
Well, as long as they've got probabilities right,
who knows better about the probabilities of mountain
climbers?
If anyone of them, they would seem like they know the best.
And they know their own limitations
better than anyone else.
So why wouldn't they just go and optimize his bank utility,
taking into account all the possibilities of top,
or fail, or get a little frostbite, or lose fingers,
or follow your death, or PTSD, all
these different possibilities.
So if you've seen mountain climbing movies,
you know about all the horrible things that happen to them.
Just rewatch this great one about 1936
ascent of the north face of the Eiger in Switzerland,
where they all died, just to give it away.
Yes, but before that, they lived a lifetime.
Yeah.
Blizzard struck in the middle of July
when they were halfway up the mountain.
They already had a bunch of other problems.
All right, so questions about this?
So in general, any time that you have a plan,
so there's all these possible outcomes.
This is my best response in the first outcome.
This is my best response in the second outcome,
best response in the third outcome.
I worked this all out.
And that is precisely the kind of situation
where if there is symmetric or perfect information,
then there's no reason to think that individual decision
making is suboptimal or that there is a moment of failure.
Wouldn't that apply to heroin?
Yes, of course.
So if, in fact, people use heroin,
well, there's 80% chance that I use it and enjoy it,
and there's no problem.
And then there's a chance that I get addicted moderately,
a chance that I get addicted really badly,
chance that it kills me, and I get that it completely kills me.
And I weigh all these probabilities.
And if you think that it's an idiot to do it,
you have to know how great it is if it really works out for you.
And in principle, that can all be plugged into this model.
You think that model is definitely wrong,
then we can talk about it in the week on asymmetric information,
possibly.
Or maybe we need to go all the way to the rationality
chapter in this second.
Just tell me what you're doing.
So questions, other questions about symmetric and perfect
information?
Everyone happy?
Everyone full of energy?
Right, yes.
In the back, everyone in the back full of energy.
In the middle, in the front.
Lots of energy to continue our march
through all of basic, easy microeconomics.
Now, asymmetric information.
So my guess is that everyone here
has at some point had a lecture on this.
Now we will do our own bird notes.
So asymmetric information.
So in the real world, everyone is not equal in the dark.
Sometimes some people have more information than other people.
Seems like a pretty obvious observation.
So when this occurs, economists call it asymmetric information
because it is not symmetric.
And if information, in addition to being perfect,
is also asymmetric, then you may get inefficient outcomes.
Even there, though, it's only a may.
And as we'll see, it depends upon a lot of other factors.
So let's start with the simple classic case of moral hazard.
So if you're risk averse, then it's
efficient to be able to get insurance.
But normally, whoever is insured knows more about the risk
that he is taking than the insurer.
So if you have auto insurance, you
know a lot more about the risk that you took just today
than your auto insurance company will.
You know about when you ford the car when you were,
say, a half of a second away from the light,
or from getting through the lights.
You know when you took a turn, when cars were coming
and it was not totally, totally clear that they would not
run into you.
You may have gone and done extra trips
that you would have not done if you weren't insured.
You might just do a normal, regular, boring trip.
But if you were not insured, you might say,
the slight risk of an accident is enough
to tip the scales and get us going.
Think about any time you were ever just about indifferent
to taking a trip, did you ever say,
well, there's also a slight chance of an accident,
so that tips the scales and I won't go.
If that kind of thinking, you have done that thinking,
you might not have because you feel insured.
Of course, insurance does not protect you from everything.
So standard examples would be like auto insurance.
You know more about the risk that you
are taking as a driver than the auto insurance company does.
This also works for employment contracts
because you know more about the effort
that you are putting into your job than your employer does.
You have opportunities to do good things for your employers
where your employer is not watching,
and you might diligently go and serve your employer's best
interest because that was the deal.
Or you might say, I'm tired.
I'm bored.
I'm going to do what I feel like doing
and what my employer doesn't know won't hurt him.
Or to quote Nelson Munson from The Simpsons,
shoplifting is a victimless crime,
like punching someone in the dark.
It's funnier if you say it in a Nelson voice.
Shoplifting is a victimless crime,
like punching someone in the dark.
So anyway, now part of the problem here
is that if you're risk averse, then you're
going to want constant pay.
But on the other hand, if there were more pay performance,
you would probably apply more effort.
So you could have an employment contract based solely
upon how much value you add.
But then there's the problem of the value
that I add depends upon a lot of factors.
It depends upon how much business the firm has
and whether the boss happens to go and give me
a good assignment.
I could go and just accidentally drop the product.
So you could imagine a job, for example, at a fast food place
where any time you mess up an order,
you're going to have to subtract that from your wage.
That could be a great deal if what?
When would you want to take the deal of
all botched orders extracted from your wage?
High hourly wage.
Yeah, if you had a nice high hourly wage.
So you say, here's your hourly wage,
$25 an hour at McDonald's,
minus the full cost of every order you mess up.
And then there'd probably be a,
especially when you're learning,
you'd probably be owing McDonald's money.
You'd probably mess up many orders,
initially at McDonald's and then,
so that would be the problem.
Okay. All right.
So anyway, so if you had performance-based pay,
you could go and get people to,
it would give people better incentives to go and
actually produce more and more carefully.
But at the same time, it does mean that there,
that you are putting risk upon
a risk averse agent and that is a problem.
All right. All right.
So this means, so once you,
once you ensure the risk averse agent,
once you go and tell the worker,
hey, if you make a mistake, you mess up an order,
then you still get the same wage as
if you got all the orders right.
This changes the incentives for that worker to be
careful and will generally lead to less care.
All right. And this means in the real world,
you've got a choice between two evils.
The real world of insurance.
So you have one evil of less than full insurance.
That's one. Right.
Or you can have inefficient risk taking.
And of course, in the real world, you generally have both.
You settle for some mix of not fully insured,
but also some bad incentives.
Right. And a classic example here would be insurance deductibles.
So with an insurance deductible,
there's a certain amount of damage that you're responsible for.
So the deductible might be $1,000.
This means that if you have an accident that costs $1,000 or less,
you have to file the full,
you have to pay the full cost of that.
If the accident costs more than $1,000,
the insurance company will give you the cost minus $1,000.
All right. So this system does lead to two problems.
So one is you got less than full insurance.
There are people who are risk averse,
but still they might lose $1,000,
possibly over a simple mistake,
possibly an unavoidable mistake.
But on the other hand, if you didn't have this deductible,
then this means that people would be,
they might be very inclined at least to go and take big risks.
Because if every single dollar that you have,
any accident you may got,
were to be reimbursed by the insurance company,
well then why not go and take some risks?
See, I did hear about a story of,
see, there's a Canadian province that had no auto insurance,
and the story that I,
I think this was a law professor told me he saw this.
So there was a guy in a really nice car who went and
cut off someone in a really crummy car,
and the person in the really crummy car just went and deliberately drove
right alongside the nice car and ripped up the side of it.
And he said, well, no fault.
So we each have to, you know, our losses, it's really too bad.
All right. So that's a case of inefficient risk bearing.
All right. You might step back and say,
you know, he was actually fighting the negative externality of cutting people off,
but you'd probably get yourself stuck in a lunatic.
So, you cut me off.
I kill you for that.
So, anyway, so you've got,
so insurance deductibles are one approach you can take,
where you're trying to give people at least some incentive or to,
you know, use Nassim Taleb's favorite phrase,
some skin in the game.
So know that if you go and get in trouble,
at least some of the cost is going to be paid by you.
Which gives you incentives to at least take moderate caution.
These basic precautions.
All right. So questions about this? Yes.
Can you give another example of inefficient risk taking?
Yeah. So this could be like your work on a job where,
if suppose you get fired,
that you could be fired for accidentally for messing up too many orders,
then this could mean that, you know, that, let's see.
So that would be, actually the other round.
So basically, like if you're allowed to mess up like 10 orders,
for 10 orders and you know you only get fired,
I can tell you that when you mess up the 11th order.
In that case, someone might deliberately mess up an order.
Might say, hey, I don't like that guy.
So I'm going to go and deliberately give him a hamburger he doesn't like,
just out of spite.
Which you wouldn't do if you had to go and pay the cost,
if you personally were paying the cost of that messed up order.
But of course, it doesn't have to be deliberate.
It could just be negligence.
Could just be, well, I mean,
I didn't want it to be messed up,
but I also wasn't going to try that hard to double or triple check it.
All right. Now, interesting.
You can often infer behavior from outcomes.
You can often infer behavior from outcomes.
And this means that in such cases,
if you can perfectly infer behavior from outcomes,
then it wouldn't matter that you don't know what everybody's behavior is.
You could just look at what happened and say,
aha, I know what you did based upon your level of success or failure.
All right. But again, the problem is that usually,
usually, there's some imperfection here.
Doing it like you might say, look,
I just know for a fact that a worker of your talent will screw up five times per day.
So you screw up five times per day,
I just accept that as normal and there's no punishment
because you did what you're supposed to do.
Six times, however, then I know that you were
trying to mess up on purpose or being lazy.
If you actually had that level of knowledge,
you wouldn't need to know the details of the person's day.
You basically just go and look at the end of the day and see how many times you mess up.
Six, that is a smoking gun for bad behavior.
If the real world were that simple.
But again, the problem is that the real world is not that simple.
Although, if you average over a long period of time,
then the world may get more and more simple.
So for example, like in academia, anyone can have a bad year.
But if someone hasn't published anything for six years,
then you tend to start thinking that it's not just bad luck,
and the person just is not going to publish.
So now again, that's not perfect because once in a while,
there is someone who just has six bad years in a row.
Like six unlucky years and they could still be awesome, but unlikely.
All right. So questions,
questions, all right.
Now, there is a way you can solve moral hazard problem very nicely,
if people are risk neutral.
So with risk neutral agents,
then you don't need to worry about moral hazard.
Because essentially what you do is you just put all the risk on whoever it is,
who makes the decision.
If they're risk neutral, they won't mind.
So suppose you are the CEO of a company or risk neutral,
then the employer could just say,
look, all right, we will effectively sell you the whole company.
Then whatever good or bad that occurs,
you will bear the full cost and receive the full benefits.
Then if spending $2,000 with a managerial effort in the middle of the night will save you,
will save you $2,500.
If you own the company, you will do it.
Or again, of course, it wouldn't have to be literally on the company,
it could also be that you,
that you're part of basically like any change in the value of the company,
is going to be taken away from you.
So you could be the company's worth a billion,
but as long as the value fluctuates by 50 million.
So if the CEO has a net worth of 50 million and he's risk neutral,
then you just say, well, if anything goes wrong,
we just take away your house and all your other assets.
Is that cool? The CEO, if you were a CEO,
would say, yeah, because there's also a good chance that I'll get to double my assets.
I might lose everything, double it,
and I'm indifferent between those two possibilities.
So you could do it that way.
With this work, you just have one risk neutral person in the entire company.
Yeah. Again, so the only issue there is
just if there is a minimum amount of wealth a person can have.
So if you can't go below negative a billion dollars,
then a risk neutral person will start acting like the risk preferring,
because once you get down to the minimum of where you can be,
then there's no reason to worry about the downside anymore.
Then anything that increase
the variance is going to raise your expected payoff at that point.
Now, another solution to role hazard,
and one which Anglo-American law specifically persecutes,
despite the pretty obvious case for it,
is contractual punishment.
So in general, there's a long tradition in
the English legal system from which the American one is the close descendant.
You've heard this before, right?
So it's all going back to the law of 12th century England.
They still teach you in the first year of law school.
Let's learn about the law of 12th century England now.
Much of it superseded, but anyway, that's still the origin.
So going back a long time,
there's been a big issue with writing a contract where one of the terms is,
if I am caught doing the following bad thing,
I'll owe you 10 times whatever the harm was.
So this is legally very heavily frowned upon.
Now, you might be able to sneak it in anyway,
if you just don't admit what you're doing.
So you might be able to put a clause in there saying,
if I'm caught playing Tetris,
I will then owe you $1,000 for the loss of $1,000 a company time.
So you might put it that way,
and then maybe a court would enforce that.
But if you were to have any kind of explicit language saying,
whatever time you catch me stealing from the company,
I owe you 10 times that back,
that's exactly the kind of thing the courts would invalidate.
The contract is not illegal, just unenforceable.
Now, it's a very strange thing that clauses like this are not enforceable,
because this gives you a great way of solving moral hazard problems.
So suppose, for example, that you want to go and sell someone a health insurance contract,
and you want to go and give them a nice discount for not smoking.
But you're concerned that they might promise not to smoke and then do it anyway.
Well, what clause might you want to put into the contract in order
to make it highly unlikely that someone would ever want to lie about their smoking behavior?
If we catch you smoking, you owe us the value of the discount
divided by the probability we catch you.
Yeah, that. Or you just have,
we catch you smoking, you owe us a million dollars.
You put this piece of a dollar's amount of money.
In this case, there is a strong incentive not to cheat.
So if you're a smoker, you're like, well,
gee, I don't want to sign that because they might catch me,
and then they might go and charge me this enormous amount.
So I'll just be honest and admit I'm a smoker.
On the other hand, if you're not a smoker,
then you'll probably be happy to sign that and say,
well, don't smoke, but never touch it. So what's the problem?
Now, the only real counter-argument people have is, well,
this gives some bad incentives over the insurance company to fabricate false accusations.
But that is a reason to be pruned about signing the contract,
but it's not a reason not to enforce the contract people want to sign.
Big difference, right? So the fear that the insurance company might rip you off,
this is a reason for you to go and say,
well, maybe he's going to falsely accuse me of being a smoker.
Then you might want to go and Google the company and
find out whether there have been such accusations and so on.
But after you've looked into it,
and if you say, well, it seems like this is not a problem and you sign,
then there's no reason not to enforce the contract after that.
So in other words, this argument is only an argument for customers to be more careful.
It's not a reason to actually refuse to enforce it.
Again, what is the argument in favor of these clauses?
The argument in favor of it is a way of getting over moral hazard.
There are so many moral hazard problems that exist in the world.
So we think about all the jobs that never happen because the employer,
because you can't sign this.
So if you were to say, look,
if you ever catch me playing Tetris,
there will be a file, I will pay you $5,000.
Again, of course, there is a problem if the punishment is so
severe that it might be hard for the agreed party to collect.
But the economies already come with a bunch of great ways of solving problems like that.
So what might you do to convince someone that you're good for the $5,000 punishment?
Clateral. Yes, collateral, a bond.
Lots of you, so there's lots of things you might do to go and
reassure the person on the other side that you can indeed pay.
Then this way you get over it.
So anytime there's a person who says,
well, look, I would like to give you a chance,
because say you don't have traditional educational credentials,
but I'm really nervous that if I hire you,
this is just like, it's not just going to be,
turn out that it wasn't profitable,
I'm really worried that you're going to mess things up,
you're going to be disruptive or dangerous,
or you're going to get someone killed,
or you're like there's all kinds of things I'm worried about.
Then a contractual punishment will allow you to
reassure partners who are otherwise nervous about interacting with you.
So this is something that's barely explored,
probably because it's generally illegal,
and yet the arguments are pretty flimsy for it.
So anyway, and then remember,
suppose that it's possible for someone to audit.
The audit is that once in a long time,
I randomly pay the information cost to go and find out what's really happening.
So you say, look, it's too costly to go and hire
a private investigator to go and follow every insurance customer around.
But what if every year I randomly pick one percent of my customers,
and then have them follow me?
Then if I get clear proof of what they're doing,
then I can go and collect.
Well, that is a way that you can at least greatly reduce this whole hazard problem.
As you say, look, as you know,
I can't afford to follow my customers around, that's great.
But let me remind you there's a penalty clause,
and also I audit.
Now, from the customer's point of view,
what's good about allowing contractual punishment?
Why would insurance customers,
in general, like the idea of contractual punishment?
You can be more fully insured.
Be more fully insured and at a lower cost.
You can get cheaper insurance if you agree to this stuff.
Now, there's a distributional factor because who right now is benefiting from these bans?
The people that are very inclined to go and sign
a contract and then break the rules anyway,
and take advantage of the situation.
So yes, people like that are probably easily in their way through the system,
sucking other people dry, taking advantage.
So maybe it's good for them.
Although, possibly even they would actually be better off in the system
because the whole idea is that you put a contractual term
because what's going on is because there's an inefficient transfer going on.
So again, McDonald's would be perfectly happy if its workers messed up orders,
if the workers would just pay for the orders.
So the reason why they're not happy is
because in general the value of the food to the customer is going to be
greater than the value of messing up the order to the resentful employee.
Otherwise, you just have two businesses.
One is I'm selling food to customers,
I also sell petty revenge to store employees.
Okay. Now, by the way, so Robin Hanson actually is a chapter in his dissertation on
the puzzle of the absence of contractual punishment or bans on contractual punishment.
As far as I know, I don't know that anyone else has pursued this topic,
but it's a great topic and I'm sure you'd be
delighted if a student came and said I want to write
my dissertation on going further on this.
Ultimately, if you go and read Robin's work,
he came up with the best arguments that you can imagine for banning contractual punishment,
although I think he will say the best arguments aren't very good.
But still, it goes way beyond typical legal arguments,
which I think it would pretty much just amount to
saying only the government should be able to punish people.
You can't sign a contract saying I accept punishment in exchange for a good deal, why not?
You have a question there?
Oh, I was just wondering what the,
you kind of answered it at the end.
I was wondering what the legal decisions were that led to that meeting precedent,
were they the arguments that you gave like fear of,
you know what I'm saying.
Yeah, like the fear that the person with the right to punish would be offended.
Right, were those the arguments that you think correspond?
So, I think these rules are very ancient.
They might even precede any kind of written opinions.
Okay.
So, I'm not clear on when they come in.
So, I've never done the legal history.
Is this Robert Hanson's?
Robert Hanson, in his dissertation, he has a chapter on it.
Okay.
Yeah, so I don't know whether he did the legal history either.
I mean, Robin today is much more likely to do that.
Back then, he was a Caltech doing a lot of math.
So, maybe he didn't bother and just sort of started with the stylized fact that it is illegal.
But, so again, there are people in law and economics who have tried to come up with some arguments.
But again, it's more along the lines of rationalizing why this system we have makes sense
rather than really saying,
we're taking seriously the possibility that it's just a terrible system that we have,
which exacerbates a bunch of problems for no great reason.
Right.
So, it's also rationalizing what we have, not figuring out, not exactly how it developed historically.
Yeah.
Okay.
All right.
So, questions about moral hazard?
I'm happy with it.
Everyone ready to go and join the crusade to legalize contractual punishment
so that we can drive moral hazard back into the pit from whence it came?
All right.
Finally, we can declare war.
Declare war and victory on moral hazard just by doing that.
Oh, one more.
Yeah, sure.
Are there any other legal systems that don't?
So, that I don't know, actually.
So, the main other legal system is the civil law versus common law.
It doesn't seem very civil law to be any better on this, but I don't know.
All right.
All right.
So, that's moral hazard.
And this moral hazard is the simplest form of asymmetric information,
and it's one where the general idea was around long before economists were around.
So, as long as it's been insurance, there have been people concerned about insurance fraud,
which is the ultimate form of insurance of moral hazard.
Right?
So, the ultimate form of moral hazard is someone comes along and says,
you know what, I'd like to buy a billion-dollar fire insurance policy on my shack.
Right?
And why?
I just love that shack so much.
I mean, you have no idea how miserable I would be without my shack.
And every fire insurance company in the world will say,
no, we're not going to insure your shack for a billion dollars.
And why?
Because if you just took people's word for it,
then people would go and insure all kinds of junk for way more than it's worth
and then would possibly destroy it on purpose for great financial gain.
All right.
Or if you know detective movies from the 30s and 40s,
a standard movie is you get a life insurance policy on someone and then you murder them.
So double indemnity, it's all about insurance policy.
I guess so. Back in those days,
insurance policies were considered very entertaining.
And you can craft a very entertaining story around insurance policies.
All right. So, anyway, so moral hazard,
long known to the insurance industry.
It's really as old as the insurance industry itself.
Now, the next problem is one where insurance companies do things about it,
and yet a lot of it seems like it's rule of thumb,
and they don't really understand why they're doing it,
and so economists actually have more value,
or are adding more value.
Maybe not in terms of the actual business behavior,
but in terms of people actually understanding what's going on.
It's a lot more, it's a lot subtler than moral hazard,
which is pretty obvious once you think about it.
So, this is another standard form of asymmetric information.
All right. And the basic idea.
So, you know your own characteristics.
You know what you are like, right?
But other people don't.
So, a natural thing for other people to do is treat you as if you were
the average member of a group that you superficially belong to.
And which group you superficially belong to can change very easily.
So, if I just go by myself to a playground,
I am superficially similar to a child abductor.
If I just wander onto a children's playground and just hang out there reading my book,
people treat me in one way.
I've never done this, but I assume it would give me bad looks.
If I go there with a child on the other hand,
they don't even know it's mine.
But if I go there with a child,
it's like there's a good father.
Right now, in both cases,
they really know next nothing about me,
other than these very superficial things.
One is, there is a man without a child in a playground.
Or the other one is, there's a man with a child in a playground.
Once I took my kids to do a test at a high school and school security came to me,
and he said, a student came and said there was a man sitting here.
There is. I didn't want to get in trouble,
so I just said, guilty as charged, here I am.
A man is sitting on a bench in a school.
But instead, I'm waiting for my children.
Okay. All right.
So anyway, so you know what you are.
You know whether you're planning on abducting anyone,
but other people just take a quick look at you and treat you based upon
the average characteristics of people that superficially resemble you.
Now, here is the bad news.
Suppose you're above average for that group.
Then, you will be treated badly relative to the truth.
So, and if there is a market,
then you may be treated so badly,
you decide you don't even feel like participating in the market.
And if enough above average people think this,
then the whole market can unravel.
Because if the most above average people drop out,
this lowers the average.
And then the best of the people remaining are treated very badly,
and they drop out, and then they drop out and so on.
And imagine if I were to say that I'm going to fail the bottom half of this class.
So, who would want to drop out?
So, let's say this.
Anyone who thinks they're going to be the bottom half wants to drop out.
But this doesn't really solve the problem, does it?
Because once they leave, then the class,
then I said, well,
the rule now I'm going to fail the bottom of whoever's left.
And then more people may want to drop out,
and then finally maybe left with one person.
And then I don't know what the rule means.
That's like 50-50 chance that they fail you or not.
Whether we're down to one.
But that would be unraveling where if the people that are in the bottom half,
they'll just keep dropping out.
And this makes the bottom half where we'll
move the average and then finally go down with basically nobody.
All right. So, that is the general problem of-
over there. All right.
So, there is a standard example that we've used many times.
This is an example that's nice because it's so simple and it's so counterintuitive.
And yet it's totally undeniable once you work through it.
So, let's go through this class.
Okay. So, suppose you've got a bunch of companies,
and they are uniformly distributed on the interval 0 to 100.
This is the value to the current owners of the companies.
However, if you sell them,
the buyers are able to run the companies more efficiently if you are.
So, every company is worth 50 percent more in the hands of
the buyer than it is in the hands of the current owner.
Okay. All right.
Now, what is going to happen?
Okay. Well, let's see.
Something that people often want to do is say,
well, fine, I'll just bid, I'll bid 50.
I'll bid the average value.
So, I'll bid 50.
And you intuitively think, well,
this is going to work out really well for me because I will bid 50,
and that's the average value of the company to the buyer,
so they'll be happy to sell to me,
but it's going to be worth 50 percent more to me,
so I expect to make a profit of 25 on the company.
That reasoning is totally wrong.
And if we've got asymmetric information,
it's because if the owners of the company know their true value,
but all that you know is the average value of the company sold,
something totally different will happen.
Namely, if you bid 50,
which companies will not be sold to you?
All the companies worth more than 50 will not be sold to you.
Those companies will be retained by the original owner,
who know that they are worth more than 50.
Therefore, the average value of the company sold to the owners,
out of all the companies sold,
the average value of the owners will be only 25.
It's going to be worth, so the average company that sold will be worth 25.
It's worth 50 percent more to you, so that's 37.5.
This means that you are paying 50 to get a company,
there's an average worth 37.5 to you,
so you are losing money.
All right. Now, what natural reaction is to say,
fine, I'll just go and bid 100.
We bid 100, then there's no longer any adverse selection.
All the companies get sold.
But in that case, you bid 100,
the average value is 50.
It's worth 50 percent more to you, so 75.
So, you have actually lost even more money by increasing your bid.
So, increasing your bid increases your loss even further.
Then, the natural thing to do is to try bidding less.
So, I say, fine, I'll just bid 25.
But then, the average value will be 12.5,
and the average value to the recipient will be 18.75.
So, again, you've lost money.
Sorry, fine, I'll go and bid two.
If you bid two, the average value of the company sold is one,
it's worth 1.5 to you, you've lost money.
Although, every time you cut your bid,
you are losing less money.
That's a good sign, right?
Because losing less is reducing your loss is better.
Then, finally, you may say, fine, how about I bid zero?
You bid zero, no companies are sold to you,
you pay nothing, they're worth nothing,
and you have now reached
the profit maximizing solution of this problem.
Buying no companies and losing no money is
the best possible outcome given the setup of the problem.
That clear to everyone?
So, this is an extreme case of adverse selection,
and this is one where there is full unraveling.
So, people fully understand what's going on.
No companies will be sold,
even though every company is worth more to
someone else than it is to the person that holds it.
That's what's so odd.
Okay. So, that's the equilibrium.
Now, if there were symmetric information,
there'd be a totally different result.
If there were symmetric equilibrium,
then there would be a different price for
every company and basically you just pay everybody.
You can offer everybody the value of their company,
or you can offer everybody, say,
10 percent more than the value of the company,
and then all the companies will be sold.
So, with symmetric information,
this would be a perfectly efficient markets.
Confirming that plan is telling you that
symmetric and perfect information by itself,
the ratchet goes over and over again.
That was perfect information.
Now, symmetric and perfect information would be,
if the sellers don't know the value of their company either.
All right. So, suppose that neither buyer
nor seller knows whether the company is any good.
In that case, the seller could go and offer 50,
everyone sells, and therefore,
the average buyer winds up getting a company worth 75.
Or you could say, so offer 51,
say, just to give a slight amount of
a slight share of the profit to the original owners.
But again, if the owners don't know if their company is any good,
and if the buyers don't know if the company is any good,
then you actually get a better outcome.
Which, if you think about it, is counterintuitive.
Because this is saying that,
we start out the world where some people
know they have perfect information and others don't,
we actually get a terrible outcome.
Whereas, if we go and mind wipe the sellers,
we actually move to not only a better outcome,
we can move to a fully efficient outcome by just deleting the information.
So, not only does this mean that
you can get a totally efficient result with the perfect information,
you can actually solve a market failure by reducing information.
It's completely true.
Again, what's the solution?
Now, again, of course, if there's
perfect information for everyone,
then there's no problem in this market. That's fine.
But, and if there is,
even if there's some metric imperfect, that's fine.
The inefficiency comes from the asymmetry.
If some people know and some don't,
then this leads to strategic behavior,
which leads to a socially inefficient outcome.
Everyone clear on that?
And again, understand the mind wipes.
This means that we can actually make some people know less,
the world would work better.
And in fact, you can make the world work perfectly.
If no one knew how good the countries were.
Surprising. Questions about that?
Is it too late to absorb how crazy that is?
Amazing that is? Yeah.
I mean, when you think about it more,
it's like you come up with those lots of examples.
Like, in general, can error make the world work better?
There's all kinds of errors which would be great if they were widely shared.
Like, suppose there was a view that if you murder anyone,
you will explode instantly.
This would basically abolish murder.
Is it true that you will explode if you murder someone?
No. Yet, would it be useful if people believe this?
It would be very useful.
So, it is not the case that if everybody,
whether that everybody understood the world perfectly,
it would like, would be an automatic improvement to the world,
where some people had some totally wrong views.
That's where we're pointing at. Okay.
All right. So, to repeat.
The same market if there is imperfect but symmetric information,
actually works perfectly fine.
Because if the, so if in a world of symmetric and perfect information,
if the sellers offer 51,
then all the buyers,
so if the buyers offer 51,
all the sellers sell because they know the people whose companies are here,
don't know that.
They think their companies are worth 50.
So, someone offers you 51 for a company that you think is worth 50,
you happily, happily sell.
And since by assumption,
every company is worth more than the buyer than the seller,
this means that we realize 100 percent of social gain.
Okay. All right.
Now, this is a classic example.
I think this is almost straight out of
George Akerlof's original paper on the market of lemons.
You may recall that he got an Nobel Prize for this.
He did cook the numbers to get this extreme result.
I don't even think he would deny it.
But anyway, but it was strategically very wise for him to do this,
because it's such a shocking result, right?
But anyway, you could go and tone down the numbers and get very different results.
All right. So, for example, let's see.
So, suppose that the companies were worth twice as much to buyers as they are to sellers.
In that case, if you were to go and offer 50,
you would at least break even.
So, no harm there.
You could offer 100, you'd break even.
So, no harm. All right.
Or again, if they were triple,
then you would definitely be happy to go and pay that amount,
you would profit from it. All right.
Then, suppose like, and then we can also alter the distributional assumption.
So, here we assume a uniform distribution,
where you're equally likely to be any of these, right?
But you can imagine another world where it's just,
let's see, so we have zero to 100.
Let's suppose we just have one spike of 50 percent of the companies are at 50,
and another spike of 50 percent of the companies are at 100, right?
In this world, at least we would realize half of the companies would be sold,
because you would go and offer 50,
and then the average value of the companies that are sold when you offer 50 would be 50,
and then you would go and make a profit of 25 of those companies.
So, now let's see.
If you were to go and offer 100, let's see.
So, you have to offer 100 in order to get all of them sold,
and let's see, in that case,
would that be worthwhile? Let's see.
So, if you did that,
then the average value would be of one sold would be 75,
and then yes. So, actually,
in that case, it would be worth offering 100,
and then all the companies would be sold, right?
And then you wish that those had been sold,
but nevertheless, overall you still make money.
So, basically, if you go and offer the distributions,
that will change the result too.
Okay. Now, average selection models are very poorly understood,
because there's a story that people want to believe,
and that is very much part of popular culture,
and then there's the story that average selection actually tells, right?
So, the story that people want to believe is that there are,
for example, evil greedy car dealers,
especially used car dealers,
and every day they wake up,
and they look in the mirror, and they look like wolves,
or like predators, and then they go,
and they put on a mask, and try to act like a nice guy,
and they put on their sheep costumes,
and they're wolves inside,
and then customers who are just like sheep show up,
and say, is this a good car?
And they go, yes, yes, yes.
Oh, grandmother, what have you guys done?
All right. So, and then what inevitably happens is,
the evil wolves go and rip off the innocent sheep,
and they get rich, and they go home every day and count their gold.
They go, ah, the stupid sheep,
I ruined it. There's a sucker born every minute.
All right. So, and many people go and hear about
Ackermann's market for lemons or whatever selection in general,
and they think this is the model that shows why that's basic economics.
It's basic economics that used car dealers get super rich ripping people off.
But that's not the model at all.
That model could be right,
but it's not Ackerlof's model.
So, like in Ackerlof's model,
it would be generally known that the people who run
used car dealerships are wolves who run to rip people off,
and then what would the sheep do?
Not buy cars.
Yeah, not buy used cars.
It would say, no way.
I'm not going to send food out to your car dealership.
I know what kind of game you're playing.
No way.
But, oh no, I want to.
I mean, I know.
So, it would be like that.
And the result would be that the wolves would not get rich.
The wolves would starve to death.
They would have no business because no one trusts them, and why would they?
So, in the fake story,
customers of sheep, but in Ackermann's story,
they're the third gold king.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, sure.
Yeah, they're like, yeah,
we need to remember all these fables, but yeah.
It's like, no way.
You can't fool me.
So, that's the idea.
And again, so in the Ackermann model,
if used car markets exist at all,
the average customer benefits.
There are some people who go and get ripped off.
But, in order for the market to exist,
who must be out there to balance out the people who get ripped off?
People who get a better deal.
Yeah, people who get a great deal.
So, it's the person who shows up there and says,
well, why are you selling?
And the guy honestly says,
well, I'm moving to Hawaii,
so I got a week, I've got to sell this.
You're like, oh, right.
And then, as a result of the fact that there's a lot of dishonest people,
the person who meets the person who genuinely is selling a good car to move to
Hawaii gets a fantastic deal.
All right. And so, this is the Ackermann model says that
markets for lemons are smaller than they otherwise would be,
but insofar as they exist,
they remain mutually beneficial on average.
So, it's not the story of
like a giant industry of rip-offs and exploitation and fraud.
Instead, it's a story where if there's any fraud,
it's balanced out by giant windfalls, jackpots.
People go and buy a used product and say,
my God, this is a great bargain.
I paid 2,000 bucks for this thing, it's like new.
I guess he really was moving to Hawaii.
Well, tough luck, tough to be him.
Too bad. Tough luck.
All right. So, that's the actual Akerlof story.
Right now, this doesn't mean that the massive exploitation series is wrong,
it just means that you need to come up with a completely different model,
and Akerlof's got nothing to do with it.
All right. Okay. So, questions about that.
So, this is not a model of industries that are worth it,
that are a good idea to ban.
It's not a model of industries where the typical customer is getting ripped off.
Right? If you take them all seriously,
then you might say, why do you hear about the rip-off so much?
I mean, why do you so rarely hear about someone who gets a great deal from a used car dealer?
What is an answer consistent with the model?
People who buy good deals don't want other people dropping out of the market.
Well, that would kind of be a public good for a car.
How do you think they don't want?
I mean, people are more inclined to complain about bad deals than to brag about good deals.
When you brag about getting ripped off, you get sympathy.
Rather, when you whine about getting ripped off, you get sympathy.
When you brag about getting a good deal, what do you get?
Envy, bitterness.
Oh, you had to go and say,
oh, you got this great deal on his fur coat.
God, I hate that guy so much.
I hope his coat burns.
I mean, there are many, many examples of this.
So, if you look at the statistics for the former Soviet Union,
you'll see a ton of people are better off,
and yet there's almost no media stories,
almost no academic research on people that talk about how great everything was for them.
Instead, they just keep their heads down and stay under radar and enjoy their new high-side living standard.
But there's a lot of research on people who lose out.
Of course, you could also just think about what almost all news is like.
How often are there good stories on the news?
When they need filler.
Yeah, so tons of bad stories.
And again, is it because bad stories are normal?
How about just because bad stories have a better audience for them?
Yes, please.
Wouldn't that just be a cultural part?
Like, you'd be able to do some kind of Ferengi type society?
Oh, the Ferengi?
Yeah, so you would brag about the good deals you got and then not say the times you got scammed.
Yeah, you know, there are subcultures of what bragging is not so friendly on.
But, I mean, although, the general story is that bragging is most acceptable
when the people that are bragging can easily beat up people that don't like their bragging.
It's like bragging about athletic ability, but much easier.
Because people have a lot of athletic ability.
If you don't like it, they can intimidate you and beat you up.
But bragging about how you did really well on a test, for example, that can get you clobbered.
Yes?
Oh, in this model, isn't complaining about the bad deals the reason why the model works?
Because in complaining about that, this is why everyone knows that there's a risk behind you.
Well, I mean, you don't need to have differential complaining.
So, you know, like, yes, so like, the model could work just as well if everyone,
after it happens, announces whether they got a good deal or bad deal.
I mean, in a way, actually, if people were naive and all that they ever heard were bad news,
this would lead to the market being destroyed even more often than the model says.
Because, you know, so basically, if all you ever heard were negative feedback about a market,
the naive inference is that that's all that ever happens.
So you actually need to have in the background some kind of common sense
where people realize that the complainers are not representative.
All right.
Okay, so your bottom line is in this model, on average,
buyers do benefit from whatever deals they actually make.
The problem in the model is just the market, is that the average selection shrinks the market,
makes it smaller than it otherwise could be, and in the extreme case, it just wipes the market out.
But it's not that the exchanges that happen are bad.
It's that it's unfortunate that more exchanges did not occur.
So, again, this is also not a model about why the sick are being ripped off in health insurance markets.
In fact, it's a model about how people that buy private health insurance are on average benefiting.
The average selection complaint is rather about who or what?
People who don't get insurance.
Yes, it is about all the people that don't get insurance, even though they value more of the marginal cost,
the true marginal cost.
So, and again, in this model, people often look at this model and say, ah,
so this is the economic model proving that sick people will be able to buy insurance in the free market.
The model says exactly the opposite.
In this model, who are the only people that will buy insurance in the free market?
Sick people.
Who are the people that don't buy insurance?
Healthy people.
Right?
And you're like, huh, but that isn't what people are complaining about.
Maybe their complaint is different from what the model is.
And well, then why do people equate the model with the popular complaint?
Possibly intellectual laziness, where they're looking for, where they have,
the thing that's really bothering them, which is probably just the sick people have to pay more for health insurance.
And then they try, and then they latch on to a model that seems kind of related, even though it really isn't.
Okay.
All right, now, adverse selection is economists' favorite argument for health insurance or for insurance regulation in general.
And in particular, the main regulation that this argues for is mandatory insurance.
And again, going back to this case.
Suppose you ordered everyone to sell their companies regardless of their own desires.
You say every company must be sold.
You must divest.
All right?
So in that case, this gets rid of the adverse selection problem, thus by forcing everyone to sell.
All right?
So in that case, they're all going to be sold, and then buyers can know that the average value sold,
the company sold will be 50, and they'll be happy to pay, say, 51, and then all the mutual beneficial deals happen.
And similarly, if we're talking about health insurance, the idea here is that you require everyone to buy,
and this is going to be good or bad for healthy people when they're forced to buy?
Bad.
But so then what is the argument for the regulation?
The argument is that it is a caloric improvement because the gains to the sick people exceed the losses to the healthy people.
And again, if you from this example, it's clear that can be true.
So basically the idea is that if you force the healthy people in the pool, they're going to be worse off.
Specifically, the healthiest people will definitely be worse off,
but the loss to them is going to be smaller than the gain to the others, and so it's a net social gain, and that is the real story.
All right, and we are now out of time, so we will continue with this next week.
