So we've been going over adverse selection.
And this was one of the most technical economic concepts
to ever make it into national media.
So during the Obamacare debates, this
was actually discussed quite widely by op-ed columnists
and so on, usually combining with moral hazard too.
Now there's one huge problem here,
which is, is there anything at all
about giving people free health care that
solves moral hazard problems?
No.
Let's see.
Is there any way in which giving people free health care
increases moral hazard problems?
Yes.
Right?
So with private insurance, your rates
will reflect risks, which leads to some incentive
to not have bad unhealthy behavior, right?
Because if you smoke, then this will raise your rates.
But if everybody gets free health care,
what does this do to the incentive to smoke?
Increases.
Increases the incentive to smoke.
What about the incentive for mountain climbing?
Increases.
Yes, incentive for obesity.
Increases.
So it's completely bizarre that someone
would pair these two concepts as if they both
argue for Obamacare.
But yet, you're like, why?
Why would someone just mention both concepts
when the first one is clearly an argument on the other side?
Most people don't have any patience
to find out what the concepts mean,
so they're just looking for some slogans.
Anyway, so moral hazard is clearly
an argument against giving everyone free health care.
And in general, it's an argument against giving people
the same rates regardless of the risk.
Because when you give people the same rates
regardless of the risk, this encourages
people to take more risks.
Of course.
What else could it do?
Which is why I had a post where I talked about moral selection
and adverse hazard, whatever.
Not even really interested in what the concepts say,
except insofar as they are rationalization for a policy
that people would have favored regardless of the arguments.
But anyway, that's what I really think.
That, that's what I really think.
So moral hazard, verified.
Adverse selection, at least there is a clear connection.
Just like in that problem that I gave you
where you've got these companies where the value goes from 0
to 100, but the current owner of the company
knows the true value, whereas the buyer only
knows the average value of the company's theory.
So like I said, in this case, there
is actually a social gain of forcing everyone
to go and sell companies.
Because remember, we talked about what's the equilibrium
price of the simple model.
What's the equilibrium price of the simple model?
0.
0 is the equilibrium price of the simple model.
And therefore, what surplus is realized
in the simple version of the model?
No surplus.
On the other hand, if you force everybody to sell,
the result is going to be that we realize a surplus.
That's the average value of 50.
And the average social gain of a sale is 50%.
So we realize an average gain of 25 for a company sold.
So if there's a regulation forcing everyone to sell,
this means that everybody sells, of course.
We're assuming harsh punishment if you don't sell,
so everybody does it.
And then the average company sold yields a social gain of 25.
And that's a case where this regulation is, in the model,
at least, a solution to the problem.
It's actually relevant.
And again, so the flip side, of course,
is if you have an adverse selection problem with health
insurance, if you force everyone to buy,
then this means that the low-risk people buy,
as well as high-risk people.
And again, what happens is that in the extreme case,
you go from a market where there is no insurance offered at all,
the adverse selection problem is severe enough,
to one where everybody gets coverage.
Now, the healthy people still are going to be getting
ripped off, conventionally, because they would like
to drop out of the market.
But again, here, we are at least doing Calgary Hicks analysis.
So the idea is that if the numbers work out correctly,
then the losses to the healthy people who
are buying insurance that is worth less than the cost
of them, their losses are going to be more than balanced out
by the gains to all of the sick people
who get insurance at a lower price than the value.
That's the idea.
Now, Krugman, when discussing this,
he maintained his economic clarity.
And so he actually said something that's very sensible,
namely, he said, look, if you study public opinion polls
on Obamacare, the one part that's really unpopular
is the individual mandate.
And interestingly, that's also the only part
that really has anything to do with adverse selection.
So the one part, so now we also, and then Krugman
had a very nice analogy where he said, well, look,
programs like Obamacare, and this
would also hold true for the other famous predecessor
of Obamacare in the state of Massachusetts.
Obamacare.
Yes, which is extremely similar.
Missouri, right?
Or maybe not Missouri, if you believe the mean voter model.
It's not surprising that both candidates that
make it up to the national race are associated
with almost the same policies.
And in fact, the same in their advisors.
Jonathan Gruber was the advisor for both Romney and Massachusetts
and Obama at the national level.
All right.
But we should all praise Jonathan Gruber
because he's written a graphic novel.
And economists should do this.
And it shouldn't be nice, it has to be first.
All right, so what Krugman said is
that the three main regulations of Obamacare
are like the three legs of a stool.
And if you don't have all three legs,
the stool will be wobbly.
And again, so what are the legs?
All right, so first of all, you've got the popular stuff.
All right, so you've got ban pre-existing conditions
clauses.
All right, so these are regulations
that say that the insurance policy will not
cover you for problems that you have at the point
you buy the insurance.
And in terms of just the logic of insurance,
why would firms want to have pre-existing conditions
clauses?
Then everyone will wait to buy insurance.
Yeah, you wait to buy insurance until you're sick.
And then it's not really insurance, is it?
Then it's just like, give me some free stuff.
All right.
And of course, insurance companies
say, sure, I'd love to give you free stuff for 10% more
than it costs.
But that doesn't do what I want.
I should have bought it before.
But I didn't want to buy it before.
All right, so you've got the ban on pre-existing conditions
clauses.
And let's see, remind me, is that one
popular with normal humans or unpopular with normal humans?
Very popular with normal humans.
Just big smiley face.
Yay.
All right, yes.
Greedy insurance companies shouldn't go and charge people
more just because they already have a problem.
They should just give them stuff that let them off.
I don't want to open up a business that does this,
but the fat cats ought to do this.
All right, so you've got the ban on pre-existing conditions
clauses.
And let's see, then, hold on, let's see.
There's, right, so you've got that part.
Oh, yeah, there it is.
And then you've got something that
has actual to do with adverse selection, which
is the mandate.
How do people feel about the mandate, generally?
Hate it.
Bad.
Bad.
Mandate bad?
No.
People should get to do whatever they want.
And the other way, you shouldn't have to go and buy something
from fat cats, right?
And then we've got the last leg, which is the subsidies.
And again, normally, so subsidies also popular.
Government's helping you.
So good.
All right, now what Krugman points out
is that there's a logical relationship between these three
essential regulations.
Namely, so first of all, so you ban the pre-existing clauses.
But then there's the problem of people
who won't want to buy the insurance anymore
until they have the problem.
And then which of the regulations
tries to solve the problem you caused
by banning pre-existing conditions clauses?
The mandate.
The mandate.
And then what regulation solves the problem
of all the people who can't afford to buy the mandate
insurance?
Subsidies.
All right, so Krugman had the sense to say, look,
these regulations all work as a package.
And if you just get rid of one of them,
then Obamacare really will be a disaster
that critics are predicting.
All right, so that's the idea.
And again, actually, for this banning pre-existing conditions
clauses, it's actually a more specific version
of something that is also very popular,
which is equal rates for everybody.
Equal rates for everybody.
Life insurance when you're 105.
That should be just as much as life insurance
for when you're 25, right?
That's fair.
Well, he's not using your fault, you're 105.
Why are the fat cats being so mean?
Why can't they just be cool about this?
All right, anyway.
So this is a nice description of the way
that the regulation is supposed to be together.
And then, as you may recall, there
was a Supreme Court case trying to overturn
the mandate, which failed.
But then, let's see, actually, so at least
in one version of the latest Trump tax plan,
the mandate was abolished.
Does anyone know what happened to the final version?
Did it end up, was it really killed or not?
I think it was killed in the bill.
I don't know if it's.
Yes, but like which bill?
I think the one that passed.
In the final version?
So it was removed in the final version?
I think so.
OK.
Right.
So again, that sounds terrible.
Now, the other thing to remember is that the actual,
the mandate is not a true mandate,
because if you didn't want to do it, you would just pay a fine.
Which is how the Supreme Court wound up approving it.
Because they said, well, really, it's just like a tax.
If you don't do it, then you have to pay something for it.
But the original tax was quite small anyway.
So really, the only way to argue in favor of the package
was to say, well, this is just a temporary low fine.
But once we have the principle of a fine around,
then we can go and jack it up to a level
enough to actually get rid of the incentive
to just wait until you need the insurance.
OK.
So questions about this?
Anyway, so praise the Krugman for actually laying this out
clearly and explaining it in detail,
rather than just going and putting smiley faces
on things, which is what most people at the time did.
My question's not exactly about this,
but could you just remind me of the way
that the equilibrium is 0?
Oh, sure.
Yeah, so the idea is, suppose that the buyer's bid 50.
In that case, the companies that will be sold
will be ones that are worth between 0 and 50.
And if the companies are worth between 0 and 50,
the average value of one sold will be 25.
And if they're worth 50% more on the hands of the seller,
this means that you'll be paying 50
for companies that are averaged worth 37.5.
Make sense, because 25 times 1.5 is?
The sellers know the value.
Yes, the idea is the sellers know
the true value of the individual company,
whereas the buyers only know the average of the companies that
are on the markets.
And again, that is the asymmetric information,
where the seller knows exactly the quality of what he's got,
whereas the buyer is just looking at the average.
And the same way with health insurance.
The individual person knows all the health problems,
but the health insurance company just
knows you're a person that wants health insurance.
All right.
OK, now this is all a very nice, direct discussion,
any improvement here, sensible as far as it goes.
Although you may notice something very odd here,
because you begin by saying, all right,
well, we have this horrible problem of adverse selection,
because individuals know more about their own health
than the insurance companies.
But then you start off with this regulation.
Now, if you say that you are from the government
and I'm here to solve the adverse selection problem,
what is odd about that regulation?
Perfect.
It creates more asymmetric information.
Yeah, well, it would probably cause it more,
not just more asymmetric information,
but it causes adverse selection.
But there's another thing.
Well, wait a second.
Why would you ban this?
You ban it because companies want to do it, right?
And why do companies want to do it?
It sounds like they're aware of this problem
and have figured out a policy to deal with the problem.
And if I had replaced this with the more general thing
of the equal rates regulation, if there
was true adverse selection where health insurance companies
couldn't tell anything about you,
would they be charging people different rates
in the first place?
No, if all they knew is this is a human who
wants health insurance, then all they would do
is just charge the average for a human.
So the very fact that they're not charging equal rates
suggests that insurance companies are not
as hopelessly and obliviously in the dark as the model suggests.
And in fact, you may have heard there's
an entire occupation that sits around trying
to compute the probabilities of the expected costs
of different kinds of customers.
What is the name of this occupation?
What's the first one in A?
Actuaries.
Actuaries.
And what do these actuaries do?
What kinds of things have they determined
are predictive of the cost of your health insurance,
of the cost of insuring you?
Age.
Age, oh my god, whoa.
All right, well, it's not like an outsider
can observe your age, is it?
That's totally private.
No one knows how old you are.
Obviously, people can find out.
In fact, insurance companies might
require you to review your age in order to get insurance.
And what are some other things that
predict how costly it will be to insure?
Sex.
Your sex.
Oh my god, women are going to, well,
depending upon the age, actually.
So if you're younger, you probably
cost more because of pregnancy-related stuff.
On the other hand, if you're older,
you're going to cost less because you're
going to be a better health addict at any given age.
And then, let's see, but that's all the actuaries
have ever figured out, age and sex.
They spent decades doing the most advanced statistics
known to man.
But they never figured out anything beyond those two.
Of course, they have come up with an endless array
of predictors, which then makes us have to look,
well, wait a second.
So you want to go and pass this regulation,
but it makes you wonder, well, suppose
that they could just charge whatever they want.
Would there even be an adverse selection problem
to solve that?
Or would it just be a world where insurance companies
go and look at you, and they punch it into the model,
and they say, well, here's our estimate of your risk.
And you're like, hmm, wow, I didn't know I was so risky.
Well, that's news to me.
And it might really be news to you, actually.
So think about this.
If you were arguing with an actuary about how healthy
you'd be in the next five years, whose judgment would you trust?
Yours or the actuaries?
The actuaries.
I mean, if you have some really specific information,
like you already know that you're coughing up
blood or something, then trust yourself.
The actuary isn't going to know that, probably.
But on the other hand, if it's just like, well,
I seem like a pretty healthy person,
so I want some health insurance, the actuary has probably
got that figured out.
So anyway, you look at this, and you realize, hmm,
maybe this kind of set of regulations
like this are what's causing the adverse selection problem.
It's like, well, before Obamacare passed,
then there weren't any regulations
like this around, were there?
And of course there were, normally at the state level.
But still, a massive amount of regulations.
Anyone here ever worked in the insurance industry?
So how many states did your company actually even work in?
15.
15, right?
So I've got a very good friend in the industry.
So that's a big company, maybe 25, 30.
Here's the thing is, to be in the insurance industry,
you have to learn the regulations of each state
you're doing business in.
And 50 sets of state regulation, that
is crazy to try to deal with.
So it's like Wyoming, well, there's only 500,000 people
there, which is like 5, 7, 9,000 now.
But anyway, there's only 5, 7, 9,000 people there.
How badly do we want their business
to have to hire a team of Wyoming specialists
in our legal department?
And then you may need, again, it's not just the lawyers
either, because the actuaries that
are in charge of pricing the insurance in Wyoming
are going to need to be in consultation
with legal teams about what they can and can't offer,
what they can and can't condition the rates on.
All right.
So any case, this is all going up
to the very general lesson, which is this.
There are many insurance regulations
that are virtually designed to make adverse selection worse.
Either they're doing it on purpose,
like you say, look, you can't charge someone more money just
because they're already sick.
It's like, well, that is exactly what
you would do if you wanted to cause adverse selection.
Precisely.
Or again, equal rates for everybody.
Well, then there's going to be adverse selection
no matter what the state of the insurance company's knowledge
is.
The insurance company could be omniscient.
And still, if you say that everyone
has to charge an equal rate, well,
I can't legally use any of my knowledge.
I mean, of course, in the real world, when you're legally told
you can't use what you know, what
do you have a strong inclination to do?
Use what you know.
Use it anyway.
Brian didn't just try to go fly below radar and go, oh, no, no.
It's not because we know that people
get a lot of accidents at risk.
We would never be charging them more for that reason.
That's illegal.
No, we're doing it just because of, well, it's
very complicated.
Well, are you familiar with box cocks models?
No, I don't think so.
Well, it's because of the box cocks models, or whatever.
It's not up to any kind of snow job
to trick people into letting you use your knowledge.
Because, well, I don't want to lose money.
I didn't enter this business as to throw money away.
And even if there's a law saying that you throw money away,
it's like, well, I don't want to follow your law.
You don't say that, because that's
one of the surest things to get you in trouble,
is say, I do not want to follow your law.
Instead, you say, yes, sir, right away, absolutely.
I would love to follow your law.
It's my favorite law.
Unfortunately, box cocks won't allow it.
Whatever.
OK.
All right, so what are some of these regulations
that make adverse selection worse?
All right, so anything that forbids you to condition rates
on minor characteristics.
So again, the most extreme case, of course,
is regulation requiring equal rates.
It's pretty unusual for any regulation
to go that far, because the adverse selection would then
be enormous.
Instead, usually there's a list of what's OK and what's not OK.
All right, so you can't use race.
But what can you use that correlates very nicely
with race?
Yes, zip code.
It's like, oh, what?
You're telling me there's a lot of Japanese people in little
girls' codernumb.
All I knew was that was a zip code that had really low rates.
But it didn't have anything to do with rates.
So you try that.
So anyway, so you'll be allowed to do age.
So generally, you are allowed to do age.
But on the other hand, not kosher to do medical record.
Or for auto insurance, yes, you can do age for auto insurance.
But you cannot.
You can do driver's record, driving record,
but only to an extent.
So there's a compression where there's a point where, no, no,
just because the guy's killed 30 people already,
if he's in jail, fine.
But if he's free, you can't go and charge him
a billion dollars for auto insurance.
No.
It's like, well, I'll probably lose money unless I do.
That's not fair.
So in the state of New Jersey, when I was living there,
this whole system of assigned risks
where basically the people that no insurance company wants
to cover the regulated rate is just told, all right, well,
you know all those people you don't want to cover?
Right?
Let's see.
According to our math, you insure 7% of the people
in the states, right?
Yeah.
All right.
Well, guess what?
You have to insure 7% of the riskiest drivers in New Jersey
at a loss.
Well, at least it's not all of them.
All right.
So that kind of a system.
And again, so you're like, but I don't want to.
Well, look.
Well, you can charge them double the normal rate.
Well, thanks a lot.
Do you want to insure them at double the normal rate?
And I don't.
I might consider like 50 times the normal rate.
Double the normal rate isn't even beginning
to get anywhere in the ballpark.
And then how about conditioning insurance premium on sex?
Is that OK?
It depends a lot.
Right?
And a cynic would say, well, if men are higher risk,
then it's OK.
Right?
Like on auto insurance, men have higher risk.
And I guess anyone here who's a male driver
and you were charged what seemed like exorbitant rates when
you were a teenager, or your parents were charged
the exorbitant rates.
And then any decent economists say, yeah, well,
males are on average really dangerous drivers.
Right?
And suppose that as a 16-year-old male driver,
you would say, well, I've never been in an accident.
It's not fair that I get charged more than a woman who's
not been in an accident.
And what is the honest statistical answer
that a company probably doesn't want to tell you about?
What's the truth?
It's coming.
It's coming.
It's coming.
Probably.
Probably coming.
There is always this individual level of justice of, look,
you don't know it, but I happen to be an incredibly safe male
driver.
It's like, well, good for you.
In 10 years, I'll believe you.
But first, I'm going to, when essentially you
have no track record, then you're
going to base your view on general statistics.
And then as your track record accumulates,
you'll put more and more weight on the track record.
Although, if it's for a very rare event,
then you might continue to put a little weight on the track
record, just because rare events usually don't happen,
even for high-risk people.
So if there's never been a nuclear accident
in your country, they say, hey, we got a perfect success rating.
So insurance should basically be free.
Yeah, but you wouldn't expect Belgium
to have had any accidents statistically.
But nevertheless, the expected loss
is high enough that it's going to be a high rate.
So you've got all the regulations
that forbid insurers from conditioning premium
on biocharacteristics, which again,
is directly contradictory to the idea that companies are like,
I don't know how risky anybody is.
Poor me.
Instead, this is the insurance companies
do know how risky people are.
And if we let them, they're going
to charge high rates to risky people
and low rates to safe people.
And this is, of course, the very thing
that you would do if you didn't want
there to be adverse selection.
Now, what does a normal person actually think?
It's one thing to go and hear about adverse selection
and then say, oh, that's why this stuff is good.
But if you just were to go and talk to your grandmom
or something like that and say, isn't it terrible
that you can't charge risky people high rates?
What is a normal human reaction to an insurance company
charging a risky person a high rate?
It's not fair.
You're mean.
You're greedy.
It's like, well, why aren't you greedy for not offering
to insure people to loss?
Why is it that just because I call myself an insurance
company, I'm expected to throw money to total strangers?
But that comes with the territory.
If you want to be an insurance company,
you have to lose money on some bad risks.
That's the expectation.
Now, again, I will say that if your high-cost people are
kids with leukemia, I at least understand
the fairness intuition.
If the high-risk people are bad drivers in New Jersey,
this is where I just completely lose
contact with what normal people are thinking.
Like, what are you talking about?
You want them to be driving?
Wouldn't it be best if they had to pay really high rates
and therefore stop driving?
And then this is where someone like my dad,
who has a lifelong love affair with the automobile,
will make an argument that makes a lot of sense to people,
although it seems completely erasing me as a Brian.
People have to drive.
Don't you understand?
People have to drive.
And since they have to drive, it's
not fair to go and charge that much money to Captain Death
behind the wheel.
Captain Death has to drive.
Has he referred to Captain Death directly?
Or is this just?
I think I just made him up now.
Yeah.
Still, I will say this seems very odd.
It's like, look, if he lost his license,
then the I have to drive excuse wouldn't count.
And you wouldn't mind jailing him for that
if Captain Death kept driving around
without a license after a vote.
It's like, well, if you're sentenced in a court of law,
then the I have to drive defense is overruled.
But if it's just a matter of economic incentives
that no one wants to insure you, then that's fine.
And probably a better story would just be, well,
if they don't go, if you charge them too much,
they'll just drive without insurance.
And we're worried about all the people
that are victimized without the insurance.
But again, you might say, well, how about you
get 30 years in jail if you get in an accident
after driving without insurance?
We could do that instead of making insurance companies
go and give heavily subsidized insurance to high-risk people,
which causes which one of these two things?
Does that?
Actually, it's actually both.
Yes, but the moral hazard as well.
People that would have given up on driving
because the rates are too high will then keep doing it.
And then we'll see.
I'm not sure, but I suspect that when you start getting up
to very high ages, then there's also
some regulation about what is the highest premium you
can charge an 80-year-old.
And again, on the one hand, we don't
want 80-year-olds driving.
On the other hand, we don't want them overcharged.
So it's a tough situation for people
with a clash of their populist intuitions.
So anyway, there's regulations that
forbid insurers from conditioning premium
on buyer characteristics.
There is subsidies for car insurance for reckless drivers
or forcing insurers to cover their loss.
Sometimes the state just pays a subsidy
to go and make the insurance affordable for the reckless
drivers.
Reckless is such a harsh word.
Let's just say multiple accident drivers,
habitual accident-prone drivers.
Doesn't mean you're reckless.
Maybe you're just a bad driver.
You're being very cautious, but you just
keep ramming into people.
And then, of course, there's the ban on free musician clauses.
This has been properly ridiculed, especially
for life insurance.
It's like, well, why is it you have
to buy life insurance while you're still alive?
Why can't the dead buy it?
And of course, if presumably your heirs
would go and buy life insurance for you after your death,
what would be an obvious thing to do as soon
as your beloved relatives pass away?
Or head right down to the insurance companies
and say, I would like to have a billion dollars of life
insurance.
And of course, if this were really going on,
then remember when we were talking about how no company
really will be able to sell insurance at an actually fair
rate because they'd be losing money,
because they're investing over overhead.
So then the rates would be even more than a billion
dollar policy, and it would destroy the markets.
So that's a particularly fair case.
But any of these cases do basically follow.
So questions about the real world of regulation.
So much of it which does seem to be specifically concerned
with amplifying the two problems that economists usually
use to justify the problem.
Now, by the way, it is possible, of course,
that insurance companies can have a lot of information,
but there's still some residual after selection.
Like it could be that insurance companies
can make a very good prediction of your risk
conditional upon your age, sex, occupation, location,
a bunch of other factors.
Health history, of course, is another really good one to use.
And yet, you could still have a little bit
of additional information on top of all the information
in the database of the insurance company.
That's going to be a marginal problem,
but there could still be a little bit of problem
left on top.
But again, do not underestimate the amazing power of actuaries
and how much they know.
By the way, actuary is a great profession
if you like taking tests.
So my best friend at Princeton did
economic consulting for two years
and said this is terrible.
I hate every second of this.
And then he was the math guru in our program.
So he was the one who we would always go to with our math.
And so he was able to go and pass the first actuarial test
with almost no work.
And then he just became an actuary.
And then the tests were so easy for him.
And the way that it works is there's seven tests
to go and complete the program.
And for each test, a company will generally
give you two or three weeks vacation
to study for the test.
Since my friend didn't actually need to study,
he just got six extra free paid vacations.
So he would fly to Europe for a couple weeks
and then come back and be like, no, I'm ready for this test.
It's going to be real hard.
Most people, in fact, few people on Earth
would be at his level, which is why he was helping all of us.
And he's a great job if you want to have
an upper middle class income and only work 35 hours a week
for the rest of your life.
Retire at 60.
He's never considered it exciting.
But it does leave an enormous amount of time
for his many exciting hobbies.
This point, well, it was a good backup plan, anyway,
for undergraduates.
He finished his PhD at Princeton.
He's like, wow, that didn't do me any good at all.
OK.
Now, there has been some empirical work
on the severity of adverse selection.
And here's this frightening thing.
At the time that this was being invoked
as a ironclad argument in favor of Obamacare,
there were already some published papers
saying that adverse selection doesn't even
seem to be much of a problem.
It's not even clear that it exists.
Or maybe there is reverse adverse selection,
as we'll see.
All right.
So anyway, so two takes on why there's
so little evidence for adverse selection,
except in cases where regulation causes adverse selection.
So there are studies of cases where
you have extreme regulations, which
do cause adverse selection.
But that's, of course, not the kind of evidence
that some advocate of a market failure theory is looking for.
You want to find an unregulated market where
the market has been destroyed.
Anyway, so two different takes.
So one of them is that insurance companies actually
know more about you than you do.
So if an actuary disagrees with your self-assessment
of your own health or your own risk,
maybe you should just leave the actuary,
throw away what you think you know.
So they have these actuary tables, and you don't.
Of course, they're no longer tables.
Now it's a giant, incredibly sophisticated computer model.
And then another story, this is getting a little bit ourselves,
but there's been a fair bit of work on personality economics.
So one of the main traits that is studied in personality
psychology is what they call conscientiousness.
Or if you know your Myers-Briggs personality type,
this is the same as J versus P, where
J equals high conscientiousness and P
equals low conscientiousness.
Why that?
Well, Myers-Briggs is generally given in workplaces
where they want to have the story of we all
work best as a team and we need all types, especially
lazy people.
That's what they call them.
Officially late people.
Anyway, so they didn't want to say that.
So instead they gave an obscurantist name
to low conscientiousness, which is perceiving.
And so anyway, if anyone here is perceiving,
many of my favorite people in the world are perceiving.
They're my favorite friends.
They're not my favorite employees.
No, I'm just kidding.
All right, in any case, so there's
this writing conscientiousness that's been heavily studied
in psychology.
And basic idea is people are high in conscientiousness.
They are hardworking.
They are disciplined, orderly, punctual, neat, tidy, boring,
all those things.
And on the other hand, you have people
who are low in conscientiousness who are thrill-seeking, lazy,
and disorganized, and messy, sloppy, living in pigsty.
But fun.
So anyway, we got these.
Now, once you accept this as just a general difference
between human beings, then you might think, hmm,
what kind of people do you think buy lots of insurance?
Yeah, conscientious people.
And how many accidents do conscientious people generally
have?
Less.
No, yeah, they don't have many.
All right, so there's many different amusing tests
of this.
So one of them, so people who drive motorcycles
without helmets.
So and even in states where insurance companies
were required to sell them insurance at the same price
as someone who wasn't a motorcycle rider.
All right, so do you think the people who
ended up in hospitals because they had accidents where
they weren't wearing a helmet, are they generally loaded up
to the gills with health insurance?
No, they are not.
They are more likely to be uninsured.
They're doing something incredibly risky.
So in a simple adverse selection model,
they would have tons of insurance.
Instead, they are very likely to be uninsured.
So growing up in the state of California,
very strong conventional wisdom, which
is confirmed that every time my parents were involved
in an auto accident, is the person
that you get in an accident with will not have auto insurance.
You may say, that's odd.
Shouldn't accident-prone people have lots of auto insurance?
Well, the same kind of people who
don't look over their shoulder into their blind spot
before they change lanes also don't really
worry that much about whether they're
going to have insurance.
There's another one.
So have you ever had a credit card company
try to sell you extra protection against theft
of your credit card?
All right.
Now, what do you think about whether this
is a good policy to buy?
So let me just give you a hint.
Legally, you're generally only liable for $50
of stolen credit card charges as long as you
report it within the day.
So you're paying, you might be paying like $25 a year
in order to avoid a maximum loss of $50.
Not very good, but anyway.
So there was some researcher who looked at this
and found out, out of people that do buy this,
do you think they have a high rate of losing their wallets
or a low rate?
A low rate.
They have a low rate.
Again, not what you would expect.
Now, the, so let's see.
So again, probably one of the very best studies in this.
So in the AR, there's a study of life insurance
to see whether there's adverse selection there.
And the basic prediction of the adverse selection model
is people who have a higher risk of death
are going to have more or less insurance.
More.
What is very strongly shown in the data?
Exactly the opposite.
So what kinds of people are loaded up to the gills
with life insurance?
People like me.
All right, so like the most dangerous thing I do is vlog.
Right?
And if anything bad happens to me,
I probably will have something to do with that.
But I think I'm still really dangerous.
So people who have lots of life insurance
tend to be people who have very safe jobs, very secure incomes.
So they've got kids.
They're married.
So what are they, every weekend, what are they doing?
Staying home with the kids.
So this kind of lifestyle.
And so how much supplemental life insurance do you think I
have?
My wife has a rule.
We each have to have enough supplemental life insurance
to buy our entire house outright.
So we need to have supplemental life insurance equal to the
entire value of our mortgage.
Now, I don't know where this rule came from.
But anyway, this is our approach.
But anyway, so people like me tend
to have a whole lot of life insurance,
despite the fact that we are very safe
and live cautiously in the extreme.
And again, on the other hand, people
who are doing high-risk lifestyles generally
are not loaded up with life insurance.
They might not have any supplemental life insurance
at all.
They might not even have a job that includes life insurance.
So this was a paper that really showed an entire industry
where people assumed that adverse selection was basically
there.
Not only is there no sign of it, the evidence
all goes the other way.
So the only thing you could really
do to save the model in this case
is to say there's still adverse selection,
but we just got the side.
We were wrong about which side has it.
You could say that the real problem is that insurance
companies are the ones with more information than you.
And then people are not buying it
because when an insurance company tries
to sell you insurance, they're like, hmm,
well, you don't think you're trying to sell it to me
if it were a bad deal, so I don't want it.
So I haven't heard anyone actually make this argument,
although in terms of the data, I'd
say this is a much better story than the usual one.
Anyway.
All right.
So I would say that there's still
been shockingly little done on the story, which, again,
is super intuitive.
Conscientious people buy insurance,
and they have little risks.
And so this is at least a big offsetting factor,
which leads us to really not see very much adverse selection.
And then there was a paper in the Rand Journal
that theoretically models this.
And it's sometimes called an advantageous selection
or propitious selection.
So basically, it just flips them all around.
And there's one other fun example of fun application
of adverse selection.
So if you're here at Mason, you may
have heard someone talking about the wonders of integral
capitalism at some point and abolishing the government
and privatizing police and all this stuff.
All right, so anyway.
Now, whatever you think about this,
here is one argument that people have made against it.
And the argument says, look, if there were just
a private police market, then what would happen
is that companies would try to attract customers by saying,
we'll pay for anyone.
We don't care what you've done.
We'll stand by you no matter what your crimes are.
Now, in terms of the adverse selection model,
is that what you're saying?
Does that sound like a promising business strategy?
Yeah, well who are you going to attract if you say,
we don't care if you're an Axe murderer,
we'll stay, our clients, we have their backs no matter what.
Who's gonna be showing up and trying to buy your coverage?
Charles Manson.
Yeah, Charles Manson, Axe murderers.
Yeah, so, yeah, the kinds of customers that you want,
or again, you want customers like me,
you want someone like ultra cautious.
Like, so, if someone bumps into me,
I apologize to them.
That's just how I roll.
I never say, sir, you bumped into me.
Like, you know, especially if the person
looked dangerous or whatever.
But even if it's like a little lady,
like I don't want her attacking me with her umbrella.
Sorry, ma'am.
And this way I solve an enormous number of problems
for myself.
Never been attacked by a stranger that I can recall.
But there was some guy on Twitter saying that
he saw me in a park with my kids
and really wanted to punch me in the face,
but he didn't do it.
So, you know, he didn't give any details,
but his story's still believable.
But he didn't actually do it.
So, I guess that's the good news.
Right, and yes, why was he gonna punch me?
Because of the internet.
Yes.
All right.
So anyway, if you were, wanted to use adverse selection
to go and worry about integral capitalism
or free market events,
it would actually, you want to go to the other side
and say the real problem is that
companies will want to throw you to the wolves
as soon as you go and step on someone's foot
because they don't want to cause it.
Again, of course, in a world where they can just go
and charge higher rates based upon risk,
then they can say, well, we will defend you,
but there is this.
But again, you don't want to be in the position
where someone actually gains by going
and committing an offense.
Right?
And again, all of it, so like the general idea
of insurance fraud, like you have to select,
what is the whole idea behind insurance fraud?
So you go and you,
how do you make money off of insurance fraud?
Because you, so let's suppose you got a building
and you burn it down.
How do you make money with that?
How do you make money by burning down
your own building again?
Yes.
Do you insure it for more than it's worth?
Bingo, yes, you insure it for more than it's worth.
So in general, insurance companies want to avoid
doing that kind of thing because, yes,
that leads to bad moral hazard, clearly.
It's like, hey, if only this building
would just somehow burn down,
I would make a lot of money.
That'd be great.
And then of course, adverse selection as well.
When you offer policies like that,
who are gonna be the first people in line
who want to buy those policies?
Arsonists.
Yes, arsonists.
They're like, oh yeah.
So it both encourages arson,
but also attracts people who are arsonists to begin with,
or arson prone people.
Okay, so questions.
Questions about adverse selection.
Oh, yes.
Is there any other market or any other example
of adverse selection in insurance?
That's what you mean, like for any kind of insurance,
in theory, you could have it.
So you got health insurance, auto insurance,
life insurance, fire insurance.
Let's see.
So one of the people talked about quite a bit,
this is at least on the face, it's plausible,
which is why isn't there private unemployment insurance?
All right, and you might say,
well, it's because these problems go and kill it.
Of course, another possibility,
there's other possibilities.
Like one is when the government heavily subsidizes
unemployment insurance,
why would you go and buy private insurance?
There's that.
Another possibility is that these problems exist
to some extent, but there are better ways
of dealing with the problem of unemployment
than buying a policy that is called unemployment insurance.
So right now, what is the,
in the private sector,
what is your main safeguard against unemployment?
Working hard.
Yes, working hard, or,
there's also, how about you go and work in an industry
or for an employer that is known
to have a lot of job security?
Right, so of course you can go and work
in the public sector where you've got
enormous job security, right?
Or sometimes near total job security.
But even in the private sector,
there's a whole range of security of different jobs.
I mean, like actuaries have incredible job security.
Private sector employees, and yet,
they're hardly ever laid off.
Very, very, so let's see.
Yeah, so they're very rarely fired.
Normally what you do if you wanna get rid of them
is you just get, is you switch them
to a crummy part of the company and hope that they quit.
But, during a recession, you may say,
yeah, you need a company,
well, you know, the classic one is put them
on the night shift.
I don't think there's a night shift for actuaries,
but that's the general idea.
Yeah, so, in my economics of education class,
I have a question that I give students
where I ask them how firing,
or how firing works at their current place of employment
or the last place of employment.
And I'm like, does anyone literally ever get fired?
And a lot of people say, no one ever really gets fired.
But if they wanna get rid of you,
they just give you the worst shift,
or they just cut down your number of hours to a low level,
and then they just hope you go away.
Right, and then, so that is an alternative there.
So, yeah, so anyway, so, basically right now,
people are buying a lot of unemployment insurance
from their employer implicitly
without it being called unemployment insurance.
So there's that.
Of course, there's also just saving money.
That's a great form of unemployment insurance.
Working hard is good too, but saving money
is a little bit less subject to business cycle fluctuations.
Yeah.
I don't think the point of unemployment insurance
is really just to insure unemployment.
I think it's really just another type of distribution.
If you're a tenured economist,
you're not going to be unemployed,
so you're gonna have part of your wages
go to someone who doesn't have that.
Right, right.
Yeah, sure, so, of course, this is a standard thing
for economists to do, is to call things insurance
when it's actually redistributive.
I mean, unemployment insurance
is probably not as redistributive as it looks
because the employers pay premiums based upon the risk.
And so, basically, this means if your employees
are almost never laid off,
then the amount you pay to the government
for the unemployment insurance premiums
is gonna be modest, although it still
is probably not fully adjusted for risk.
And so, yeah, that's part of what's going on.
Right.
All right.
Yeah, so, like, anytime, whenever economists
talk about social insurance,
there's some obvious things to think about.
Like, well, if welfare were really insurance,
then wouldn't Bill Gates pay next to nothing in taxes?
What are the odds he'll ever be on welfare?
And, yeah, so, again, a lot of it is actually,
just like you're saying, it's thinly veiled redistribution,
although it may be thinly veiled redistribution
with some very heavy deadweight costs
on top of everything.
All right.
So, questions about ever selection?
Everyone happy with ever selection?
And, again, so, I mean, I haven't heard much about it
in recent years, but there were about two years
when it was very commonly discussed in the media.
I don't think it was ever on the front page,
but, like, on the op-ed page,
or if you were to actually read an article
about what's going on, it would be heavily discussed.
And, again, the bizarre pairing of mentioning moral hazard
and ever selection in the same sentence,
even though the effect of Obamacare on moral hazard
is completely the opposite of what you would normally,
of what it's supposed to be.
So, are there any government health-related regulations
that seem designed to at least try to deal with moral hazard?
Well, let's see, I already mentioned motorcycle accidents.
So, what is a regulation that's relating to motorcycles
that does have something to do with moral hazard?
Helmet laws.
Helmet laws.
All right, so, normally we see this as paternalism, right?
You don't want to try to protect the owners
of the motorcyclist from cracking their heads open.
But you could also say, well, wait a second,
it's not really paternalism because in our state,
taxpayers are on the hook for your brain injuries.
And since we, and if you know this,
you're more likely to drive without a helmet,
so you know what, you have to drive with a helmet.
You've got that.
Or, you talk about regulations on diet,
things like that, so like banning trans fats.
Again, of course, the regulations may be highly ineffective,
so if you know anything about the social science
of trying to reduce obesity,
there's enormous amount of substitution.
You go and ban one unhealthy thing,
people generally don't then switch to celery.
People usually switch to a different unhealthy thing.
Right, yes?
So like with the helmet law,
and I guess seat belts fall under this category.
Yeah, yeah, seat belts, perfect.
So couldn't you say that requiring a helmet or a seat belt
is also another form of a moral hazard?
Because I'm gonna drive a little bit more risky.
Ah, yeah, yeah, yeah, well, that's another good example
where even if it's at least targets one kind of moral hazard,
it may cause other ones.
And there is actually whole economic literature
on just making cars safer,
make drivers drive in a riskier way.
So yeah, so that's upsetting.
Do helmet laws make motorcyclists even more risky?
Yeah, it's a little hard to believe.
So I got a helmet, before,
before I was already going crazy,
but now that I got a helmet.
I'm gonna jump 12 school buses.
Yeah, take it up to 190 now.
You can't even.
I think the fastest vehicle I've ever seen
on a public road was in Germany when I was passed
on the Autobahn by a pack of uniformed cyclists.
And I think they were going,
I mean, I was probably going 95
and they passed me like I was walking.
So I think that they must have been going
like 160, 170 miles an hour.
Now, these are German motorcyclists.
So they're all color coordinated.
Their outfits match their bikes.
And they look like they know what they're doing.
But I mean, if anyone does,
they look like they were really prepared.
And yet, one cockroach gets in front
of that motorcyclist at the wrong time.
And they just be a ball of fire
by the end of the road for a mile.
And then whatever would happen to them.
So in the case with like equal rates for health insurance,
would sin taxes be it?
Could you see sin taxes?
Yeah, so sin taxes, again, potentially.
And so there's the issue of will people
to switch to some other unhealthy thing.
But again, at least in principle,
you can think about that.
Now again, what's striking is that normally,
the health insurance doesn't include this stuff.
It's just done in a totally different way.
And again, probably for totally different reasons.
And so, they're called sin taxes,
not health externality taxes.
So again, of course, that doesn't mean
that they don't serve that function.
Although it does suggest
that there wasn't really careful analysis
of whether they were suited for the job.
And as you were suggesting back there,
I think that's true.
That people, it's more like people know
what they want to do,
and then they just look around
for any rationalization for it.
And if you say, well, actually,
it's more complicated than that.
Well, we've already got 51% of the votes we need.
So we've already passed it.
And whatever you say, professor.
All right, so questions, questions.
All right.
So now we move to the asymmetric information problem.
So dear to my heart that I do have
a 416 page book on it, which is signaling.
All right, so let's just start with some puzzles.
All right.
So, people spend a lot of time in school
studying subjects that it seems like
you will never use after the final exam.
And yet, employers care.
So you can be one Aristotle class short of graduation,
and you have your job applications
getting thrown in the trash.
And then you get this Aristotle class,
and you finish it, and you are now a graduate,
and then suddenly a bunch of doors open for you.
And this gives you better careers,
better career options, and more money.
And this seems weird, right?
Do you really think Aristotle actually improves
job performance in many jobs in the modern economy?
I did have a student who was saying it totally does,
because if you go and read,
I think he said if you read Aristotle's rhetoric,
then this will, then he said,
he was like a classics undergraduate,
he said if you read it and really understood it,
this would make you a better salesman.
I'm like, all right, well I've read it.
And I'm like, all right, maybe,
but how many people read it and do become better salesmen
as a result of reading Aristotle's rhetoric?
So yeah, it was probably very few.
All four of them.
Yes, all four of them.
Yeah.
All right.
So again, if you just go through your mental,
or your mental list of all the classes
you ever had to take,
think about all of the classes that you had to do
that just don't seem very relevant in the real world.
All right, so history.
How many real world jobs use knowledge of history,
other than history teacher?
All right, poetry.
There's a lot of jobs for poets, right?
Art and music.
And look, these are required classes
in most American public schools.
You can't say, I don't wanna be a musician,
so I'm not taking this class.
It's like, well, then you're not gonna graduate.
Too bad.
All right.
And then, of course, like Shakespeare,
you can learn English that's spoken 500 years ago.
That's really useful.
Right?
Even higher, mathematics.
How many jobs are there that actually use calculus?
My job uses calculus,
because when I teach PG Micro, I need calculus.
But then this kind of goes back,
yeah, I had a few articles that used calculus, but.
But anyway, so there is actual research on this,
and I think the result is,
out of people who actually did calculus or higher,
only about 20% say they use algebra on the job.
So it's not just that you don't use,
people who study calculus don't use calculus.
80% of them don't even use algebra.
All right, so.
Only one study is the only one I know of,
but it was like, wow,
that's an unusually low level of usefulness.
And then, think about it,
so like civics, odds are using that.
So, you know, it seems odd that this stuff is so important.
We're talking about this foreign language in America.
I know there are countries where foreign languages
are super useful,
especially if that foreign language is English.
All right, so there's a lot of countries
where learning, or becoming fluent in English
opens up a lot of opportunities for you.
But for Americans, how often does an American go
and acquire additional job options
by taking a foreign language class in school?
And yet, how many of you had a foreign language requirement
at some point in your educational career?
Yeah, so, like, say to California now
to go to any UC or CSU schools,
this is like the entire,
like all the state-funded colleges in California,
three years, mandatory.
Mandatory three years, yes?
They also require you to take a four-year art.
Ah, four-year OL.
Well, where would we be without that, right?
Right.
Yes?
But, for example, how do you feel about this
Parkland students who were like taking these theater classes
and then made them, like, better spokespeople?
Yeah, so.
Is that anecdotal?
Like, talk about it?
Yeah, that sounds super anecdotal.
Basically, if a horrific and ultra-rare tragedy
happens to strike, then the drama students
will be prepared to deal with that kind of situation.
That seems like a way of, like, it's true,
but it's like, wow, you're really stretching things.
I mean, once I gave this talk and a guy came up to me
and he said, look, you're wrong about foreign language.
French was, I took French in high school
and it was really useful for me.
I'm like, all right, tell me more.
He said, well, once I was at Charleston Hall Airport
and my flight was delayed and they only announced it
in French.
And if I hadn't taken French, I would have missed my plane.
Yeah, but the drama students, they
could have applied to other things other than just, like,
yeah, you know, yeah.
It's possible.
In general, if a parent finds out
their kid is interested in drama, do they say, wow,
this is preparing you for lots of great jobs.
Good idea.
Or is it like, please don't want to pursue this
with any intensity.
Yes.
All right, so anyway, this guy, look,
so you're telling me that you gave up how many years studying
French?
I think you did like four years.
So you gave up four years of your life studying French
to avoid missing one plane.
Four years of high school French have
prepared me for this moment.
Yeah, yeah.
So anyway, so now, of course, for any particular class,
you can go and debate it.
But at least, like, almost anyone
who's ever been in school has some sense
that you were made to study a bunch of subjects
that any reasonable forecast would say
would not be very likely.
And yet, employers still care.
That's what's odd.
Employers still seem to be interested in whether you
completed the requirements.
Yes.
Is it possible that what you have learned
has nothing to do with the job, but this
has something to do with your everyday life?
That is possible, too, although it would still
leave open the puzzle of why do employers care.
So right now, we're just listing some puzzles.
Why do employers care that you study something
that you are never going to use in the job?
Or is it highly unlikely?
Maybe it's about uncertainty.
I don't know what I'm going to do in the future.
Yeah, so maybe you study Latin in case
you happen to fall into a time machine.
And you're like, what the heck?
You know, so, you know, like, any elegies.
Time travel's possible according to some theories of physics.
So don't be so dogmatic.
No, sorry.
I don't mean to pick on you.
So in my book, I do say that a lot of the defenses
that I've heard about different obscure subjects
and how they're really useful after all
reminds me a lot of the show Hoarders.
All right, so this is a reality TV show
about people who have stuffed their houses with junk.
Sometimes it's like horde cats.
They have like 300 cats in their house.
So sometimes it's old computers.
You have 500 computers from the 80s
who just live climbing over piles of junk.
Sometimes it's much more disgusting collections
than what I'm talking about.
It's the people who don't throw out food.
And they have extra refrigerators.
Or maybe they just store bottles of spoiled milk
in their garage.
Now, if you go to these people and try
to get them to stop doing this, it's like, look,
why don't you just throw out your 1,000
gallons of spoiled milk?
What is the standard answer of the people on this show?
I might need it.
I might need it.
Are they wrong?
No.
No, it's true they might need it.
I can think of lots of uses of spoiled milk.
Maybe you'll be attacked by a home invader.
And in the last minute, they'll say, oh, well,
I just need to get a little drink of milk here.
And then you open it up and you throw it on them.
And they get to their mouth and they go, ah!
And then you save your life.
That's spoiled milk.
It'll save your life.
Prove it won't.
So anyway, the I might need it defense is literally true.
But it's also a terrible defense.
Look, how about cost-benefit analysis?
Sure, there are some conceivable uses for spoiled milk.
But must you really have 1,000 gallons of it?
Do you really need any spoiled milk?
I think they are wrong because if the probability is very low,
you need to calculate the expected.
But they're not doing that.
They're not saying expected benefit minus expected cost.
They're just saying it has some expected benefits, which,
again, is the kind of defense that I
think I hear of many seemingly useless school settings.
subjects is like people come up with scenarios where it could be useful.
Like, all right, I suppose that's happened to somebody.
Yes.
You might have said this in your book, but I haven't read it.
You could just take that in reverse and just make a, say, any subject under the sun is
justification for it.
Yeah.
And then just start making things up and asking this person, like, do you think we should
teach basketball in schools?
You might use it.
Like, do you think we should teach Esperanto in schools?
You might use it.
Yeah, I mean, I think there's a lot of people saying, oh, yeah, I mean, like, we need more
and more of this stuff.
And then, you know, like, we're really shortchanging our kids right now.
Yeah, there's that.
All right.
So, anyway, this is one puzzle that's weighed on me.
I will honestly say I cannot remember an age at which I was not simply baffled by all of
the useless subjects that were taught in school and, like, and the fact that I, you know,
I go to adults and say, well, why do I have to do this?
And they say, well, so you like, see, like, you don't, it'll be hard to get a good job.
I'm like, hmm.
Well, yeah, it seems like everybody know the good job has done this stuff.
So I probably can't get out of it.
But why?
Why?
All right.
Now, some other ones.
All right.
So why is it that if a company just goes and puts a warranty sticker on a product, that
makes it more likely to buy it?
Warranty stickers on the exterior of a box, you know, like, suppose there's a product
and then, like, there's no warranty and then someone, and then you see someone come and
put the sticker on.
And suddenly, you're more willing to buy it.
But that sticker didn't change the contents of the box.
It doesn't, like, bleed through the packing material and improve the quality of the product.
Right?
And then imagine that you are just passing through a town.
So you're not going to be able to actually return the product.
Even then, that warranty sticker makes you more likely to buy.
Why is that?
All right.
Or here's another one.
Why use nice paper on a job application?
So, again, standard advice is you're sending out resumes.
Go and splurge for the $30 paper.
You know, like the paper that's 25% cotton.
All right?
Now, do you believe there's someone on the other end of your envelope who gets it out
and goes, oh, 25% cotton.
Oh, man.
I love this paper.
Right?
It doesn't seem like it.
And yet, people do this anyway.
And it seems like it's a pretty good idea.
All right?
Or is it the other one?
So why are there so many jobs where you have to wear a suit to work?
I mean, what a stupid uniform.
When you think about, like, indeed, you're going to be able to wear a suit to work.
But you're not going to be able to wear a suit to work.
You're not going to be able to wear a suit to work.
You're not going to be able to wear a suit to work.
And yet, there's many jobs where you would not be allowed to work there if you refused
to wear a suit.
It seems like a very bad uniform.
You know, if it were like a tennis outfit, that would be a sensible uniform.
But no, it's got to be this, like, a jacket.
A jacket and a suit.
And you're not going to be able to wear a suit to work.
So it's got to be this, like, a jacket, a jacket and a long-sleeved shirt and wool pants.
Right?
And then, like, leather shoes.
I mean, like, I've yet to find one, like, a pair of dress shoes.
That doesn't seem like a torture device to me.
And, like, you know, I know people are wearing worse shoes than that all the time.
So I think it's part of the job.
All right?
So why is that?
Why is it that there's so many jobs where they require you to wear this uniform which
seems so ill-suited for comfort and for just doing a good job?
All right?
Here's another one.
So why are wedding rings so expensive?
You know, there's the standard De Beers commercial, how else could two months' salary last forever?
All right?
It's like, well, why would we need to give up two months of our life to go and get a ring?
I mean, what's so great about it?
All right?
And think about this.
Suppose that someone came up with a way of making diamonds synthetically for the cost
of plastic.
For how much longer would diamond engagement rings still be given?
A week?
A day?
Newsflash!
Diamonds now as cheap as plastic.
That would probably kill the whole diamond in diamond industry.
Right?
You know, like, you would at least diamond wedding rings.
You might use them for costume jewelry.
But you would only, like, so it might be that you give it to a five-year-old at that point,
like a cubic zirconia.
Right?
Anyone seen the commercial of, hey, a cubic zirconia looks just like a real diamond.
Right?
And yes, and of course, the point of the commercial is, this is the kind of reasoning that makes
people hate you.
True, though it may be.
All right?
So if this happened instead, people would very quickly go and switch to other kinds
of gems that could not be cheaply synthesized.
All right?
And again, that seems kind of odd.
It seems like it's got to keep costing this exorbitant amount in order for it to serve
whatever its social function is.
All right.
Here's another one.
So why do countries have tons of weapons that they never tend to use?
So it would be clear it's during the 1980s when the Soviet Union would have the May Day
Parade, and they'd go in this endless line of scary-looking stuff where it's like, look,
if you were to actually launch this, it would be World War III.
It would be the end of all of us.
So what's the point of going and having all the weapons that are so deadly that they'd
wind up killing the people that own them?
It's a deterrent.
Right?
Yes.
Well, yes, it does feel like you're so preserved, but why is it a deterrent to have weapons
that are so deadly you wouldn't even want to use them?
Right?
So imagine you had the actual doomsday device.
This is the button I press, it kills everyone on Earth.
It's like, well, you wouldn't do that.
Oh, no.
Would a nice person build a doomsday device?
All right, getting a little ahead of ourselves.
Or one last seemingly unrelated example.
You ever looked at a male peacock?
It's like, evolution made that animal.
Evolution made that animal.
It's like, how do you escape any predator in the world with that kind of a tail?
It's like, 15 feet long.
You can lay like, never mind, you're a flightless bird.
You can barely walk.
You're like, so, and yet evolution created that beast.
The pea eggs, on the other hand, look like they could get away easily.
But we're seeing them like they're hideous.
Just like a homely chicken.
But the male peacock's gorgeous.
But seems like they would have been wiped out ages ago, down to the last peacock.
But there they are.
Of course, the way evolution would work is that the ones with the longer tails would get wiped out.
And then they would replace.
And finally they would get some tails that are useful in combat or something like that.
Like a dinosaur deadly spike tail.
Right?
That would, you know, look at dinosaur fossils.
Look at those animals.
I understand how evolution made those guys.
It's like a tank.
All right?
That's an animal that makes sense.
But the peacock, what is that?
Weird.
Okay.
All right, now, I mention all of these puzzles because they all have received very similar solutions.
And a similar solution goes under the heading of signaling.
All right, so the basic assumption of all these models.
First of all, you need the assumption that there are different types of people and firms.
All right, so you could have able and undisciplined workers, hard and dumb workers, honest and dishonest firms.
Or working ladies.
All kinds of possibilities.
You could have psychotic and sane.
All right, so things like that.
All right, then, so that's the first assumption.
Then it needs to be hard to observe the types directly.
In other words, we need asymmetric information.
So individuals know their type better than outsiders.
You know what kind of worker you are better than employers know what you are.
You know whether you are really a psychopath or not.
At least you know better than others.
There could still be some confusion about yourself, but you've got to know better where you stand than others do.
All right, and then the third assumption, this is the key, is that different types have different costs of performing the same observable activity.
All right, so we need to have different costs.
And in particular, we need to have the type that is in higher demand.
The type that is more desired by the market needs to have a lower cost of doing something that is observable.
All right, and then we put this all together, and you say, hey, all right, well, suppose I'm the good type.
But there's asymmetric info, so people don't know I'm the good type.
So what am I going to do?
I'm going to go and signal.
I'm going to do some things that I wouldn't want to do unless I were the good type.
And by doing this, I will convince observers of the goodness of my type.
And, of course, this doesn't have to be perfect.
It could be that you just raise the probability, right?
But if you can go and move someone's probability that you're a good worker from 40% to 55%, that could be enough to get you over the top and get you hired.
So it could be that some bad people are capable of sending the signal or will send it.
But as long as it raises the probability, then it could easily be worthwhile.
So what is a standard, really easy thing for someone to show that they are a textbook psychopath?
So someone smoking a cigarette, what can they do to immediately convince you that they are, in fact, not to be trifled with?
Put it out on themselves.
All right?
This is a very scary action.
Look, I'm not talking about putting a cigarette out on you. That's scarier.
But that, of course, immediately gets you in big trouble.
You could go to jail for putting a cigarette out on another person. That's a good thing, too.
But if you put a cigarette out on yourself, like a bunch of other people see this, people will talk.
And people will not mess with the person.
If he'll do that to himself, what would he do to another person?
You don't want to mess with that person, steer clear of them.
And of course this means that if you're ever in prison and you're not a psychopath, you might want to do this just so that the worst things don't happen.
You might say, hey, look at me.
All right?
That is, of course, just one example.
But for all of those different cases I gave you, we can think of examples.
All right.
So, for example, why is it that that Aristotle class would oppress employers?
All right.
Well, let's see.
First of all, if you do well in the Aristotle class, well, there's a lot of people who could try really hard and they would still not be able to do it because they're just not smart enough.
All right.
So most people could read Aristotle their whole lives.
Like, what in the world is this guy even talking about?
Virtue is a state of choice lying to mean, i.e. the mean relative to us, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
All right.
So most people would have a lot of trouble ever figuring that out.
So, you know, I suggest that you're smart.
Of course, just being really smart isn't enough to get out and finish your Aristotle class.
You've got to be hardworking.
Right.
And then as I discuss in my book, besides these first two things, smart and hardworking, the other thing that you really do show very strongly with education is that you're smart.
The other thing that you show very strongly with education is that you are conformist.
Right.
That if the school goes and comes up with an arbitrary, ridiculous list of requirements, you don't sit there saying, this is an arbitrary, ridiculous list of requirements and I'm not going to go along with it.
In that case, you don't get to graduate and your employers will not want to hire you because you would not signal your conformity.
On the other hand, like a good student just says, what are the requirements again?
All right, great.
I get to work.
All right, so I need three years of foreign language.
All right.
All right.
Well, let's do a foreign language then.
Do employers care what it is?
Nope.
All right, great.
All right, let's do that.
Or again, it might be, like, do they care what it is?
All right, well, what's the hardest one?
So, not the, you might say, well, Latin's harder.
All right, fine, I'll do Latin.
But you're never going to use Latin on a job.
But it might impress employers more in their more useful language, actually.
So, it might be that.
Right.
So, I actually have a story about why this last one is better.
Why signaling conformity is especially crucial is here's the thing.
It's not just that you get better pay from doing better in school.
But school is the kind of thing where it's very hard to come up with any convincing substitute for it.
Like, there are many jobs where you could say, look, I've got great IQ scores.
I've got all I have.
I have strong documentation that I've worked 70 hours a week for years.
So, now, so, yeah, sure I dropped out of high school, but you should hire me anyway.
And yet there's a lot of jobs where you suspect you wouldn't even get an interview based upon that.
And it's like, yeah, well, sure you're smart and hardworking, but you just don't want to submit to social expectations.
Because in our society, you're supposed to go and complete a bunch of degrees.
And you didn't do that.
Why not?
If you're that smart and that hardworking, it should have been easy for you to get a college degree.
But you didn't.
Why not?
Why not, indeed?
And, again, a natural inference is you've got some problem with authority.
You won't fit in.
You won't go along.
And, again, for virtually every job, conformity is important.
Even jobs that people say, well, you have to be really creative here.
We don't want a bunch of conformists.
Well, you want someone who is creative within the confines of the job.
But you don't want someone who's so creative that you say, you know what?
I think I should be the boss of this firm.
You know what?
I think our customers are idiots.
And we should go and come up with a totally different product and find totally different customers.
That's my plan.
People like this are unwelcome on virtually every job on earth.
And I know some people like this.
They're very lovable and fun people.
But I don't want to employ them.
Not at all.
So, let's get the calls here.
So, this is my general story about why this non-job-related school is the race to your income.
You can go through the other ones.
So, obviously, with the warranty.
So, when a firm goes and slaps a really good warranty on a product, it does not improve the product when you slap the warranty on.
But here's the thing.
Suppose your product is awesome.
How much does it cost you to offer an awesome warranty?
Next to nothing, right?
Who's going to go and return your awesome product?
If you know everyone who buys it loves it, you can go and offer a fantastic warranty, and it costs you next to nothing.
On the other hand, if your product is junk, then it's very costly to offer a warranty because a lot of people are going to want their money back.
So, it is a very credible signal of quality to give a great warranty.
Or, again, the nice paper.
So, if there are some people who are willing to go and make a special trip to the store and spend some extra money to go and impress you, and others aren't,
well, who do you rather hire?
I'd rather hire the person who goes and makes this extra effort to impress me with a fancy paper.
Now, again, of course, it does not need to be a big effect, right?
Suppose that you can improve your expected earnings by 1% by going and getting that fancy paper.
Is that a good investment of your time?
What does it cost?
One trip to the store, 30 bucks for the paper, so maybe like 50 bucks.
And then if it raises your income by 1%, so that could easily be like $500.
So, that's a great investment.
It's the kind of thing where you think about it and wonder why doesn't everybody do it.
Right, Annie?
If it's probably some lazy, defiant people like, ah, I don't feel like it.
Oh, I've got paper.
It's enough of a burden on me to have to send in a job application at all.
Now I've got to put on fancy paper.
You may even know friends who would have this attitude.
And do you want to hire them?
Right?
Maybe not.
Right, or again with the suit.
Right, if the clothing you wore to work was comfortable, everyone would be happy to do it.
And it wouldn't really show very much.
But when it's miserable clothing, this is where you can distinguish between the people who go and subordinate their individuality and comfort to the demands of the team,
and there's those who don't want to.
And for a lot of those jobs, I'd rather get those people that are willing to go and subordinate it.
And again, when you think about this, what's striking is that almost anything could be the required uniform.
Right, so it could be that we all have to wear winter coats in the summer, and we could have that equilibrium.
Right, but so much of this is just about conformity, so whatever is already accepted is what you want to go and do as well.
Has measures of conformity ever been compared in those examples versus school to see what the weighting is?
So the answer is, I mean, I've looked around a lot for this, and I haven't seen anything that's really very good, unfortunately.
So it's the kind of thing that seems like it's got to be right, and yet in terms of actual affirmative evidence for this point, I will say I haven't seen very much.
I mean, so in a way, like my bet, I'm like the argument that I think there is data out there that would be a very good fit with this.
So in many schools, including like the whole Los Angeles Unified School District when I was growing up, for grades 7 through 12,
but on your report card for every class, there would be the grade, which would be like A through F,
and then there were two other measures, and the measures were called work habits, that's one.
So again, the grade is like A through F, but for work habits, that's either E for excellent, S for satisfactory, U for unsatisfactory,
and then the last one, cooperation.
Cooperation, also E, S, U, right?
And if you just take a quick look here, it seems like there's a fairly close correspondence to these three things that I'm putting forward,
which is baked into the report card itself.
So grade seems a lot to do with how smart you are, hard working sounds a lot like work habits, conformity sounds a lot like cooperation.
So there is something in the very DNA of school that seems like this idea is right there,
but I've never heard of any economist actually using these behavioral marks for any purpose,
so maybe someone could get them and do the work.
Basically, if you get access, then it's a wealth of data that as far as I know, no one's ever bothered to even look at.
I'm pretty sure I did do a look over Google Scholar to see whether anyone outside of economics had done any empirical work with this,
I didn't find anything.
So, again, conformity, the extent to which conformity and agreeableness have been compared?
So, yes.
So, again, for at least for a lot of purposes, conformity seems more about conscientiousness,
but agreeableness as well, there's sort of the conforming to be nice and then there's conforming to be do-able.
And so these are sides with some correlation between them.
So, we're going to get to work, and why don't we go and take our ten minute break now, and then we will resume.
All right, now the really important question, why are wedding rings so expensive?
Well, suppose that someone comes up with a way of making the wedding ring cheap, well then it no longer signals very much, does it?
So, giving up too much salary at a ring, that signals commitment, right?
You wouldn't do that for just anybody, right?
Imagine you show up on a first date and you say, hey, I've given up too much salary for you, here you go.
All right, that is, it's convincing, it's actually so convincing it's scary, right?
But, in any case, if someone were to say I won't go on a date with someone unless they give up too much salary, you're just going to be alone, right?
People are not going to want to do that.
But, on the other hand, for a wedding, this is a very credible signal that you're giving up so much for it, shows that you're committed.
And if wedding rings then became cheaper, you would need to either find something else
to go and signal, or you could go to get two rings, or better rings, or bigger ones.
It's got to be expensive in order to be convincing.
And that is the idea.
And of course, intuitively, the whole idea of a wedding ring is that it is a symbol of
commitment.
So here I have a symbolized commitment with this ring, with this ring I to the signal.
Yes?
I think it might have been Dr. Williams, unless I'm getting somewhere else.
He was talking about the wedding ring thing too, and he was saying that diamonds aren't
even really that rare.
It's just all basically been a marketing campaign by people who are a small number of owners
of the supply of diamonds to make it a wedding.
That whole thing didn't exist before.
I mean, if they weren't rare, then why wouldn't the bridesmaid grow it down?
Yeah.
It seems like if the diamonds were easy to get, then people would produce more, and people
would just produce more, and it would drive down the price.
They had this because the people-
Yeah, so the idea is they're not rare, but they're heavily concentrated in a few locations?
Yeah.
Right.
So it's possible.
Again, it seems like there is a relatively short list of locations, but again, it seems
like there's enough locations where if they were easy to get, one of the competitors would
have produced them to the point where it would have driven the price down, but maybe he's
right.
Yeah.
I don't know.
Other places that aren't controlled by the Nubiris cartel have a tendency to erupt in
civil war, like Sierra Leone or-
Well, there's Russia.
Russia and Segadio are supposed to have plenty of diamonds.
All right.
Here's the thing.
If someone were to say, well, look, but surely the market's going to come up with a way to
make wedding rings cheaper.
They're not going to stay at too much seller forever.
It's like, yeah, I think they will.
I think they will.
I think they will.
I think they will.
I think they will.
I think they will.
I think they will.
I think they will.
I think they will.
You know why?
Because if they fell below too much salary, it would stop signaling.
So not only should we not expect market forces to go and make wedding rings cheap, we should
expect that market forces will keep them expensive, given what purpose they're supposed to serve.
And then like why would countries have tons of weapons they don't intend to use?
Well, like if you are a really scary country.
Right?
Then you may go and put it over to invest a lot of weapons and you say,
well, yeah, a normal person would use them.
A normal country governed by normal people would never think of doing it.
But we're not a normal country.
We're crazy. So do not mess with us.
Again, here are our demands.
All right, then you can try that strategy.
You may think of this as say the North Korean strategy.
Right? If we're willing to starve 10 million,
or 3 million of our own people,
what would we do to you?
So I wouldn't be talking so big about us.
Again, that's pretty convincing.
Just like putting out a cigarette on your own arm is convincing.
All right. So bottom line is,
in all these cases, it may be,
oh yeah, and then the peacocks.
So here biologists have actually independently discovered
the signaling model and comes down to,
like if you can survive with that tail, you must be awesome.
Like if you've got that tail and no animal has eaten you,
that's really impressive.
All right. In that case,
that's biologically impressive.
And then the PNs may say, wow, look at that guy.
All right. So maybe that guy should be the father of
the next generation of peacocks.
All right. So at least that is the story.
There's some variants on it of like,
if you have a big tail, it looks really good.
This might signal that you don't have any parasites.
Right? So it could be not a signal of just sheer survival.
It could be a signal of that you don't have a bunch of other,
that you're lacking some other problems.
So it could be that too.
Or anyway, in all these cases,
it may be the interest of whatever type is in higher demand to do
something that is intrinsically worthless in
order to convince others that they are in higher demand.
All right. And that is the whole idea of signaling models.
That you might go do something which is not very productive,
but it is very convincing.
All right. And from the point of view of the individual,
do you care whether your action is productive rather than just convincing?
No. But from a social point of view, it matters a lot.
From a social point of view,
there's a big difference between,
hey, I have increased my productivity or
B, let me convince you that I am this productive.
Right? Because here's the thing.
If, so in a pure signaling model,
the only thing you're doing is convincing people of
your pre-existing awesomeness then when you go and signal,
you get more money, but you have not,
by definition, increased the production of the world.
So, if you have more money,
but the world is no richer than before,
where did your money come from?
Someone else.
The other people who now look bad by comparison.
The other people that you have outshined.
Say, well, you've got your bachelor's degree,
I've got two PhDs, sucker.
All right. So, I'm a man.
All right. That is, I don't really have two PhDs,
but anyway, that is the story that you'll be telling.
All right. Let's see.
And yeah. So, I'll go into
examples in a little bit more detail in a minute.
But anyway, that's the general idea.
For all of these things, in principle,
the signaling, what you're signaling could be
completely socially worthless and yet
extremely convincing and extremely rewarding to you,
but not rewarding to society.
All right. Now, let's just go
through a mathematical example.
So, again, this is a really simple stripped down version
of a signaling model, but it illustrates
the general way models work.
So, let's suppose that we got two kinds of workers.
Good workers, bad workers.
Are there only two types of workers in the real world?
No. It's a model. It's a simple model.
Do you want to do it all with continuity?
I don't. So, I hope you don't either.
But you can, and yes,
people have gotten publications by
referring to this Greek model, the Indian model.
So, there you go. All right.
So, anyway, we got two kinds of workers,
and good workers are worth 100K to employers,
and bad workers are worth 25K.
All right. So, then, so this is the work.
I'm going to go over the, this is like
Marshall product, let's say.
Marshall product. But then, they also
have a cost of getting education.
This is our education cost. Okay.
Let's suppose that good workers
can complete school easily.
So, it only cost them 25K.
Again, it could be that they
can do the same amount of work in half the time,
so they just spend less time.
Could be that they have
a higher completion probability.
Could just be that they enjoy school more,
or they just like it less.
Right? In general, when you're
thinking about how people feel about school,
think about what it's like to be a C student.
Probably a few of you who have been C students.
What is it like to turn in your work and
typically get a C from year after year?
And remember this, you're a child when this is happening.
You're a sensitive kid,
and you're continuously told that you are inadequate.
So, is that a pleasant experience, you think?
Probably not. Right?
Even though, so, imagine this.
Suppose that you could go,
that if you just stay in school for four years,
you get your degree.
But during those four years,
every single test, the teacher comes and says,
wow, you're terrible.
You don't know anything. You're an idiot,
lazy, you're a scum.
And so, imagine you know for a fact that if you endure
200 of these demeaning,
humiliating lectures, you receive a lot of money.
Can you see a lot of people dropping out anyway?
Because they just don't like being humiliated
over and over and over and over again?
Does that fit with your understanding of what people are like,
that they generally do not like humiliation of this kind?
Yeah. So, getting C's probably feels kind of humiliating.
And according to, you know,
teachers can try to sugar coat and say,
now, I think you have lots of potential,
but right now you're only getting a C,
but you could do so much more.
Right? Because they think that makes people feel a lot better.
Doesn't it sound like you're just saying,
like maybe it's almost like a thinly veiled insult, right?
It's like, I mean, sure,
like you're doing terribly,
but you're also lacking fiber.
I just want to let you know this.
Your work's bad, and you're also subpar.
All right. So, this is the experience a lot of people have.
And here's the interesting thing.
Do people who receive this humiliating treatment
often write books about it?
No. Generally, it's the good students who write books.
Right? So, this is an undersung viewpoint.
It's one, you know, like, are there a lot of movies about
people who really hate school?
There's some, but not that many.
All right. There's a lot of movies about someone who hates school,
but then they have an inspiring teacher who turns them on,
and then now their teacher,
and you know, he's great.
And that's more of a typical plot.
Okay. So, anyway, 25K for the good students to do their education,
but it costs 50K for the bad students.
Okay. All right.
Now, as an employer,
I know what your education is,
but I don't know your type.
I have to infer your type from your education.
Right? And then last constraint,
this is called the, you know,
you think about just the opportunity cost,
or sometimes it's called the participation constraint.
And here, what I'll say is,
if you don't want, suppose you aren't working for me,
then you have a self-employment option,
where you can earn 50% of your value.
So, the good workers have a $50,000 self-employment option,
and the bad workers have a 12.5K self-employment option.
All right. Now, in equilibrium, what has to happen?
So, since this is a signaling model,
we have more constraints than usual.
So, there's the one obvious one of,
I've got to maximize my profits.
That's the same as in tons of other models.
But then we add in the signaling constraints.
The signaling constraints say,
good workers must not want to look like bad workers.
So, good workers don't look bad in equilibrium.
Right? And again, that's one's pretty obvious.
Well, yeah, why would a good worker
want to look like a bad worker?
But, for completeness, we do this one.
And then the last one is more impressive.
This is the one that bad workers don't want to look good.
All right. Now, why would a bad worker not want to look good?
Because it's too costly to do it.
Right? The burden of looking good,
the burden of sending a good signal is so horrible
that you would rather just accept your low status.
Okay. So, what happens in this model?
All right. So, there are silly strategies.
There's ones like paying all workers
the same regardless of education.
Right? All right.
And, yeah, so we, and if you were to do this,
then let's see.
So, let's see.
Let's see. Yeah.
So, have you paid every, you know,
so it's worth thinking about, by the way.
So, maybe it's not as obviously silly.
Given that it's a minute and a half,
it probably is silly in the end.
But, think about this.
So, yeah. So, suppose we've got equal percentages
of each group. Okay?
So, in that case, ah, so, like, yeah, here's, you know,
so, let's see.
So, let's see.
So, if you pay everyone the same regardless of education,
there's no reason to get education. Right?
Okay? And then the average value of workers will be 125 or 2.
So, that'll be, what, 62.5? Right?
So, you could actually get them to, you know,
they could actually get them to work for you with that
because you would need to go and pay 50,000, though,
in order to get them to do it. Right?
Because if you pay less than 50,000, what'll happen?
What will the good workers do if you pay less than 50,000?
Yeah, they'll all be self-employed
and then they won't work for you.
I'm saying if you pay everyone the same regardless of school,
then no one will get school. Right?
So, if you just say, like, I pay the same to everybody,
well, then I don't need to have any school.
All right? Anyway, so, we're going to see that, you know,
that at least you're not losing money with this strategy,
but there is a better one. Okay?
All right, so, suppose that, you know,
so, in a normal single-income equilibrium,
we expect that it's going to be only the good workers
who have the education and then the bad workers won't.
All right? So, what do we need to offer good workers
to work for me and get education?
So, they have to be paid at least 75, then.
Right? So, that's where it's got to be minimum 75
or else good workers won't want to get the education.
Right? And, on the other hand, of course,
bad workers might be paid at least 12.5K or they won't,
but here's the thing.
If you offer 75K to people with education
and 12.5K to workers without,
what will bad workers want to do?
Get education.
They'll want to go in person and get good workers,
so that's not going to be a viable strategy either.
All right? So, now, if I were to go and raise the wages
for the bad workers up to 25,000,
then we have an equilibrium
where the bad workers don't want to do it
and one where the good workers will want to do it.
Okay? And, let's see, in this case,
then I'll make an average of 12.5K per worker.
12.5K per worker.
All right.
Right? And, you know, so, if you don't have to,
so you don't have something better than that,
then we've got an actual equilibrium here where I go
and pay the good worker 75, the bad worker 25,
and then I maximize the profits,
but then good workers don't want to look bad.
So, good workers certainly don't want to get no education then
because then they would go and only get 25,000 rather
than 75,000 and you cost them, only cost them 25,000 to do it.
And, then bad workers similarly don't want to do it
because they wouldn't gain.
So, that looks pretty good.
And, now, notice that we've got a deadweight cost built
into this model.
Deadweight cost because expected surplus
for worker is actually 31.25K.
Why? Because we've got a surplus of 75K for half the workers
and we've got a surplus of, excuse me, this here, that's,
so that's, excuse me, surplus of, wait, what is it?
Yeah, surplus of 50K for these workers and a surplus
of 12.5K for these workers.
So, we've got 50% times 50K plus 50% times 12.5 and that comes
out to 31.25K per worker on average.
So, that is the surplus of working
for me rather than self-employment.
But, the real life surplus is only going to be 18.75K.
Where do the, and again, that's including the profit
to me plus the surplus that the good workers get
because the good workers get 25K in surplus each, right,
because they get paid 100K, excuse me, wait,
it was the other round.
It's actually the bad workers get the surplus.
Yeah, bad workers go and get paid 25K
but they only needed 12.5.
So, they get that surplus.
And let's see, yes, good workers, yeah,
they're just breaking even.
All right.
So, anyway, so the remaining amount,
the remaining 12.5K, that's the deadweight loss.
That is the loss that is burnt up by this useless education
because half the people go and get education,
which costs them 25,000.
So, per worker, that's 12.5K worth of worthless education.
Again, it's worthless by assumption in the model
because it does not.
Notice how your education doesn't depend upon your,
rather than productivity, doesn't depend
upon your education.
So, that's the idea.
Now, you could imagine a model
where you would have a costless cash transfer with signal.
Right, so, you might want to get money back guarantee,
you might do something like that.
But, it doesn't have to.
Again, like you could easily have an equilibrium like this.
All right.
Questions about the model?
I mean, just the general structure of the models.
So, again, like, you know, maximize profits,
good workers don't want to look bad,
bad workers don't want to look good.
That's what you need for a signaling equilibrium.
All right.
Now, signaling models have been used to analyze a lot
of different real world situations.
So, educational signaling.
This is one where I do have a whole book on it.
Of course, I'm not the first person
to write on this by any means.
Michael Spence got a Nobel Prize for this stuff.
But, he got a Nobel Prize for pure theory.
He didn't actually spend much of his life arguing
that in fact education was primarily signaling.
And, you know, when I looked through all the economists
who worked on this, I couldn't find anyone
who really actually made a strong empirical defense
of a signaling model education.
And, furthermore, I know that out of people who specialize
in labor and education economists,
there's generally very low regard for the signaling model.
So, I wrote a whole book trying to convince them
that they're wrong
and that the signaling model is totally empirically grounded.
I'll just give you the real quick version
of the book right here.
See, I've given this book so many times it's getting a little
redundant, but not, only for me, not for you.
All right.
So, again, I'm thinking like the first key thing,
the first key argument for signaling precisely is just
looking at the curriculum and comparing it
to the jobs you're likely to have and just seeing the chasm
between so much of what you study and what you'll ever do.
All right.
So, you know, this is the kind of thing
that would make you take signaling
as a serious possibility.
The only real answer that I've gotten to this objection
from economists is to suddenly, temporarily become
pro-psychology and say, oh, well, sure,
you don't actually use history, but history teaches all kinds
of critical thinking and great stuff.
Or like, and like, really?
So, are you aware that there is an entire field of research
that evaluates claims like this and has been studying it
for a hundred years?
It's called educational psychology.
And are you aware of what their general disappointed verdict is
on learning how to learn slash learning how to think slash
teaching critical thinking?
Well, I will tell you.
Their general verdict is they really wanted to believe it,
but they don't find much evidence of it.
They find very little experimental evidence of it.
And they find when you broaden the sample
to include other kinds of evidence,
that doesn't seem to work very well either.
It seems like learning is generally highly specific.
So when someone studies history, it
does not make them into a better businessman, a better
scientist, better parents, or like,
well, like, barely even be a, it's not even clear
it makes them into a better foreign policy analyst.
It's like, why not?
Well, have you ever seen the total corruption
with which foreign policy analysts deploy history?
Like, if you're a foreign policy analyst
and you want to argue in favor of a war,
what historical events do you remind us of?
World War II.
World War II, Munich.
And on the other hand, if you're a foreign policy analyst
and you want to oppose a war, what foreign policy events
do you remind us of?
Vietnam.
Vietnam, yeah, stuff like that.
And does it seem like they're doing a lot of careful work
to go and match up the exact details of the current events
with different historical details?
Or does it seem like they just are trotting out
whatever example that they need to argue
in a lawyerly fashion for what was already a foregone
conclusion for them anyway?
I don't know.
It's up to you.
I don't know.
I have an ultra-cynical view of this.
So yeah, someone who really knew history really at the deepest
possible level, they'd be a better foreign policy analyst.
Where is this person in the real world?
So anyway, just starting with the general disconnect
between the curriculum and actual jobs,
and not entirely, so you do learn reading and writing
in school, but no sensible advocate of the signaling model
has ever said that education is literally an all signaling.
There are plenty of people who have publicly
said that they think signaling is zero,
or could affect your lower rounding error.
I even have, so my econ one teacher
told me that he thought that the signaling is negative.
So whatever earnings gain you get,
the productivity gain is more than the earnings gain.
So, you go to school and it makes you look bad,
but the productivity gain is so immense that still is profitable.
It seems like a really strange view.
But anyway, so you got that.
Then there's just a bunch of
observations about the world that should be
familiar to everyone who's been a student.
Things like, why is it the students are so eager to get easy A's?
If you were in school to acquire job skills,
would you want to just take all your classes
to the easiest teacher you can find?
No. You'd want, you'd be concerned with
that someone like that wouldn't actually teach you very much,
and then you'd be paying all this money and putting in
time to not learn useful skills and of course,
labor market would then fail to reward you for this time you wasted.
On the other hand, if the main thing you're doing is signaling,
it makes total sense that you want to get the easy professors,
because the employer doesn't know that you had
the easiest teacher of Algebra 2 in the world.
He just sees Algebra 2 on the transcript and says,
well, good Algebra 2. So, anytime you can find
an easy teacher for a given class that is a way that you
get the rewards of the work without having to do the work.
Since it's highly unlikely overuse the class later,
it doesn't come back to bite you, at least very rarely.
All right. So, there's that.
Here's another one that I think is also pretty striking.
So, whenever people complain about the high cost of college,
I would say you're just wrong.
The best education in the world is free.
And what? So, well, suppose you think
that Princeton is the best school in the world.
Here's my plan for you.
Move to Princeton and start attending classes unofficially.
No one will stop you.
I've been to Princeton.
There's no idea, no one IDs you.
There's no effort made to prevent people from getting free Princeton education.
If you're compulsively honest and you go to the professor and say,
I'm not really in this class,
do you mind if I learn calculus here?
Normal professor's reaction is,
I can't believe someone really wants to learn this just for its own sake.
I'm so shocked.
There's this one little problem.
At the end of four years of unofficial education,
what will you not have?
A degree.
No degrees, no grades,
no official record ever there.
Right. And virtually no one on earth tries to do this.
So, here's the thing about it this way.
Suppose you could either have a Princeton diploma with
no Princeton education or Princeton education with no diploma.
Which one would you rather have?
If you have to think about it,
you already agree with me.
Because even the fact that you were deliberating means that you think
that the signaling is important and that's really all that I really need for
my story to make a big dent in the normal view.
Could you say that it's like there's a mix of incentives?
Like if I'm taking classes in my concentration,
I want the most rigorous teacher so I actually learn that.
But I want to balance this out with some really easy gen ed courses,
so I can keep my GPA somewhat inflated.
Right. But again, there's just the puzzle,
why do employers care about your performance in
these other irrelevant classes if it doesn't really show things action?
I think here's the other thing. I know a lot of
engineering majors who would deliberately not take the part graders.
My dad actually loves to tell the story of when he was getting his PhD at UCLA,
there was one teacher who was known as being crazy.
And I think the highest grade he'd give was a C and he'd fail PhD students.
Maybe it was just undergraduate engineer majors.
But anyway, whoever it was,
he would fail majors reliably.
Right. And then the students reaction was quite extreme.
People stopped signing up for his class entirely.
He would just be teaching empty classes.
And so then what do you think the response of UCLA was?
You know the guy's 10 years, you can't tell him what to do.
So how did UCLA respond to the fact that no one would take his classes?
What's that?
No, they didn't go that.
What they did is they removed his name from the course catalog.
Just replaced it with staff.
In fact, the whole class is staff, staff, staff.
Right. And then my dad said that on the very first day,
like then it was a required class on the first day,
bunch of people would be signed up.
And the second that guy walked into the room,
the class would empty.
People fleeing like he had plagued.
All right. And no one was saying the guy didn't teach the material,
but they didn't want to have their employment prospects ruined by
this strange twisted jerk.
So that was what happened.
What did he think of all that? Was this like a-
My dad?
No, the professor.
Was this like an elaborate ploy to not teach?
My dad never speculated on the psychology of this guy,
I know that to say he was crazy.
I will say that the issue of educational signaling is
the only issue I can think of where my dad and I agree.
But it might even, so my dad just have a PhD in engineering and he will say,
he will say, well, like he's someone,
he said, well, engineering of course, that's human capital.
My dad, well, my dad doesn't know the phrase human capital,
but he said, no it wasn't.
My dad will tell you about all the stupid groups he had to do,
and like how irrelevant it was,
and yet he never used it on the job, yet he had to do it.
The only reason my dad says he has a PhD is because UCLA got rid of
the language requirement right before he was deciding whether to finish.
So, my dad was willing to write a dissertation,
even though he never wanted to be a researcher,
he was not willing to learn Russian.
They just got rid of it, that's why my dad has a PhD.
So, was he handicapped in his career because he didn't know Russian?
Come on. All right.
So, these are some of the common sense,
the common sense arguments, and then,
this is just the highlights,
and then if you move over to the actual research arguments.
So, there are four big bodies of research that I say are relevant.
So, one of them is research on the so-called sheepskin effect.
All right. So, again, key fact is
that diplomas used to be written on the skin of sheep.
So, sheepskin effect is another word for a diploma effect,
and what it says is that there seems to be
an unusually high payoff for crossing academic finish lines.
In human capital terms,
this is very hard to understand.
Do they save the job skills for senior year?
Is that what's going on?
At least, if you've ever been in American high school or university,
we have a very different stereotype about senior year.
Senior year is goof off year.
It's the least stereotype that I've always heard for the United States.
So, if anything, we ask less for you in your senior year, not more.
All right. But in terms of signaling,
it seems like there's a lot of weight placed upon whether you actually finished.
Again, it seems like it has a lot to do with sheer conformity.
So, yeah. You can say, if you do three years rather than four,
then you're not a smart nurse or working,
but you're extremely non-conformist.
Because in our society,
what do your parents, teachers, peers,
what virtually everyone say that you're supposed to do?
Get three years of college?
Is that what everyone's been urging you to do from the earliest age?
Go to school and get three years.
Do three years or four year degree.
I think that's what you should do.
What does everyone urge you to do?
Finish your degree.
Finish your degree. If you ever talked about dropping out,
you've seen your parents getting agitated.
No. You will finish.
So, now, did you think, so now,
they have three year programs, right?
Yeah. As long as it's the official three year program and it's standard.
So, could that be seen as a sign of further signaling?
Like, hey, that guy's finishing in four years.
Yeah. So, there is room for that.
Although, in general, if you hear,
if someone were to offer to say three year college degree,
but with three year, which is the same work as a regular one,
that's where you'd be pretty nervous about,
well, am I going to stigmatize myself?
Whereas in a country where college only lasts three years,
the sheep's gonna bet kicks in at three years.
So, it's a very nice story.
Now, so, like in the book,
I actually went and just compiled the estimates for every paper I could find.
Now, there's two ways of doing the sheep's gonna bet.
One of them is you just assume that years 12 and 16 are graduation years,
but sometimes they're not actually.
So, that is a crummy method.
But there are some data sets where they actually have
both years of education and degrees attained.
If you do it that way, that's the cleanest way.
So, in studies that do it that way,
where you have separate measures of years of education successfully completed,
and degrees successfully completed,
what you'll see there is that the high school degree is worth more than-
so, like the last year of high school is worth more than the first three years combined,
in percentage terms, no less.
And the last year of college is worth more than
twice the first three years combined in the average study.
So, this is a huge effect.
And again, if what you're doing in school is signaling,
and particularly signaling informity,
the fact that you are doing something so socially disapproved,
sends a very bad signal.
Right now, the only argument I've heard about this is,
this signaling doesn't make sense because it's so easy to finish college.
And there's some sense in which this is true, right?
Because if you look at the easiest majors of George Mason,
well, how easy are those?
Right? But then, there's a look.
You shouldn't judge the ease of finishing based upon what a professor thinks is easy.
You should base ease upon doing something based upon the fraction of people who successfully do it.
And if you do it by that measure, then,
so college completion rates are very low,
despite the fact that there are super easy things you can do.
So, overall, for full-time college students,
the four-year completion rate is about 40%.
If you do it for a four-year program, your odds of finishing a four-year program in five years of full-time,
that goes to 55.
Six years goes to 60,
and then it rasptotes pretty quickly after that.
So, there's a lot of people,
for reasons that I will admit I have a little bit of trouble empathizing with,
who don't finish a four-year degree in six years,
despite the fact that there's so much easy stuff going on on campus,
and somehow they're not doing it.
So, my only story is they're too lazy to find something easy to do.
They're that lazy.
So, you know those easy majors,
oh, it's time to find them,
oh, the burden.
All right, so, there's that.
Do you think some of it's that it's consumption good, to some degree?
Well, a little bit,
but I don't really say,
I mean, here's my main story about the consumption.
Suppose that college gave you no career advantage whatsoever, zero.
One fraction of people would still go,
paying for tuition at the current levels.
I can't see this being very many people.
Especially, this is true when you realize that a lot of people
probably go right now because of peer pressure, peer effects.
So, in like 10 years after,
all financial rewards for college have disappeared,
how many people will still go?
I don't think that's going to,
my best guess is like 10 percent of the people currently go,
still go if there was no financial benefit whatsoever.
Like Sally, and after social expectations adjust,
so there's no longer much statement.
There's plenty of work on how does the cost of college affect enrollments,
and it's based on there is significant elasticity.
So, yes.
How does military experience in enrollments monitor how people perform?
Yes, so that is a very good question.
So, there have actually been,
there have been studies of the effects of conscription on long-run earnings,
which are generally negative, but you
wouldn't expect a conscription was single very much about you,
because it applies to everybody.
In terms of like the rewards that you get for enrolling the volunteer force,
there must be some papers on it,
but I don't remember seeing them.
But yeah, it does make sense that now you can signal quite a bit by going
and doing the military and getting your honorable discharge,
and that looks pretty good. All right.
Although of course, one of the main reasons people do
the military now is to get the military to pay for the college.
So, that you want to disentangle that,
and then there's a concern, well wait,
you went to the military but you didn't do the free college?
What's wrong with you? Right?
And that by itself might ruin all the good signal of the military stuff.
So, all right. So, the conscription effect is one.
It is one of the social science literature that is relevant.
There's another one on,
we'll just quickly boil that to its credential inflation.
Right. So, there's a lot of work especially in sociology where they
got looked at the typical level of
education that people in different jobs have had over time.
And as you might guess,
there's been some expansion of the modern economy into more high-tech jobs,
where people generally might think that people possibly
need more education or do those jobs like computer science, something like that.
But there's a lot of jobs that seem totally technologically
stagnant or maybe even easier than they used to be.
Like being a waiter today is probably easier than it was in 1950.
In 1950, you probably would do,
you would add up the customer's bill at their table.
Right. Things like that. All right.
And yet, we can see is that there's been a large rise in education of workers,
even in industries that it seems like they are no more
cognitively demanding than they used to be or maybe they are even less so.
Right. And in general,
what these studies find is that,
so when they go and compare the education of people in different jobs over time,
is that only about 20 percent of the rise in education of
the workforce can be accounted for by more cognitively demanding jobs.
Eighty percent comes from the education required to get a job rising over time,
get a given job rising over time.
So, now it is very common that a waiter in a nice restaurant,
or a concierge in a fancy hotel,
or a secretary with a college degree.
Fifty years ago, this would have been crazy.
Right. So, again, this is hard to understand in terms of human capital.
Because look, if a high school degree is enough to train someone to be a waiter in 1950,
it should still be enough. Why not?
And yet, if what's going on is that you were
signaling that you were in the top third of workers by your education,
then if the educational attainment of the population rises,
you need more to show that you're in the top third.
So, the signaling model has this built-in rat race idea that,
the more everybody else has,
the more you have to have or else you look bad.
So, this is, again,
like to me, is in a way some of the most convincing evidence.
Again, like economists will say,
non-invented here, sociologists did it.
But it's a pretty simple method where you just go and get
Bureau of Labor Statistics ratings for what skills you need to do a job at different times.
They do try to consider the possibility that the job itself has changed.
But again, there's just a lot of very stagnant sectors of the economy,
where what workers do is very similar to what they did in the past.
So, there's that. Then, there is a whole literature on what is called,
let's see, like national returns versus personal returns.
All right. So, there's a lot of research, of course,
on when an individual gets one more year of education,
how much does this raise the individual's earnings? So, there's that.
But over in macro, there is a parallel literature,
where they say if the workforce in the country gets one more year of education,
how much does that raise the earnings of the country?
So, just like you can go and regress personal income on personal education,
you can regress national income on national education.
This has been done. Right now,
the human capital model basically predicts that you'll get the same results.
So, if an individual goes to school and gets 10 percent more
productivity and that raises the wage by 10 percent,
if the whole country gets one more year of education,
that raises the productivity of the country by 10 percent,
and the country's income will go up by 10 percent.
Signaling, on the other hand,
says it's not going to work that way,
and that there's going to be a lower return for
countries to raising their education than for individuals. All right.
Now, there is a pretty big literature on national returns,
and their estimates are all over the place.
They had, there's many different data sets that have been used,
but every single data set used finds
the national return is way below the personal return.
Every single one. All right.
Now, the reaction of people who are doing the research is normally to say,
we're doing something wrong.
What's wrong? Why are we getting the wrong answer?
Right. And in my book,
I do actually find some smoking gun papers where they literally actually
say why this data set is better because it gets a higher number for the return,
which is what's called, what kind of reasoning is that again?
Circular reasoning.
Circular reasoning. Yes.
Especially when there is a simple model that predicts
that the reward for educating of our country is
raising their education levels will be lower than for individuals.
And when one individual raises education,
he stands out from the pack and looks better and gets makes more money.
But if everyone in the country gets extra years,
everyone in the country can't stand out.
And so it just raises the amount.
So anyway, so I did find one paper,
they actually, they were pushing their own new data set,
but it was a great paper because they went and did
the same thing for all eight existing data sets.
And all eight of them,
they came up with the very highest number,
which was that the national return is about half of a normal estimate of the personal return.
And then, but the average payoff that they got out of all the data sets was that,
you know, you raise the education of your whole nation's workforce by a year,
raises earnings by 1.3 percent,
when for an individual it would typically be like 10 percent.
The only decent answer that I've heard to this objection is,
well, you have to understand that there's a lot of these countries,
the education system is terrible.
So, like, Lampritch is this great book called,
A Schooling Ain't Learning, where he talks about
all the countries would have high absenteeism of teachers, like India.
So you say, well, it would make sense,
if teachers don't even show up,
it's not going to be any good, right?
But that predicts that schooling in India would raise
neither personal nor national income.
And there's plenty of evidence from India saying that schooling in India
raises income despite the fact that teachers are barely showing up sometimes.
All right. So, again, it fits very nicely with signaling.
And again, like, well, why would it signal to go to school,
to finish school when the teachers don't show up half the time?
It's like, well, think about how demoralizing it is to show up to school,
when the teacher's not there most of the time.
We take a very smart,
smart, hardworking, informed person to keep going when the teacher doesn't go.
So, maybe that's the story. All right.
So, that and then finally,
there is a literature usually called the employer learning literature.
Where they go and try to basically,
or it's not learning, it's learning.
Learning literature. This is where the researchers go and get some measure of your true ability,
like IQ, they assume it's not accessible to employers.
And then they see, well,
how does the return to ability, to your true ability,
compare to the return to education over time?
And normally, what they find is that the longer you work,
the lower the return to education and the higher the return to ability.
And they normally interpret this as learning.
So, basically, this means, suppose that you're
a really smart person who drops out of high school.
When you first, the first job you get,
you'll basically earn a very typical high school dropout's wage.
But over time, 10 years later,
you will be doing better than other high school dropouts on average.
The market will gradually detect your superior ability and then go and reward it for you.
And the penalty for your poor education gradually goes away.
So, at least gradually diminishes anyway.
All right. So, there's this literature here.
And what did it find? Oh, yeah, I'm going to.
General Results, it finds that if you are someone who is...
someone who has high ability but you skip conventional education,
then it takes you over at least 10 years to start
getting anything close to full reward for your true ability.
So basically, if you are a diamond in the rough,
you're someone who's with great promise but you don't do school,
then eventually you do get the market does reward you,
but it takes years and years.
Whereas if you would just do it the normal way,
then you get, then this is a shortcut to getting other rewards.
And on regular, so there's one paper that's,
so I'll take your question in a second.
So there's one paper on these lines where if you just read the abstract,
it seems like it's a very anti-signaling paper because the paper says
that employers see college graduates ability with near perfect information.
All right. Now, this is overstated for some reason,
I discussed in the book, but if you read the whole article,
they say on the other hand,
for everyone, not only for high school dropouts,
high school graduates, but also college dropouts,
it takes at least 10 years.
So, is this a paper,
so basically it's saying that for those who finish,
then if you combine your school,
your major, and your grades,
that employers then see the real you.
For everybody else though,
which is of course the vast majority of the workforce,
if you have ability,
like the working load,
the employers barely take notice of it,
and you have to spend years and years and years
convincing them that you are better than your credentials would suggest.
Yeah, in the back.
So, what is the literature review on co-variance of IQ and education?
They seem to be like education has an effect on the effect of IQ.
Yes. So, I mean certainly co-variance in correlation.
So, there is a sub-literature on the effect of education on IQ.
So, again, there's zero doubt that IQ causes education.
So, you can get someone's IQ goes from under seven,
and use that to predict their ultimate educational attainment.
Of course, this is a point where everyone's,
at seven, everyone has the same number of years of education virtually,
except for a few kids that went out back or something like that.
So, anyway, so IQ definitely causes education.
There is a separate literature on the extent to which education causes IQ,
and a lot of evidence that it does,
and including a lot of quasi-experimental evidence
that if you just send a person an extra year of school,
their IQ will be higher.
There's only, there's just two main problems with this result.
I wish we're getting a generally acknowledged among people that are paying attention.
We get to see who's paying attention.
Psychologists are only paying attention.
Economists are likely to just quickly read the abstract and say,
see, education raises intelligence.
But I get my psychologist's work on this will tell you is two problems.
One of them is fade out.
So that while a year of education noticeably raises your IQ,
a lot of the gain goes away over time.
And this is true for almost anything that raises IQ.
Like any intervention that raises IQ is likely not to last.
So, like you just go back to where you would have been.
So, this is the fade out problem.
And the other problem is what's called the problem of hollow gains.
What do you think of as teaching the test?
Right, so what is the easiest way to dramatically raise IQ?
What's that?
Practice IQ test.
Even easier.
This takes about one minute.
This is a one minute path to getting super genius IQ.
Works for sure.
Answer key.
Just give the person the answer key and that will raise their IQ score up to like 200,
250 really easily.
Works like a charm.
All right.
But I don't know anyone so naive as to say let's just give everybody an IQ test and
our country will all be geniuses.
Right, nobody thinks that because we realize well,
that's not raising IQ in the right way.
All right, now once you realize that,
that at least some increases in IQ are not really meaningful,
even though they're large, then you have to start thinking, well, what about other things?
So what about practicing IQ tests?
What about doing that?
Well, there is a lot of evidence that if you just send someone to a prep class,
that will boost their scores.
Right, and you can just practice or do a lot of practice and then your IQ score goes up.
But how many people think that SAT prep classes actually make you truly smarter?
Very few.
And one thing that intelligence research will tell you is that if you practice for
one particular kind of IQ test, but
then take a totally different kind of IQ test, you will not have improved at all.
You either lose one symptom of the hollowness of the gains.
All right, then you might start thinking, well, what about education?
Is that hollow?
Well, for a lot of tests at least, it's very hollow because very often,
the very things that are IQ tests are specifically taught to you in class.
So like there is a standard IQ test that asks you to go and
name the biggest river in Africa.
And you're like, that's an IQ test?
That's not an IQ test, yes.
And psychometrically, this does correlate very well with other items.
So it's fine as long as you're not trying to game the system.
But once you start trying to game the system, then not so useful anymore.
All right, and there's a general literature on test prep as a way of
improving people's performance, and
test prep is super effective compared to really learning stuff.
So you can either go and teach people, teach them the test, or
you can improve their general knowledge.
Right, so anyway, so teaching the test is very effective, but
it doesn't inspire a lot of confidence, does it?
If you just hear, yeah, well, their scores are up,
then you just talk to the test.
So, scores is score, right?
Yes?
With regards to the river in Africa question,
is the biggest river in Africa also the only river in Africa that most
Westerners probably know, or is it just the Nile?
So a lot of people get the question wrong.
So Kim, it's one where basically smart people tend to know the answer and
not so smart people don't tend to know the answer.
Okay, and that's all the, in terms of designing an IQ test,
all you need is that the items correlate with the thing that you are really
trying to measure, but in terms of gaming the system, on the other hand,
not so good, right?
And anyway, so now, of course, there are IQ tests that go out of the way to be
what are called cultural reduced,
where you don't have things that you think are taught in a classroom.
But even there, these are things like geometric puzzles.
Do you ever have geometric puzzles in a classroom?
Yeah, so even there, it's like, well, geometry is a culture or not culture?
And can you train people to do well in a geometry test?
You sure can, so you're not self-convincing.
To me, my favorite IQ test is just lunch.
It's just talk at lunch.
Now I will decide what you're eating.
And that can't be gamed.
But this is a controversial view.
It's not generally accepted by psychologists.
Yes?
So you really can't have a non-hollow IQ test, can you?
Because eventually, people can game these tests, right?
Well, so it's not generally that people talk about a hollow test.
They talk about hollow games.
It's the games that are hollow.
So basically, you give the test.
When you first design the test, no one's practiced it.
And then you can say, well, this is a fair measure of what we're really going at.
But then once there's room to game it, then-
You have to keep redesigning it.
Yeah, so yeah, you're sort of always trying to keep one step ahead of people
in gaming it.
On the General Sub-Survey, they actually
have a short 10-word IQ test.
So it's a vocabulary test.
But again, it correlates quite well with normal IQ tests.
But they keep the words secret.
The words on that test are secret.
They don't share them.
Because they're worried that if they announce them,
that they might actually raise public knowledge of the words
and then invalidate their own test.
All right, so anyway, so the book has a lot of other evidence.
But my general story is that the evidence for signaling
is so overwhelming, you have to be really delusional not to admit
that it's a huge force in the world.
And yet, I do show that there are many prominent labor and education
economists who are totally dismissive of it.
And they're dismissive just by not talking about it.
And that is very prevalent.
So if you just go to Google Scholar and you Google, say,
human capital, in quotes, versus educational signaling, in quotes,
I think there's like 1,000 to 1 imbalance.
So anyway, it's an enormous imbalance.
So there's a lot of ignoring it by omission and just saying it.
And of course, if you spend 99% of your time on one theory
compared to another one, which theory are you basically saying
is the one thing that's true?
The one you spend almost all your time on, especially
if you're a empirical person.
Anyway, then on top of that, I do find all the people
that have rendered their general verdicts on how important signaling is.
And out of the empirical economists who have talked about it generally,
it's very dismissive.
So I move along, nothing to see here.
And in terms of the arguments, so in the book I talk about,
what they're saying, a lot of it just comes down
to attacking a really simplistic version of the model.
One that I've heard many times is, look, if education was signaling,
we'd just do IQ tests instead.
So it can't be.
The end.
Well, that's a very good argument against the view
that education is purely a signal of intelligence.
It's not a very good answer to the view that education
signals that package, especially when you realize
that if someone were to come up with a radical, unconventional, new,
original, alternative way of signaling conformity,
what would that actually signal?
Who's going to be the first in line to do the radical, new way
of signaling the conformity?
Nonconformists.
There is a built-in catch-22 here, which I say tends to lock in the system.
Another ridiculous thing I've heard economists say to my face
is, look, the current system passes the market test.
The current system receives about a trillion dollars
in government subsidies a year.
There is no industry that I know of that has not done less
to pass the market test than this one.
In fact, if you're getting a trillion dollars in subsidies,
isn't that a sign that you would be destroyed
if you had to pass the market test?
Terrible argument.
And then another one just says, look, there's got to be a cheaper way.
There's got to be a cheaper way.
And again, that's, look, trillion dollars in subsidies, first of all.
So why would people be looking around for a cheaper way
when the current way is so heavily subsidized?
And then, of course, you can add on the conformity issue, which really,
really undermines the incentives to look around for something else.
And then on top of it, there's the point I was making about wedding rings.
Look, if someone did come up with a much cheaper way of making a diamond
ring, would the result be that we get to have cheap weddings from now on?
No, the result would be that we'd have to find another expensive way
of signaling devotion.
Similarly, if someone came up with a way of making education really cheap,
what would we wind up doing?
Doing more education, more years.
Because if it were cheap enough, everyone does it.
If everyone does it, what does it signal?
Nothing.
And what do you have to do in order to signal when everyone else is signaling
nothing?
More than what they're doing.
So that is my story.
Just to be clear, what I'm telling you is not the normal view
among computer specialists.
Not at all.
This is a case where I'm just saying the people specializing in this
are so far wrong that they really don't know which way is up.
Part of my complaint is that there's a lot of evidence outside of economics
that's on point, and they don't have any interest in it,
or refuse to read it, or aren't even aware of it.
So you have evidence like educational psychology,
industrial psychology, sociology.
And then there's also a whole academic discipline called education.
Called that.
There's departments of education on campuses.
And education economists generally don't pay any attention to their existence.
But they're there, and they know things.
So I say they should pay attention to those, to what they're saying.
Anyway, so of course, it's just my opinion.
All right.
Let's see.
Questions about education signaling?
Thank you.
Yeah.
Happy?
So.
All right.
All right.
And then some other ones.
So here's one that Robin Hanks has put forward.
First, I thought it was crazy when I heard it.
And increasingly, I think there's at least a lot to it.
I don't think it's nearly as knocked down as educational signaling.
But Robin says, you know, a lot of health care
isn't really about improving your health.
A lot of it is about signaling.
All right.
So just like, why would you think this?
Well, Robin begins with this big empirical literature
that tries to estimate the effect of medicine on health.
And finds that at least marginal medicine seems to do very little good.
So there are a number of experiments where they randomly assign people
to different levels of insurance.
And as you expect, people with better insurance get more health care.
But then they don't seem to actually have better health on almost any measure.
Furthermore, there's a lot of things where there are regional variations
in either the cost of health care or access.
Things like if you're just further away from a hospital.
So a lot of empirical work where they try
to use these quasi-experimental designs to see how much does it
matter if you have better or worse access to health care.
And again, generally find very little.
Now, for the first person who told me all this empirical work was Robin.
And my reaction is, yeah, well, that's what you said,
because you have this crazy view.
But then, like, he got me curious enough.
And like, whenever I found a normal, boring health economist, I'd say, well,
so what do the empirics say about the effect of access to health care and health?
And all of them actually back Robin up.
Like, wow, that's weird.
All right, so they all.
So, and again, this included people that were presenting papers on why we need to
have universal health care.
Like, wait a second.
Your own papers on why we need universal health care, but
you're claiming a judicious reading of the literature is that this would have
almost no benefit for health?
Then why do you want it?
And there was a guy who gave a seminar who just said, well, look,
if voters thought that every American should have balloons,
I would favor a program for universal balloons.
And it wouldn't matter to me whether the balloons actually did any further good for
anyone.
But what if the balloons cost a trillion dollars?
It still wouldn't matter?
That's crazy.
All right, now, but so anyway,
this is just like an initial motivating fact.
But then some of the kinds of things that Robin points out are how,
like suppose that you were sick.
What is the thing that almost all friends and family would advise you to do?
Go to the doctor.
How often do they first do a quick Google to see whether medical science can do
anything for your problem?
Virtually never, right?
In fact, suppose that you point out the medical science actually says that
nothing can be done for you.
People often say, well, you should go anyway.
Just get it checked out.
There's something very odd about that, right?
Anyone watch the show Breaking Bad?
I'm just re-watching it now.
So the guy has lung cancer, the main character is lung cancer.
This is one of the least treatable forms of cancer.
And the whole family changes the intervention and
try to pressure him to go and get this not just chemotherapy, but
ultra expensive chemotherapy.
So there's a double ignorance.
First of all, they have no interest in whether the chemo works in general.
And they have even less evidence about whether this premium cost
healthcare works.
But they still are really pressuring him to go and do it.
And again, this is a scenario where it's very easy to see.
Now the guy is a chemistry teacher.
He, him said, although does not suggest that he's actually gone and
read up on it just fine.
He says the treatment would be ineffective.
But you have a good sense if he were to say, look, I have all these papers showing
that the treatment is ineffective, and what would the family's general reaction be?
So they're like, look, you can prove anything with the statistics.
I know a guy who really thought he would die, but he didn't.
Just a bunch of ridiculous, innumerate nonsense.
And this would be the reply to this.
Now, this might make sense if you were super rich and
chemotherapy were totally painless.
But what if you're not?
And what if you're not super rich and
what if chemotherapy hurts, and I've always heard that it hurts?
Apparently you sell meth.
Yeah.
Yeah, you can do that.
But anyway, if you really cared about the person, you would be interested in getting
the facts about the effectiveness of treatment, and you would consider their
pain and suffering, not just, not just this.
But, so, you know, Robin ultimately comes up with this ultra-cynical theory of
saying that these people, they don't really care about you very much.
It's just, they're trying to show what nice, wonderful,
warm people they are, and that they want to help.
Right? And again, just think about people's reaction to a doctor who just
says, look, I could go and give you this expensive treatment, but
it would hurt a lot and would barely help.
So I advise you to just live with your problem.
What do people think about that doctor?
Yeah, that's a monster.
He's a quack.
He's incompetent.
And then you go and find another doctor.
Oh no, I've got lots of stuff that'll work.
Oh yeah.
Oh yeah, I can cure you.
No problem.
I'm great.
I'm great at curing cancer.
Yeah, you should see.
You should see how great I am.
All right.
So there's that.
And again, look, there's other stories that you could tell.
You could just say, well, it's just general, I'm an over-safe.
What else if you go to, if you would actually go to the doctor,
I would say, Robin, open my eyes to how odd doctor's offices are.
Because they're full of propaganda about love.
Just look on the wall, and there's all of these children,
like, thank you, doctor.
I love you.
I love you.
All this stuff.
Really?
There's so much about.
Doctors, it's like going to a hippie commune when you look around
and see all the propaganda.
And it's like, how come there's almost nothing
about the effectiveness of the treatments?
It's totally innumerate.
There's nothing where they try to say,
compared to a relevant treatment group,
my patients are doing better.
Instead, it's like, my doctor cares.
And then there's also research on why do doctors get sued.
And main punchline of the research
is it's not incompetence that gets you sued.
It's bad bedside manner that gets you sued.
It's when your patients are suffering,
and you don't seem to love them.
That's the kind of thing that gets you sued.
Whereas if you make a terrible mistake and paralyze someone,
but then you look all broken up, and you're like,
we did everything we could for you.
Some problems are beyond even the best doctor.
You probably won't get sued.
The patient will just be like, oh my god,
the doctor tried his best.
Wherein, it's like, wouldn't everybody do that?
There's some people who are just very cold, and they get sued.
And even though they don't seem to be worse than other people,
maybe better.
Yeah.
So if you think that the cold people might be more likely
to not buy a good treatment, if they actually don't care
is when a person who does care is going to be sued.
Yeah.
At least the empirical workers claim that they're as good.
So yeah.
So basically, they try.
So this is research where you get the doctor's actual track
record, and hopefully adjust it for the riskiness
of the treatments that you're giving.
And then, versus some measure of just likeability.
So they're actually working on it.
Yeah.
At least they're trying to do that.
Again, I'm like, I have not read the papers.
You might read the papers and say they're not that good.
Yeah.
This is a common reaction that people have when they actually
read papers.
It's like, ah, all right.
It's the best there is.
Best isn't that good?
All right.
So and then, Rob Reuben also said, look,
he says he knows some single men who
have been convinced by this literature,
and they've just basically barely used doctors.
He says he doesn't know a single guy who
has taken his family off health insurance as a result of this.
And there's some sense of what kind of a monster
would gamble his children's fate on a mere theory
about the ineffectiveness of this stuff.
And now, I mean, like, now I will say
when talking with Robin, I think he,
like sometimes at least he rhetorically goes overboard
because we don't actually have much evidence
on the effectiveness of the stuff
that virtually everybody gets.
So it's just the marginal stuff.
But still, there's a lot of marginal stuff.
Right, and then the other, like, you know,
on the other side, it's very striking
that there is a lot of very solid evidence
that doctors kill and injure people,
and this is going to a hospital's datrice,
because they're full of people with contagious diseases.
And you know what else they're full of?
Doctors who don't wash their hands.
Yeah, well, there's been a good amount of research
on how many people doctors kill
because they don't wash their hands.
It's a large number.
Like, after 1860, they're not washing their hands?
Today, they don't wash their hands.
Of course, I mean, again, they wash their hands sometimes.
Never.
But it is very unusual for doctors
to religiously wash their hands
every time they deal with a contagious person.
Right, and this is why I actually will ask them
to wash their hands right in front of me.
I know, I know.
And I know, like, you know, and generally, they will.
Right, and you know, like, they say,
well, I just did, like, well, it would still make me
feel better if I just saw you do it, you know.
Sorry.
Not saying I don't.
Now, so the kind of thing that drives me,
like, I look, but like, you know,
especially after Robin, I'm about ready to yell at the doctor.
Doctor comes in, hi, let's shake hands.
Let's not, I don't wanna.
Like, there's a chance you don't have to touch me,
so like, so, like, why don't we just,
can you just look at me?
Why don't you even touch me?
Like, with your possible, like,
horrible diseases that you're carrying.
In the UK, it has socialized medicine.
They had to issue a formal apology to government
because there's a whole section of the country
whose hospitals do not supply adequate amounts
of disinfectant soap, and so they were killing, like,
thousands and thousands of people over there
because they just didn't wanna spend the money
on basic stuff.
Right, and these doctors who care so much
can't go and pry open their wallets and buy our soap.
No, they can't do it.
Yeah, so, you know, like, we're not saints here.
You can't expect us to buy our own soap.
Right, yeah.
All right.
So, all right, so yeah, you believe you in healthcare.
So, Robin does have a very neat paper
in the journal Medical Hypotheses,
which we actually got in the medical journal,
called, I think it's just called Showing That You Care,
which is his general, laying out his general case.
He also has a really neat paper,
neat, sort of like, it's not bad,
but it's like a popularizing essay on his work,
and it's just called Cut Medicine in Half.
Yes.
So, I guess, like, another anomaly that kinda supports
like, the certain theory of medicine is that,
like, nobody, so, if somebody gets terminally ill
and they have a year left to live,
there's not an option to cash out on your insurance policy.
Instead of using that money to, like, get chemo,
you could just use it to take, like, an awesome vacation.
Yeah, I mean, there is the story
that people then fake cancer in order to get free money.
So, there is, it is a genuine possibility, but, sorry?
Oh, you said they faked it to get free money?
Yeah, yeah, there is, you know, it does create an incentive.
So, you know, that is a concern.
Again, you might say, well, here's money you have to pay.
You know, I mean, I'd say, look,
we give it to your family after you die.
So, that, maybe you could try that,
that could be an option.
I mean, like, just in general,
the extreme opposition to euthanasia
for people who are in horrible pain
and have no hope of getting better.
Now, to me, to my mind, you know, they could say,
look, it shows that you don't care
if you make a person in horrible suffering
with no hope of getting better live,
but clearly my view is a minority view.
So, the normal view is if you love someone,
you wanna keep them alive in horrible pain
as long as possible, and that's what a loving person does.
Right, and again, the scene,
I mean, like, I do have, like, there is a point
where my powers of empathy fail me,
and I just don't see, like,
how can you say that that's the nice thing to do?
Isn't it clearly a nice thing to go
and help them commit suicide if they want it?
It's like, no, no, no, you care too much.
If you care, no, no, you don't care,
you don't care very much at all.
It's more like you care about your own feelings
rather than the suffering of the person
that you allegedly care about,
and it's all a giant narcissistic bloodbath here,
and that's what's going on, but,
again, I'm not a popular position, but I'll stand by it.
What's that?
What's that?
24 degrees of freedom.
Ah, well.
Well, that settles it.
All right, and the last case, funerals.
So notice, funerals involve performing
expensive medical procedures on corpses.
Embalming, it's a medical procedure, it's very expensive.
It does nothing for the person who is already dead.
All right, I guess you get a very strange theological view.
You might think you have to be involved
to go to heaven or something like that,
because maybe an ancient Egyptian view,
but anyway, that's not why we do it,
so, and people put tens of thousands of dollars
into funerals for, supposedly for the benefit
of a dead person who has no idea what's going on anymore.
So what is the actual likely story
about what's going on with funerals?
Well, the thing about this, suppose you go
and you give a beloved relative
the cheapest possible ceremony,
like an $80 cremation, and then you're like,
tsk, tsk, tsk, all right, what will people say about you?
Guess you didn't love them.
You didn't love them, you're a terrible son,
terrible brother, terrible person, right,
and we hate you, all right.
You know, this is the only way,
a normal reaction to someone skipping on a funeral, right?
And you ought to say, my wife,
and say, from my dad, I have it as,
right from the horse's mouth that the only reason
he didn't just put his dad in a pine box
was because of what people at the funeral would say.
Right, and you just say, yeah, well,
I guess no one else were there,
then I just put him in a pine box.
My dad wasn't that fond of his dad,
if you knew my grandpa, you kinda know why,
but still, my dad's level of candor was unusual,
but there are probably a lot of people
thinking the same thing, like,
why am I spending 10 or $20,000 on this funeral?
What good will it do?
Oh yeah, people will talk, so I better go and do it
to signal my devotion, and even though, of course,
if everybody does it, then all the,
like, you do the average amount of signaling,
you convince people that you want
the average amount of devotion,
but again, what if everyone else is doing $20,000 funerals
and you do the $200 funeral, what happens?
You and comparison look bad.
All right, now, if signaling is a deadweight cost,
what could government do to make things more efficient?
Well, step one is don't subsidize the signaling.
Right, so, that's the obvious thing.
Don't throw more money at the problem
because there's already a market failure of excess, right?
And again, what do you, like, if government were to go
and make college free for all,
which of these three problems would be totally obvious?
Yeah, if they were college for all,
what would happen to credential inflation?
Free college for all, big increase in the number
of people with bachelor's degrees,
and what does this mean about the value
of a bachelor's degree?
It goes down, yes.
It goes down, yes.
Yeah, well, I mean, of course,
there's people who won't do it even when college is free,
so you still look better than those people.
Yeah, but there is a meme featuring the villain
from The Incredibles that says,
if everyone has a BA, no one does, right?
And that's the idea.
And so, minimum don't, you know,
like, subsidizing signaling is wasteful,
but then you could actually go forward, you could tax it.
You could tax the signal.
So, imagine there were 1,000% tax on funerals.
In that case, you put your relative in a pine box,
and people say, what a dutiful son
to have paid for a pine box.
Because a pine box in this world costs 20,000 bucks.
So, in that case, you can impress people
that you did it at all.
Really, like, even very simple things.
There was a bouquet of flowers at the funeral.
And, well, what does that do?
Well, do you know how much you had to, like,
to tax on those funeral flowers?
You know, there was like a $5,000 bouquet there,
and you did it anyway.
Duty, devotion.
All right, so there's that.
All right, so, anyway, the basic idea is that
if it were subsidized less, or were taxed,
and everyone could get half as much,
and still signal the same thing,
you could subtract a degree, still signal the same thing.
Right, and that's where the big efficiency losses
are coming from in signaling models.
Is that if what matters is the ranking,
you could have the same ranking
with everyone were to go and start their life
at an earlier age.
Now, again, like, the main objection
that I would say that I've gotten from non-economists
is just, if a government didn't subsidize education,
then it would be totally unfair
to people who weren't born rich.
I mean, I even had one guy in a think tank saying,
if you just raise the price by 20%,
then only the rich would go.
And so it's like, look, that's crazy.
Like, you know, like, we've got estimates of elasticity,
only the rich would go.
And the president was like,
this is a very, very silly claim, but anyway.
But I do have a response to this,
and I say, look, here's my goal.
Going back to a world where you could get a good job
right out of high school.
How does that sound for people from poor families?
Right, because, again, it seems like when people criticize,
you know, cutting education spending,
they're always picturing the incredibly talented kid
from a poor family who doesn't go to college,
and it resolves.
They're never picturing all of the not-so-talented kids
from poor families who can't get a regular job
because they don't have a college degree anymore,
because they don't have a college degree,
and that's not required.
So, again, when you're thinking about social justice
in general, you shouldn't think about just the success
stories, you should think about overall.
So I say overall, it's not at all clear that today,
that a world of having high average education
is better for people from poor families than one
where people, it was people at low levels.
Because, you know, having high levels dries up
a lot of the opportunities to go and get good jobs
without going and getting a lot of education.
And, of course, the more meritocratic education becomes,
the more justified it is for employers to just dismiss
anyone that doesn't have the right credentials
as being unworthy of consideration.
All right, so, and we are now out of time,
so we'll stop here for tonight.
