Then we're going to talk about midterm.
And then if we run out of things to talk about midterm,
we are going to start week eight,
although week eight will not be on the midterm.
Don't want to have any dead time.
All right.
Can we buy that dead time from you?
Can we buy that dead time from you with something?
Wait a second.
No, no, no.
You shouldn't.
I should be buying dead time from you.
You shouldn't want dead time from me.
Good. So what would you pay us so that we can go home
if we're done with it?
What is your income from substitution?
Anyway, here, I'm very confused by this offer.
All right.
Okay. All right.
So in the last class, we were just doing a review
of public goods and externalities
with my slightly eccentric sociological theory
of when economists actually switch
between talking about positive externalities
of public goods, negative externalities of public goods.
This is not in any textbook.
This is just for observing how economists
in fact use the work, right, or use the terms.
All right.
So my suggestion is first of all, for thinking
about positive externalities, of course,
one way you can diagram them.
This is not the only way, but one way you can do it is just
to show a social benefits curve above the demand curve,
indicating that there are these extra benefits
for the bystanders.
And then we can think about public goods
as just being an extreme case of positive externalities.
So one, we've got supply up here, social benefits up here,
and then demand somewhere around there.
Of course, this is a fuzzy concept
when you're applying it to the real world.
But again, you might think about something like national defense
for Switzerland during World War II, how many people are going
to go and voluntarily pay money for the Swiss defense?
Right? Probably very few.
And yet, how good is it for Switzerland to not get invaded
by Nazi Germany during World War II?
Very good.
That's very good.
In fact, it's even really good for the soldiers
because it's way better to drink cocoa in the Alps
in a Swiss uniform than to be dying on the steps of Russia
in a German military uniform.
And probably most of those Swiss guys just would have been put
into German uniforms, declared to be German,
and sent to fight in Russia,
which is really bad from what I've heard.
Right?
So there is a standard threat in all World War II movies.
I'll send you to the Eastern Front.
No, no. All right.
All right.
So anyway, this is, as I'm drawing it,
just an extreme version of positive externalities.
And then similarly for negative externalities,
we just flip things around.
So here we have supply,
here we have demand and social benefits curves.
And this is below the demand curve.
This is for negative externalities.
And then, if we're talking about public goods,
then we can just think of this as a situation
where there is quite a bit of demand,
but the social benefits are basically zero.
So roughly socially optimal for the thing not to exist at all.
And again, it's very tempting to say, well, isn't that true
for all things negative externalities?
And the answer, of course, is no.
I mean, there are many things with negative externalities
where if we just stop them from happening today,
it would lead to terrible results.
Right? Like if you just stopped all emissions
of internal combustion engines today.
Beginning now, with no warning.
This would probably starve most of mankind to death
in a few months if you could really enforce the law.
Right? Because no one is abandoning it.
Passing a law preventing anyone
from using an internal combustion engine does not
magically give you an alternative way of growing
and transporting food.
Right? So that could happen eventually.
Right? But it's not going to happen overnight,
unless you get really lucky.
And you might not want to gamble the lives
of most of mankind on, well, maybe.
Maybe we're just a little bit away from this.
All right?
So we think about this as a situation of a public bad.
Right? And again, so just an extremely extreme negative
externality.
This is nonstandard.
So if you go to a textbook, they'll talk a lot more
about nonrivalry as being an additional trait.
Although, if you really think about it, nonrivalry is
so ubiquitous in the economy.
Right? So any time you go to a matinee, you see nonrivalry.
Right? How many of those seats are actually occupied,
even at the matinee price?
Right? So it's already reduced,
and yet almost all the seats are empty.
So you can say almost all those seats are nonrival.
Or just think about whatever food gets thrown
out of a restaurant at the end of the day.
Right? Or you can even go and look at how many seats are empty
at restaurants most of the time.
And yet, it doesn't look
like they are pricing anything close to marginal cost.
They've got some, you know,
because usually there's some reduction in price.
But if you're wondering, well,
like why would they not have cut price if they are not on,
if they, why would they keep prices above marginal cost?
And the obvious answer there is it's not for recompetition.
Like if a movie theater were to cut the price by a penny,
would all the seats fill instantly?
No, right? And wait,
what does the permitting competitive model imply would
happen?
That. It implies that if you cut your, the price of your seats
by one penny below the market price,
you could fill all your seats.
And you may have noticed that that's not actually true.
So, permitting competitive model, while useful
for many purposes, is also wrong for a lot of other purposes.
Okay. All right.
So, just questions about this.
I'm wondering.
All right.
Right now, a common observation that people make is
that if you just think about the actors as being firms
in an industry, then you could say that collusion is a public
good for firms in an industry.
Right? In some sense.
Right? So, all the firms in the industry would be better off
if they could all agree to raise prices for a certain quantity.
But holding constant the behavior
of all the other firms, no firm wants to do that.
Right? So, standard story.
Everybody wants to be the one firm that doesn't cut back.
The one firm that doesn't raise prices.
All right?
So, we all suggest that we can go and, you know,
use the provision of public goods using the same tools we've
already been using for competition and collusion.
So, let's think about a simple game theory model
of general giving.
All right?
And if you're going to notice, we're going
to make it look exactly like a Cornell game.
It's going to look at least really similar
to a Cornell game.
So, imagine that individual utility
for any one actor is going to be equal
to their own personal consumption times D,
where D is the sum of all the donations.
Right? And of course, the donations are going
to be your stuff minus whatever you consume.
All right?
So, let's assume that everybody starts going down at one.
So, then donations will be equal to the sum of all the stuff
that individuals don't consume.
Right? So, 1 minus CI, that's the stuff you don't consume.
And in a simple model, if you don't consume it,
then what do you do?
You donate.
It's a one period model.
So, what else would you do with the stuff?
If you didn't consume it yourself, you would donate it.
And then the sum of all the donations, of course,
will be the sum of all these, of all the stuff
that people don't consume themselves.
Right? Again, like I said, we're assuming everyone starts
with an endowment of one to keep things simple.
So, then if everybody's utility is going to be the product
of their own consumption times all the endowments,
times the sum of all the endowments that are donated,
then we've got utility function that looks a lot like Cournot.
Remember with Cournot, we've got this,
we have your own Q times a P, which is a function
of all the Qs that everybody's making.
Remember what Cournot looks like?
Remember? Yes, sir.
You're maximizing with no cost, you're maximizing PQ,
where P is a function of, you know, QQI, where P is a function
of your own Q, but it's also primarily a function
of all the other Qs of everybody other than yourself.
Okay? All right?
So, let me think of it this way.
So, CI plus DI equals 1.
All right.
And then we can go and solve this
for asymmetric equilibrium.
All right?
So, again, all we do here is we can substitute that in.
All right? And then we have, you know, your utility is going
to be equal to your own consumption times the donations
of everybody other than yourself.
So, let's see.
That should be, let's see.
So, for all I not equal to J. Or, excuse me,
you're actually on the way.
We have all J not equal to I. J not equal to I. So,
all the sum of the two Js plus and 1 minus CI.
Right? That's your stuff.
So, this here whole thing is equal to D. All right?
So, that's all the donations of everybody besides yourself plus
your own donation.
Multiply that all through.
Right? And if you go and work this out just
like any other Cornell problem,
you're going to get a pretty obvious result here.
So, we're going to have, we can multiply it all together.
Then we'll have CI times this plus another C
and minus CI squared.
Right? And what are we going to get?
Well, so it's just like, it's just like Cornell.
So, I'll let you work out the remaining bit of the math.
But if we then do this and then the last step,
remember with Cornell, is we look
for the symmetric equilibrium.
So, once everybody is doing the equilibrium thing,
and since everybody's assumed to be the same, it would seem likely
that everyone will wind up doing the same thing.
Right? It seems to make sense.
Then we get the solution to this game, which is, which is that C
is going to be equal to N over N plus 1.
Okay? Whereas, if you wanted to maximize social utility,
you would just say that C is equal to.5 for all N.
So, no matter how many actors there are,
everywhere you always want to go and set,
you consume half your own stuff
and then donate half of your stuff.
Right? And again, if you look at this,
so suppose there's only one actor.
So, is there going to be any externality problem
with one actor?
Do you generally have externalities
when there's one person?
No. All right.
So, in that case, well, your optimal C is going
to be the other individual C. The equilibrium will be 1 over 2,
1 half, which is also the socially optimal thing.
Does that make sense?
So, when there's no one but yourself,
you do the socially optimal thing.
All right.
Wow. All right.
Right? That's the not so impressive invisible hand.
If I am society, then I always do,
and I always do what's best for me.
I always do what's best for society.
All right.
That's a really unimpressive trivial result.
And then, as the number of people
that involved increases,
the amount of people's own stuff they consume goes up.
Right? And as n goes to infinity, then what happens
to the fraction of your own stuff that you consume?
Goes to 1.
Goes to 1.
And then what happens to the share that you donate?
Goes to 0, which is your standard public goods result.
Okay. And again, so why is it
that when n is infinity, nobody contributes anything?
Same reason why when there's an infinite number
of firms, no one bothers trying to collude.
Because you are so small, you don't have any effect
on the aggregate outcome, so why do anything
to change the aggregate outcome
if you can't change the aggregate outcome?
All right.
Now, this, of course, is this the competitive
or the cooperative or the non-cooperative result?
Is this what you get with cooperation,
or what you get with everyone doing what's
in their own best interest?
Ah, the latter.
Yes. Yes.
Everyone just acting selfishly, and you get this result.
Now, in a repeated game, we might be able to go
and get a better result.
Just like with the repeated Cournot game,
you can get a result that is better for the firms,
although of course it's actually worse for society
if you remember the setup.
All right.
So, in a repeated game, we might go and have punishment
like we all agree, or usually,
like the most extreme one would be we all agree
to contribute.5 every turn.
And then if one person ever betrays us,
then we go back to doing this forever.
Right? And then you can go and set up all your payoffs.
So, you've got, and as usual, you've got, you know,
the infinite sum of the cooperation payoffs.
So, there's the infinite sum of cooperation, and you want
to see whether that's better than one defection payoff plus,
that's equal to zero, plus an infinity from turns one
on of punishment payoffs.
Right? And, you know, and of course we want
to have a discounted term there just to make it all sum
up to something finite.
Right? And this is actually a very general approach
to all problems like this where you're always going and saying,
all right, this is what, this is the payoff
if we just all cooperate.
And on the other hand, do you want to cooperate?
Well, it depends on whether the defection payoff
of cheating once is going to plus the infinite sum
from t equals one on of getting the punishment payoff is better.
Right? And of course, again, you think about the real world,
the time that you really worry about defection are times
when defection saves your life, for example.
Any of you have seen movies where it's like, look,
let's see, either you die tonight or you live,
and you just give it to your friends.
And then, that's always dramatic.
What will the person do?
Will they go and die with their friends, or will they betray,
or will they try to weasel out of it somehow,
or maybe their friends will go and assault them a little bit
by rescuing the person.
Right? And then, of course, if it's a very hard boiled story,
your friends may try to kill you before you betray them.
For example, this is key element in the plot
of the movie Jackie Brown.
Samuel Jackson just goes and kills a guy who's having a,
first he bails him out, and then he kills him.
So, why do you bail a guy out just to kill him?
He has a whole little soliloquy
about why this was the smart thing to do.
He's going to do well, put himself in a situation
where he's going to get 10 years.
If you know anything about my employee Beaumont,
he's not going to do 10 years.
And so, I went and killed him, and then, you know,
that way it worked out best for everybody.
All right.
Okay. All right.
And, again, of course, the, you know, it is easier, as always,
to get to cooperation if we've got very,
if we have a very high value of beta.
So, the people are not discounted the future so much,
because then the fact that you have an infinite period,
infinite periods of punishment is a much bigger deterrent
than if you don't care very much about the future.
Make sense?
Are you happy?
Okay. All right.
So, I'm going to go ahead and get to the next slide.
Are you happy?
Okay. All right.
So, moving on then.
All right.
Now, I know that you've talked about Coase's problem
of social cost a lot.
Right? So, Walden is fed.
It's a good article.
All right.
Let's see.
Is it, I think it is the most cited article
in social science, or maybe just economics ever.
All right.
Okay. Anyway, so, in this piece, just to refresh your memory,
Coase famously argued that public goods
and externalities problems are actually disguised transactions
cost problems.
So, even though it might seem like there's a separate,
there are two separate concepts,
because really it's just transaction costs,
and those are the root of everything,
because with zero transaction costs,
then by definition people would just bargain and bargain
and bargain and bargain
until they reached a mutually beneficial outcome.
All right.
And you might say, well,
wouldn't it take a really long time?
Well, it doesn't matter if it takes a long time if it's free.
You could just do it in, let's just do an infinite amount
of transacting until, at a cost of zero,
until we have worked out every possible detail.
All right.
So, zero transaction costs, you just write a contract to get
to the cooperative solution in every situation.
So, like in this one, everybody in Switzerland would go
and write a contract with each other to go
and compensate everybody that needs to be there
to defend Switzerland against the Nazis.
Okay. And if there, and you say, well,
wouldn't some people free ride?
Well, we'd have a contract to not free ride.
We would, all right, and we would go and say, look,
we all know exactly what's going on here, so let's just go,
we know this is the benefit that you get,
so let's give you, write a contract
which is mutually beneficial.
And they say no, say, well, then we're not going to do stuff
for you, and so you're not going to want that, are you?
No. And then, again, a full agreement gets reached.
Okay. All right.
Now, this whole cozy insight gives us another reason
to think that the degree of cooperation, let's see,
actually, oh, yeah, degree of cooperation declines
as n goes up, right?
It just says that as there's more actors,
what obviously happens to the two transactions costs?
More actors, meaning, you know, so all of us want to work
at a deal about where to go and eat after class.
Yes, very high transaction costs for everyone to go and agree.
And suppose none of us can eat until we all sign.
All right.
All right.
Yeah, we starve, right?
And then, finally, maybe, you know,
like how long would it take?
So, you know, if there's like one vegan and one anti-vegan,
one person who cannot eat anything except
for animal products, then we've got a real problem, right?
And then we may find out, well, who really wants to follow these
rules the most, who actually cares the most, right?
Right? And, again, if you really,
when you really start thinking about Coase, very, you know,
like Eddie, when you really absorb Coase,
then the amazing thing, for example,
is why there's not a lot more bargaining in Congress.
Like why is it that they're, that neither side offers a deal
of, look, we'll give out an abortion if you give
in on the death penalty, right?
You say, well, but neither side would do want that.
Well, like there must be one side that cares more about one
and one side that cares more about the other, it would seem,
at least relatively, in relative terms.
So why is that deal unthinkable, right?
And why is it that, so, you know,
like probably the first thing that would happen,
you approach the deal as your own people,
excommunicate you, right?
It's like get, get thee gone.
Renew, we must win on both.
Well, we're not going to win on both,
so why don't we make a deal?
No. All right.
So in that case, we just are stuck
with whatever status quo is.
At least we didn't agree to it.
Which, again, on some level makes sense,
but it's very uncosy, right?
It is not at all what Ronald Coase would,
you would expect would happen in the real world.
And Ronald Coase would lead us to look, there's got
to be one side that cares more about abortion
than the other side.
And so the side that cares more should just pony up and offer
enough to get the other side to go along, right?
Now, when I've suggested this to people,
I get all kinds of weird answers.
But no answer that really makes a whole lot of sense.
So there's, you know, let me see.
So I was talking to one guy whose wife is on the board
of Planned Parenthood, and he just said, look,
liberals care more about this issue
than all other issues put together.
Like, well, maybe your wife does.
Is it true?
Does that make sense at all?
Like everything together?
I don't know.
It seems like there's a lot of, that's a lot of stuff
to care more about.
And then I said, well, if that's really true,
then why don't they go and give it on to everything else
in order to remove the restrictions
on abortion that exist?
And I don't see that deal happening either.
So, yeah. All right.
So, in any case, from a Cozy point of view,
it makes perfect sense that cooperation will go
down as the number of people goes up.
More transactors, then transactions costs will be
higher, everything else be equal, right?
And if you really start thinking
about what the functional formula would be,
it's very easy to believe it's like n squared
or n cubed, something like that, right?
And you know, so then you're like.
Two people, you know, like any two people in the room could probably decide upon some place they could both eat in a couple minutes.
But like four people, you know, I can easily see that taking 10 minutes, 20 minutes.
And then as we get to the whole room,
again, it might just go to infinity where like we would all have to starve to death because there's some really stubborn person.
Probably not with the people in this room, but does making a thousand people?
Right, and then who knows what's going on. There could be someone who is a vegan and really wants to lose weight, right?
Or and thinks other people ought to as well.
Right, so there's many possibilities.
All right.
Now,
further point is that in all of these repeated game
setups that we're doing, notice that we've never allowed for people to actually go and write an enforceable contract where you amplify the punishment.
So that's something else that is generally being ignored in game theory.
You know, in game theory, usually, and we're thinking about, can just repeat alone generate results.
But in the real world, you could go and write a contract saying that if you don't go and do this thing that you promise to do,
then you owe me a million dollars.
Right, something like that.
Right now, if you know a lot about Anglo-American law, there's also a bunch of exceptions to this.
So there's actually a general long-standing principle of English law that says that a pure penalty clause is not enforceable.
All right, but then aren't there penalty clauses?
Well, don't call it a penalty clause, first of all, if you want it to be enforced.
And then you need to go and pretend, some way of pretending that it's not really a penalty, that it's just a
compensation for your enormous losses, which could be, however, totally psychological, for example, if you set it up right.
All right.
So, you know, if you could go and change the payoffs of the game by writing a contract,
this would greatly enhance the ability to have cooperation.
Right, so in the 19th century, before there were antitrust laws,
there were still some court rulings saying that a collusive contract is contrary to public policy, and though, while it is not illegal,
it's also not enforceable.
So an enforceable one would be one where if you go and cheat on your quota,
you can be sued by the other people that you signed the contract with.
And what these pre-antitrust cases said is, no, you can't actually sue someone for that. You can write the contract,
you can try to do whatever you want to privately enforce it, but the courts are not going to help you do it.
Now, Robin Hanson actually has a dissertation chapter on the puzzle of why is it the legal systems,
especially the Anglo-American one, don't allow for pure punishment?
Because, at least on the surface, punishment is awesome.
Right, it's a way of overcoming all the problems of cooperation that simple repeat don't solve.
Now, of course, a classic objection to this is say, well, someone might then sign a contract where they agree to a punishment,
and then the other side will go and lie and punish them in a way that was not really appropriate.
For example, you could have an employment contract that says that if you ever slack on the job, that you owe the boss a million dollars.
Now, once you sign that contract, you should be worried that your boss will do something to you.
Now, once you sign that contract, you should be worried that your boss will do what?
Try to catch you.
Yes, try to catch you, or that by itself isn't that bad, just don't do it.
But the real worry is, you know, frame you.
Lie, claim that you did it just to go and steal a million dollars from you.
But, of course, the obvious response to this fear is if you don't like that contract, don't sign it.
Right? So that is the obvious market check upon abusive contracts of this kind,
is just to say, look, the contracts are legal, they're enforceable, but be warned.
If you do make the benefit, or the punishment, that great for one side, then they may actually be tempted to
try to frame you or lie, or otherwise lie, in order to go and capture the benefits.
But given that a person is signing this, there's no reason not to enforce it.
It's a reason to be cautious before you sign, but it's not a reason to say that you can't actually have contracts like this.
And yet the law actually does generally say these contracts are not enforceable.
Which, if you think about different alternative arrangements for certifying worker quality, might be a big deal.
So right now, if say, you have no academic degrees at all, and you want to get a job, you might make the offer.
Give me a chance, I'll work for free, and if you don't like me, then you can fire me.
So even that, there's a little bit of an issue, because there's some rules about unpaid internships, but you can probably get away with that.
But if you signed a contract saying, if you aren't happy with me, I owe you $10,000,
which is still less than a year's tuition at most places, so it could be a realistic...
If this is the way you get your foot in the door at a job, this could still be a way better deal than going to college for this.
But this contract would generally not be enforced.
So, what would be a quick little legal definition of what the theory of pure punishment is?
Because I'm trying to see if I can distinguish that between saying, if you hurt someone, or you fail to fulfill a contract, then you're owed money damages.
Right, so the normal way the contract law works is that you are only liable for an amount of damages equal to whatever financial loss you caused.
A punishment would be one where you owe more than that.
So you owe some multiple of the damage that you caused.
Right, and why would you ever need a multiple?
Well, just most obviously, you might need a multiple in order to compensate you for your court costs or your legal expenses.
So the way that current contract law works is...
There is some way to recover your legal costs, but normally the way that works is if someone breaches a contract that costs you a million dollars,
you hire a lawyer that costs you a lot of money, and then if you win, you get a million dollars back.
As I was mentioning, antitrust law gives you treble damages, so that is actually a statutory punishment that's worked in.
But that's actually one that you cannot contractually waive either.
So you can't say, I'm your franchisee, a condition of getting a franchise from Carl's Jr. is that I can't sue you under the antitrust laws.
No, that will not be enforced.
That rule will not be binding.
So we're going to get Robin has a whole chapter which goes over what I'd say is a fascinating issue of why is it that voluntary punishments are so heavily...
Or are so discouraged by the legal system.
There are, as I said, there are a number of loopholes that you can try to get it in, but the official position still is no one should be able to consent to be punished.
Even though there's lots of reasons why it would make a lot of sense to consent to be punished.
And individually, you probably would very much want to consent to be punished so that you could persuade people to deal with you.
So anytime someone is nervous about you and you haven't managed to win them over, saying, look, I will go and offer you this extra favorable term in the contract that I am going to owe you a lot of money if you're ever dissatisfied.
All right, now as to how stores get away with double your money back.
So that might not be legally enforceable either, although that's one where since it's the consumer against a big, it's an evil corporation or something.
That's one where probably they would somehow juggle the books in order to make you pay.
All right, but so when we get to the chapter on asymmetric over the south, we can asymmetric information.
That's the best story anyone has come up with for what the point of banning punishment clauses is.
But we'll talk about the later on.
Anyway, it's an interesting question.
All right, now when you do experiments, what we see is that cooperation is greater than either repeated play or even cozy bargaining would allow.
And the obvious explanation, shocking as it may seem, is that at least some of the time human beings are less selfish than economists assume.
All right, oh my God.
No way.
All right, but anyway, that's the obvious explanation.
Ron Heiner, who is in the office next to me, has a 300-page book with another explanation, which I do not rightly understand.
But again, the simplest explanation is that people are just not as selfish as a simple model would predict.
Okay, questions?
All right, now last point, if you think that this extra cooperation is motivated by something like altruism or fairness or some kind of conscience,
then there is a reason to think that there's actually in the real world a difference between socially harmful collusion and socially beneficial cooperation,
even though in game theoretic terms they're the same thing.
So in game theoretic terms, going and getting cooperation in this situation is exactly the same as getting cooperation in the Cournot model.
Right, in both cases, you would go and use punishments in order to threaten people and repeat a game in order to cooperate.
In this case, say, look, if you don't donate enough, like we're all going to stop donating and the whole system is going to break down, so you better watch it.
You better donate enough.
And in the Cournot model, it would be you better restrict your production like other people are doing,
because if you don't, then we're all going to produce the regular Cournot amount, and then we're all going to be worse off, including you, so you better not try that.
Okay, now since, as I said, we generally see more cooperation than gets predicted by either repeat or co's,
and since the obvious explanation is that people are just not as selfish as the model predicts,
then there's actually a reason to be optimistic that there actually, in the real world, is a difference between this and Cournot.
Namely, in a situation like this, if someone goes and cheats, what does their conscience tell them?
You're bad. You're being bad. Don't do that. Don't cheat. Good people don't do that.
Go and be a good person who goes and not only cooperates as much as in your interest, but actually do more than that.
On the other hand, if you are all trying to collude to restrict the world's supply of aspirin,
even though in purely formal terms it's the same problem, it is unlikely that people doing it feel really guilty when they go and produce extra aspirin.
So there actually was an aspirin price fixing case, and as far as I can tell from the back story, no one bothered appealing to anyone's conscience.
There wasn't anyone saying, look, we all know that it's a better world if we restrict aspirin, right?
Well, can't you be a good person and just stop producing so much aspirin?
So that was not the appeal. Instead, the appeal was, well, we all want to make more money for ourselves, right?
And then there's a whole system of kickbacks that are paid and bonuses to people to keep their mouths shut,
all suggesting a certain degree of guilty feelings among the participants.
And yes, the reason we know about it, of course, is it not actually lasts.
There are actually some Swiss executives from Bayer who got deported to serve jail time in Texas in the end.
So, bad outcome for them.
Does this suggest that union collusion is more likely to be sustainable?
Yes, yes, great question.
Because they have a moral...
Yes, yes, so sometimes people do manage to moralize collusion.
So unions are the most obvious and famous case of this, where yes, there is a whole ideology of someone
who violates the union is not just hurting the group, but is actually a rat scab.
Right? You have two things that are both bad.
Right?
I don't know.
White shirt likes to be like, I was told that picking scabs is bad, but I don't know, somehow, scab is an insult.
So scab is an insult for someone who breaks a union, who doesn't participate in a union, or works when the union says don't.
I did see a May Day parade in New York City where there was about a 12 foot inflatable rat.
Not a cute rat, but like a really, I guess, like a horrible, ugly rat, and it said don't be a rat scab.
So I looked in New York, and actually whenever there are union disputes, unions will pay to put that in front of a building
where it's being painted, or something is being installed.
So there's a small industry for these giant inflatable rats.
Or is there just one rat?
So one rat who gets moved around, like a kid's party inflatable?
I've seen multiple for multiple unions.
Yeah.
So yeah, so if you can manage to moralize collusion, then it's going to work like other kinds of,
then it will work much more with charity.
But for the large area of collusion where people just think of it as a way to make an extra buck, and they don't feel morally superior to other people,
I suggest that that is not going to work nearly as well as the kind of cooperation where people feel like there is a general good that is being achieved.
And if you're thinking about how optimistic is this, a lot of it depends on what is the correlation between people's perception of whether they're being good and actual social good.
So presumably when people are collecting money for orphans, almost everybody thinks that's good, and I suggest that probably actually is good.
And on the other hand, when people are trying to restrict the production of aspirin, sounds pretty bad.
For food, actually, that is another case where before there were official government farm cartels,
there was a lot of moralizing of the desirability of restricting food production in order to raise prices, but that was one that never worked.
Probably because the moralizing just didn't really actually take that much.
Why? Well, I'm not a social psychologist, but it seems very likely to me that your feeling of guilt is going to be very different if you're betraying people that you see every day,
versus if you are on a farm where you were running your own farm and then you get a letter in the mail saying, please restrict production,
come to the town meeting, and then you see the monks, and then you go back and you're on your farm again and no one else is around.
And you're like, well, I don't know why it would be so bad for me to go and throw some more food on these perfectly empty acres here.
And even during the Great Depression, as you may recall, there was a lot of moralizing of the evil of destroying food at a time people were hungry.
I just remember about the idea, like, today we do the relatively efficient kind of restricting food production,
where the government tries to stop the food from being created in the first place,
but during the Great Depression, the chaos was so great that it got grown and then it got destroyed afterwards,
which tends to really upset people, especially during a time of poverty and hunger and everything else.
So anyway, I do have a paper with Ed Stringham where we build on this point, where we are arguing against Tyler Cowen,
who says that either you should be pessimistic about charity and collusion, thinking that private charity will not be much,
but that collusion will be much, or you should be optimistic about both, in the sense that you should think that private charity works well,
but also collusion is going to be strong. And we suggest that actually there is a reason to think there's an asymmetry,
namely that the moralizing of cooperation makes a difference. So that is our story, if you're curious.
All right, questions? All right. So let's now do some more on coordination.
So remember we had this very simple coordination game that we've been going over quite a bit,
where you've got people, say, driving on the left and right-hand side of the road,
and they can either coordinate on driving on the left side, which could be socially inferior because people are biologically right-handed,
say, most people, 90%, or they can both coordinate to be on the right side,
or we could have the really bad outcome where we don't coordinate and then we have bad payoffs for everybody.
And as you recall, we have two pure strategy Nash equilibria, PSME, and then there's also a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium.
There's a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium where if you go and solve it, you'll see that everybody could randomize
just at exactly the right levels so that you're indifferent between playing left and right.
And then you get some very bad social outcomes because if both sides are randomizing,
then there's a pretty good chance that those diagonals will occur.
And those diagonals are really bad.
So imagine people randomly deciding which side of the road to drive on.
Not a very good outcome.
Now the interesting thing about that bad mixed strategy Nash equilibrium,
I'm not going to prove it mathematically, but I'm going to try to explain it intuitively,
is that in this game, in the coordination game, not as a general rule, but in the coordination game,
the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is unstable.
What does this mean?
It means that if you go a little bit above or a little bit below the probabilities,
instead of naturally going back to the mixed strategy probabilities,
you naturally go as far away from them as possible.
So think about this being, say, Israel and you're trying to decide whether the national language is going to be English or Hebrew.
All right.
Now, when would you be indifferent?
You're indifferent if you have exactly, like, as soon as your languages are equally easy to learn,
and you show up not knowing either one, then you'll be indifferent between the two languages
if exactly 50% speaks English and exactly 50% speaks Hebrew.
But suppose that 51% of the population speaks Hebrew.
Then which language is the better one to learn?
Hebrew.
Hebrew.
And since all the new people want to switch to that one, what does that do to the fraction speaking Hebrew?
Increase it.
Which makes it even more clear that you want to speak Hebrew,
which makes it even more clear that you want to speak Hebrew,
which then naturally moves you to the equilibrium where everyone is speaking Hebrew.
Similarly, if you were at this one where people are just evenly
Actually, we can make this really easy.
You can even do it like this.
You can do
Imagine we did 5-5.
So here it's clear that left and right are both equally good.
So you can start off in a world where half the people are driving the left-hand side of the road
and half are driving the right-hand side of the road.
And if you're just one person, there isn't any good side anymore.
Each side is deadly.
You just hope that you happen to be driving on the same side as the other people you encounter.
But the good news is as soon as there is a slight tipping,
as soon as 51% of people are driving on the right-hand side of the road,
then clearly the smart bet is to drive on the right-hand side of the road,
which makes it even clearer for everybody else that it's smart to go on the right,
which makes it even more clear, and then you go off to right.
Or of course, if the probability were 49%,
people would go to left instead.
And this is in general how coordination games work.
So while there is a mixed strategy and Nash equilibrium,
mathematically these are unstable, meaning that while you could stay there if you were exactly there,
your odds of remaining there are very slim because the slightest perturbation
will move the whole system to one extreme outcome or the other.
Just like standing a coin on its side.
That is an equilibrium, but it's not stable.
So a small breeze can go and tip the coin over.
Anyone ever tried doing this?
There's a Twilight Zone episode where somehow coin landing on a side leads to telepathy.
But I don't think that's true.
Although whenever I see a coin on its side, it's always been placed there.
I've never actually seen it land there, which is really hard.
But obviously it's an equilibrium because you can do it.
You can put a coin on its side and it'll stay there,
which means that if you flip the coin ever just so, just perfectly,
that it would stand there on its side.
but you probably go for a long time without it happening.
All right.
So, questions about just the basics of coordination games?
All right.
Now, there's lots of real world applications
of coordination games we're thinking about.
So, like I already suggested, you've got language.
All right.
So, right now, linguists will say that we are in the midst
of a great linguistic die off and most
of the world's languages are disappearing right now.
All right.
And from a coordination perspective,
there's a lot to recommend this.
Right? It's like, well, what's so great
about preserving language when only 50 people speak?
Like, what can you do with the language?
And like, however beautiful the language is, there's not likely
to be much worth reading
in a language only spoken by 50 people.
Right? So, what movies are going to be seen by,
or going to be made by, in a language
where only 50 people speak it?
So, it doesn't seem like there's that much of a point to it.
But anyway, of course, the value, the whole idea,
the value of a language depends upon the number
of people speaking it.
If you invent a new language, it could be fantastic in every way,
except that no one else speaks it and then that's enough
to make it worthless.
Right? Almost worthless anyway.
All right.
So, language is a pretty obvious application
of the coordination game.
Another one is, you know, so culture more broadly.
So, there are all sorts of cultural norms that exist,
where the important thing is just that there be a norm.
And having a norm is more important
than exactly what the norm is.
So, for example, if you were familiar
with Eastern European culture, as I am,
since my wife is from Romania, you know that they,
that at a meal they will vary,
they will struggle to give you food.
Right? They'll keep trying to put food on your plate
and feed you and it's considered rude not to offer.
Right? Now, you know, among native-born Americans,
it's, you know, the other rule is usually in place, where no,
people go and take the food that they want
and it's rude to push.
Right? Now, if you have two people
who both follow the Romanian custom, that works okay.
Because then, you know, so like people don't ask,
but you offer and so you get food that way.
Or if you have two people both
of the American custom, that works.
Because you're going to, if people don't offer,
but people are, people assert themselves and ask, that works.
But if you combine an American with a Romanian,
then you do have a conflict.
Because if someone who says, look, I take what I want
and like don't bother me and someone else says, no,
you must take this, no thanks, yes, all right,
that causes conflict.
And of course, if you, if you reverse it,
if you have someone who was embarrassed to ask for food
and then someone who doesn't offer them food,
then they wind up starving.
So that also gives you a bad outcome.
Let's see, I also remember philosopher John Searle talking
about different cultural views about the right distance
between two human beings for a conversation.
So he said, so the Italians, according to him,
at least Italian philosophers, believe that a distance
of about three inches is optimal.
Whereas Britons believe a distance
of about say 10 feet is about right.
And he said that you could go
to international philosophy conferences
and see the Italian philosophers almost chasing the Britons.
And the Italian tries to get close enough for a conversation
and the Briton tries to get far enough away to talk to you.
So, and we can back, so you can either have the close distance,
is what people expect, or the far distance.
Either one can work.
And you can go and debate what the actually socially optimal
culture is, but still having just a disagreement
about what the cultural rule is poses extra problems above
and beyond whatever flaws you see
with a particular cultural rule.
Right? And then obviously for culture that can include things
like what clothes are acceptable to wear.
So let's see, no two people in this room are wearing the same
clothes, but no one is wearing anything
that would shock anyone, I don't think.
Some people are shocked by a professor with flip flops.
But over time this has become less shocking.
All right?
So, you know, but if one person were wearing say a Star Trek
uniform, there was, I think it was actually one
of the Clinton trials involved a juror
who always wore her Star Trek uniform every day.
So this was many, like 20 years ago.
And then interviewed said, well, you know,
as a Starfleet officer.
So it doesn't break character or, you know,
maybe she is a Starfleet officer.
It's unclear.
So, you know, so there are, you know, coordination norms
about what is acceptable attire.
You may have noticed a common question that people ask
when they're going to a important social event is,
well, what are we supposed to wear?
What are you wearing?
So people are trying, if not,
to exactly match each other's clothes to go and coordinate
on what would be typical at that time.
And it's not always formal attire.
So sometimes people would be embarrassed
to be dressed formally when everyone else is informal.
I just said that.
I was like, overdressed.
It's so embarrassing.
All right.
So there's that.
Then another very common application
of coordination games, especially in economics
but also public policy is technology.
So I already mentioned that you've got a lot of,
there's only a whole academic literature on things
like the QWERTY keyboard and VHS versus Betamax for videotapes
and many other examples in technology where a key part
of the technology is just being compatible with other items.
So I guess it was 10 years ago I was teaching this class waiting
for a high-definition DVD standard to emerge
because for a couple years there was Blu-ray and HD DVD.
And there's a format war.
And I was, I like most people that were even interested
in it was holding off for one to die.
And then HD DVD died even though it had a better name.
But Blu, but so I think the key thing was Blu,
it was Walmart said we're dumping HD DVD
and then that was it.
So Walmart just, Walmart seemed to be the key actor
that changed things.
And there were people saying that HD DVD was superior
for something or other.
I can't remember.
I think Blu-ray was better for games
and HD DVD was supposed to be better for some other purpose.
I guess like movies.
But I mean I suppose I can imagine Blu-rays being better
for movies but hard to see that it's that much of a gain.
But the main thing was just to have some standard
so that you would know that you were not going
and wasting your money on getting the wrong kind of player.
And remember initially the players liked 400 bucks.
So it was not just a trivial question.
It was not just the cost of one or two discs.
All right.
And then the last one that Paul Krugman keeps trying
to popularize me.
So he's one of the people who manages to be,
to feel like very neglected despite a Nobel Prize.
So it's one of those great skills that you have
to practice.
Like to feel like unjustly neglected.
Like nobody cares what I think or say
with my Nobel Prize and my fame.
So he's been trying to push how there's path dependence
in location.
Like why is it that so much carpet is made
in this one area outside of Atlanta.
And again his story which makes a lot
of sense is people want to build their carpet factory there
because all the other carpet factories are there.
So all the workers that know how to do the carpet are there.
And all the input suppliers are there.
So once it's there then you want to stay there.
Like why the diamond industry in Manhattan.
There's a bunch of obvious reasons
to not have a diamond industry in Manhattan.
In fact it's pretty much the same reason like for almost any
kind of manufacturing there's an obvious reason
to not have it in Manhattan.
Right? Like what's the obvious reason
not to be in Manhattan?
Yes. Like a really high cost of doing business there.
So like the only thing you'd really want to have
in Manhattan when you think about it is something involving
the tourists.
Something involving like actually there's a lot
of high population density is what makes the product good.
But for manufacturing it's going to get dispersed
over the whole country.
Over the whole world even.
So it's hard to see what the point is.
Then there's an obvious disadvantage.
But still as long as you have the other people
that are doing it there then you want to be there too.
Same with the stock market obviously.
All right.
And then for many other regional things like why have all
of you, why have so much of the tech industry in the Bay Area?
Which again has the same problems as Manhattan.
It's a terrible place for most purposes.
Like why make a lot of people move to a place
where a million dollars a year isn't even a good salary
anymore?
It seems like a dumb thing to do.
But again it looks like there is this lock in that you get
where once other people are doing it you want to do it too.
Even though it seems like there would be a way better way
of doing it.
Is there a question here?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Is the Diamond Locket in New York partially,
is it like a cultural example too almost I guess?
Is that primarily like a lot of Jewish people?
Yeah, yeah.
So a lot of Hasidic Jews are involved.
So although they too they have no actual religious reason
to be there other than the fact there's other Hasidic Jews there.
So they can all coordinate to just go and move to Florida.
So it's one thing if you,
if the religion actually specifies that Jerusalem is the
holy city but as far as I know there's no doctrine
about Manhattan being a holy city or anything.
So if you could just get the Hasidic Jews to go and move
to a lower rent place seems like a big improvement for them.
All right.
Now normally when people are talking
about technology they use different jargon.
So the preferred jargon is path dependence.
All right.
And under this name which is just another name
for there being a coordination,
coordination problems something like that.
So there's a bunch of economists who pointed
to various alleged examples
of inefficient technological lock-in.
And as I mentioned QWERTY is still probably the most
famous example.
So again just imagine typing the second row
on your keyboard the non-word QWERTY, Q-W-E-R-T-Y.
All right so that has been around for a really long time.
So and there is a story that sounds pretty plausible
on the surface saying look,
the reason why we have this keyboard is it's just a hold
over from earlier times when there were actually physical
keys and you need to actually slow type this down in order
to avoid jamming of the keys.
This is the standard one.
I don't know if you were anything like me
when you first learned to type.
Did you ever ask someone why is it just alphabetical?
That was my, that seemed like an obvious question.
And I think I did get, so see I think my mom had,
yeah my mom had actually been a professional secretary
in the 40s and 50s.
And she actually had a different story.
Her story was that you want to have keys
that are frequently typed right next to each other.
So it was, it was the, it was not actually just deliberately
slow down the typing to avoid jamming.
But anyway, but when it was another story based upon there
being physical, actually that one, that wasn't really
about the keys because that one was still all over.
So, anyway, important thing to remember
about all these models is that it's not,
these models are not like the prisoner's dilemma at all.
In the prisoner's dilemma there's actually a story
about why society naturally goes to the Pareto inferior equilibrium
or the Caldex inferior equilibrium.
You look over here, is there any particular reason to think
that you're going to go to the lower payoff equilibrium?
Not at all.
In fact, there is a good reason to think that you won't.
Right? There's a lot of reasons to think that you won't.
Just starting with Thomas Schelling.
Remember, so if you were playing this game
with a randomly selected other human being on earth,
like can you imagine not playing right?
It would be crazy not to play right.
Right? You say, well, of course you would play right.
And if the other person played left and you said why,
is it because I thought you would play left,
well why would you think I would do that?
It's like, I don't know, I just thought you would.
Right? All right.
So there's something very psychologically appealing
about the outcome that is better for both parties.
Now if you had one that was more like this, let's see,
so which one, let's see.
So you had one that was like 5, 3, and 3, 5.
That's one where you can start
to more easily understand why people might be doing different
things because the two sides might disagree
about which one is better.
And they might even, for public relations, say, you know,
this guy might say, oh, left is better for society,
this guy says right is better for society,
but it's actually a disagreement
about whose interests should prevail.
So anyway, you can imagine that happening.
All right.
All right.
All right.
So anyway, but, so, you know,
the key thing about these coordination games is it's only
possible that you would get locked into the inferior one.
Yes?
Yeah, Nathan.
Could it be possible that there are situations
where people are ignorant of the specific payoffs but know
that coordination has a positive payoff?
Yeah, sure.
Payoffs are expressed as like a complicated equation.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly.
So that would be a case.
Or how about just one
where the information gets revealed very gradually
and there's a lot of players.
So then, you know, suppose I'm trying 1 million,
it becomes, it's revealed that right is actually better.
And then just player number 1,000,001 want to go
and switch over.
Yeah, he's probably going to say, well,
like other people are going to be doing,
are going to keep doing what they've always been doing.
So I'm not going to be the one to switch over.
Just like now it's obvious
that English is an inferior language to Esperanto.
Do you want to be the person
that starts speaking Esperanto all the time?
Right? Probably not.
There is a William Shatner movie on Esperanto.
I'm not sure why he did that.
But I saw a couple minutes that looked terrible on that level.
But even by the Shatner standards.
All right.
So anyway, inefficient lock-in is possible.
But there's always another possibility,
which is the status quo is actually optimal.
And the complaining you hear is what we call special pleading,
where there's some people who are losing out or just trying
to get attention, and they don't end, they're actually wrong.
Okay? And then there's another possibility,
which is the implausible for something like language,
that if we would be better off today
if we had all chosen a different language long ago,
but it's not worth switching anymore.
All right.
So knowing what we know now, sure it would be better
if we could go and rewind.
But we can't rewind, and it's just not worth doing.
Right? And so the QWERTY example specifically,
there are several very well-known papers
by McGraw and Leibovitz where they debunk the QWERTY example.
It is one where it is pretty hard
to understand what the coordination story is anymore.
Because now it is really easy to convert any keyboard
into a non-QWERTY keyboard.
So is anyone here trying?
I think I already asked you.
Like one person.
Has anyone ever tried switching?
Like, you know.
Like, was there anyone who when you were first learning
to type decided you wanted to try doing something different?
Like experiment, let's try a few.
And what did you learn?
When I was in elementary school, we had a typing class,
and we tried some Du Bois stuff.
And which one?
And did you like it better?
No. It's harder.
It is harder.
I'd have to think that some European keyboards would be
completely different from ours.
So let's see.
So I was in Germany this summer.
So the German keyboard is very similar to the U.S. one,
but they do have separate keys for the umlaut letters
and things like that.
Yeah, like that or like that.
And then they move a couple other ones.
So like the Z is in a different place
because they use the Z all the time.
But still it's almost the same as the U.S. one.
Although you just adjust it, I mean, just enough.
And actually, you know, so and there they set it up
so that you just go and flip a switch
and it becomes a regular American keyboard.
What about something like a Russian or Hungarian?
Yes. So it's totally different alphabet
that I don't know whether it is.
But they're not doing QWERTY in an alphabet
that doesn't have the same letters.
I guess you could try to mimic it as closely as possible.
Right.
Right. But in any case, you know, like as the cost
of being the one person doing something different goes down,
if you don't see much change in behavior,
suggests that at least the simple coordination story is
wrong and it's actually something else going on.
All right.
So now these coordination problems seem especially
unlikely when the number of players is small.
So yes, you know, if you had the original payoffs,
3-3, 5-5, you know, if we only had five players
and we were there, then again, it seems pretty easy,
it might be pretty easy to switch over.
Right. Five people just get together and say,
come on people, like we all know this is better.
Let's just do it for now.
Let's just do it.
And notice that this is very different from say the members
of OPEC all agreeing to cut back the oil production.
Right. Because if all the other members
of OPEC cut back the oil production,
what do you want to do?
Yeah, in fact, you want to increase your oil production.
On the other hand, if everybody but you switches
to blank right, do you want to go to ha, ha,
suckers all driving the left-hand side of the road?
And then you want to switch over too.
Right. Which is part of an argument that I had
with Tyler Cowen years ago about the sustainability anarchism,
but we won't get into that here.
All right.
So anyway, so coordination problems are pretty unlikely
when the number of players is small.
Or another way that you can get to the better outcome is
if you have market leaders.
You can have a lot of firms, but if there are a few firms
that are focal for people paying attention to them,
then you can, then once again, there is a very easy way
of getting out of it, which is the focal leaders say,
we're going to switch, and then everybody else switches
behind them.
So Walmart seemed to be focal in the market
for a high-definition DVD player.
So not HD DVD, which is a trademark
for a specific technology, but the general concept
of a high-definition disc that you would play.
Right. And you've probably heard the story
about how the US time zones were originally selected.
So which company, which market leaders had a big stake
and worked something out?
Railroads.
Railroads. So daylight savings time, that was government,
but the time zones themselves were done by railroads.
Right. I still remember the day that Windows 95 was released,
where Bill Gates himself came out and bought a ton
of network television to go and tell everybody,
now we're all switching over to Windows 95, people.
All right.
So it was already like two years late,
but that's why it was called Windows 95.
All right.
So this is another way.
And you can imagine what would have happened
if there had not been any market leader in operating systems.
Of course, there's a lot of complaining about Microsoft,
but it is worth considering
that there might be something worse than Microsoft.
Like there could be chaos.
There could be 20 different operating systems,
every one of which is inherently superior to Windows,
and yet they are all mutually compatible with each other,
and you have to either learn 20 operating systems
or just deal with the incompatibility.
I still remember back
when email systems were not really compatible.
So in the early years of email, like 1989, 90,
if you emailed something to a person at another university,
never mind a non-academic server,
there's about a three-quarters bounce rate.
And just said, cannot be interpreted.
I don't know.
So and then if you tried emailing a private thing,
like CompuServe or AOL, then like it almost never worked.
So and then there are all kinds of other problems,
but in backspace and things like that.
But anyway, so but you know,
you have all these mutual incompatibilities
between the systems, and it seems clearly superior
to have one system, even if that system isn't that great,
than to having a bunch of incompatible systems.
All right.
So again, my guess is that without,
if there had been no focal leader in operating systems,
that people wouldn't be complaining
because probably computers would still be a niche product anyway.
So if you can't go and contact most of your friends,
then it's just frustrating for people to deal with.
And therefore, the market would stay small.
And if the market stays small,
then people wouldn't complain about it very much.
It would just be a small number of aficionados doing it.
Right? Probably all fighting over which system is better,
rather than agreeing it's just better to get something,
even if it's not that great.
It's not great.
All right.
So, questions about coordination?
All right.
So, a useful game for thinking about the real world,
even if obviously those exact payoffs are just invented.
Yes?
It seems like Menger's theory of money is similar.
Yeah, of course.
Yeah, so that's actually one, you know, that's not just that,
but it's very much like the why mixed strategies aren't stable.
So, you know, Karl Menger has this theory
about the emergence of money.
And the idea is that even if initially you have a bunch
of different commodities that are being used as money,
still people gravitate towards the one that is most used.
And once people start doing that, then it's even better
to be the most used, and even better,
and the other ones gradually disappear.
In a way, what's striking is
that there's not yet a world currency by this process.
Well, there was gold.
Yes.
And we're going that way.
But even with gold, people still generally transacted
in national denominations.
And it's been noted by macroeconomists
who study hyperinflation that normally all you need
to revive a crummy domestic currency is just
to stop hyperinflation.
You might think that after you have a big hyperinflation
and the economy dollarizes, it would stay dollarized.
But normally it doesn't work that way.
Normally, if you just get inflation back
down to 20% per year, people switch back
to the crummy currency and away from the dollar again.
Again, probably part of that is just the government wants its
taxes in local currency and things like that.
But there's also something very focal in the modern world
about your nation.
And people go, what nation am I on?
What nation am I in again?
I'm in Zimbabwe.
All right.
Well, is the Zimbabwean dollar the worst thing in the world?
No? All right.
I guess I'll use it then.
Whereas if it is the worst thing in the world,
then different story.
All right.
So, all right.
Let's move on to bargaining.
All right.
So let's think about a simple model of bargaining.
We've already talked about this a little bit,
but worth pursuing it in some more depth.
All right.
So. All right.
So, figure you've got two bargaining strategies.
You can be a hard bargainer or a soft bargainer.
All right.
And you probably know which one you are.
Right? And if you end up with kids,
you can also generally see,
kids generally gravitate towards hard bargaining.
Almost as if it's a dominant strategy,
which as we'll see it's not.
All right.
Or it also is if there's not a repeated game, which it is.
So, possibly children aren't that strategic.
But in any case.
All right.
So, suppose we have a set up like this
where if both people bargain hard, then the payoffs are zero
because you can't reach a deal if both parties bargain hard.
So, both players are aggressive bargainers who ask for a lot.
If both sides ask for more than half a surplus,
then there will be no deal because you cannot give
everybody more than 100% of the surplus.
Some surplus cannot exceed 100.
And then suppose that if one party bargains hard
and the other one bargains soft,
then the hard bargainer gets most of the surplus
but the soft bargainer gets something.
And same thing if player one is the soft bargainer,
then player one gets the bad payoff
and player two gets the good one.
Although still more than nothing.
Then finally, suppose the best one
of all is both players bargain soft.
And so, you read the introduction to Freakonomics.
At least it sounds like a great partnership
between Dubner and Levitt.
They said that, well, when we started,
we started discussing how to divide the royalties,
each of us said 60%.
And then finally we realized each one was offering the other
with 60%.
Oh, it's so stupid.
All right.
And they made millions.
All right.
Probably tens of millions actually.
All right.
So, very good.
So, that's a case where they're both soft bargainers,
each offering the other one more than half.
And that way the deal definitely happens.
All right.
All right.
Now, if you take a look at this in terms of pure strategies,
we got two pure strategies here.
Right. So, you get a kiss here.
If you're at hard, then obviously someone wants
to stop being so hard.
And here, both people have delayed both players
from bargaining soft.
There's incentive for each player's incentive to go
and say, hey, well, if you're going to be so soft, then yeah,
give me more stuff.
I want more.
All right.
But there's also a mixed strategy
in Nash equilibrium here.
And if you solve it out, you'll see it's.5.5.
And several interesting things about it.
First one is that this one is stable.
This is not like that coordination game one
where some of the 51% of people are playing Hebrew.
You want to play Hebrew too.
Actually, this one is the opposite.
This is one where 51% of people are playing hard.
You want to play soft.
Why? Because once the percentage playing hard gets
over 50%, then you're actually having,
you have too high a probability of that bad outcome.
And then being the person
that bargains soft actually raises your payoff in a world
where people are bargaining hard.
And again, just imagine that everyone is bargaining hard.
What do you, you want to be the one person
in the world who does what?
Bargain soft.
Everyone else is being a jerk.
Everyone else is saying, I want 60%.
No, I want 60%.
I will let us settle this at 60%.
And you be the one person who says 40% is fine by me.
And then you make a deal with everybody.
And then everyone is your customer.
And then you make way more than everybody else makes.
That's a more extreme case.
But actually, these numbers you are like, you know,
like you actually, at least you get a deal rather than no deals,
which is what all the hard bargainers are getting.
And of course, if you were in 100% soft bargaining,
then you want to be the one person who's aggressive.
And so there's a natural tendency to, for the,
for this mixed strategy,
natural equilibrium to actually stay around.
Right? So it is actually stable.
We could do, we could work for the math, but we're not going to.
Again, the intuition is all that's really important here.
It's realizing that if you were at either extreme,
here you would not stay at the extremes.
Instead, you would naturally gravitate towards this mixed
strategy and natural equilibrium.
All right.
And again, the intuition is an equilibrium.
Both strategies are equally good.
Landsberg has this line saying,
don't mistake a hard bargainer for a good bargainer.
Let's see.
I think that the whole idea of Trump's art
of the deal is a hard bargainer, a good bargainer.
A hard bargainer is a good bargainer and vice versa.
But that's just wrong.
Right? And of course, he himself obviously does not actually
really do that.
Right? If you've ever had any transaction
with Trump Enterprises, he doesn't just go
and demand $1,000 for every hotel room.
Instead, realizes that if he tries bargaining
that hard, he'll just go someplace else.
Okay? All right.
Now, the outcome that you get
with the mixed strategy and natural equilibrium,
it is not going to be first best.
So if people are playing.5,.5,
then 25% of the time you're there.
25% of the time you're there.
25% of the time you're there.
And 25% of the time you're there.
Right? Because you are basically flipping two coins each 50-50.
So that's like two heads, two tails, head, tail, tail, head.
Okay? Now, if you make this bad outcome worse and worse,
then you do make it less and less likely people will play it.
So if instead of zero, this were like negative a million
for each person, then that outcome does become very rare.
Although still, there is a very small risk
of a really bad thing happening.
Right? And if you put in the numbers,
you can see how bad it gets.
Now, of course, in this model, you always want people
to think you're going to play hard.
You always want people to think that you're going to play hard.
But here's the key thing.
If everybody wants you to think something about them,
then the fact that they are sending out signs
that they're this kind of a person is not very convincing.
Just like in a job interview.
Everybody in a job interview wants to act
like they're what kind of a worker?
A hard worker.
So if everyone wants to act like a hard worker,
then what actual payoff do you get
from acting like a hard worker?
Not much because everybody else is doing it.
It isn't very convincing.
Of course, if you were actually going to the interview
and to say I'm super lazy, right,
then you get treated differently.
But that would very rarely happen, as you know.
All right.
So if everyone wants to be perceived as a hard bargainer,
it's very hard to convince anyone
that you're actually a hard bargainer.
And as a result, the actual payoff of, you know,
the actual reason to be perceived this way is not even
that great because there's no really credible way
of convincing people.
It's like, well, that's what they all say.
So, you know, why do you always tell me that you're great?
Something like that.
Okay. Now, in this bargaining model, it has a very simple
and yet kind of dissatisfying theory
about why people don't reach agreements when it's
in their mutual interests.
And the answer is bad luck.
Bad luck. So if there's two people
and there's a mutually beneficial trade between them
and they fail to reach a deal,
the mixed strategy explanation is, well,
looks like they got two tails.
And they both play the mixed strategies came
out the bad way, and so there's a bad outcome,
and that's the story.
All right.
So it's kind of dissatisfying, but it makes sense.
All right.
So if there's randomization in the strategy
that people are playing, then when are you going
to get both people going and taking the actions that lead
to a bad result for both of them?
Well, you just have to go and multiply the probabilities
of those two strategies together,
and that gives you the bad outcome.
All right.
So in other words, then, when you see two people
who are failing to actually reach a mutually
beneficial agreement, it's generally tempting
to say they're just stupid.
And I will say, yeah, I'm very tempted to say this a lot
of times, like the way my parents still haven't figured
out a way to calmly resolve any dispute.
It's like, it's just stupid.
You've been married for 53 years.
You don't have a system of any kind that you could have worked
out over all these years.
Every single piece of fruit has to become an argument.
But there is another theory,
which is they're just playing the mixed strategies,
and it just turns out that fighting a deal
that fights are happening all the time.
And I suppose, like, there could be even more fights
that I'm not seeing, but it seems like just living
in a house with them, there's a whole lot of fighting going on.
And it does take me back to my childhood, where I just wanted
to close the door and turn on the music.
So, yeah, on the one hand, you know, so you say, well,
they're still together after 53 years.
The fighting isn't that bad.
But still, the pettiness of the disputes
that can be adjudicated does, forget it.
It is hard to believe.
But, you know, so I'm not saying
that randomness is the only explanation,
but it is an explanation.
All right, so anyway, bad luck.
So two hard bargainers happen to bump into each other,
and then we get a problem.
All right, now, this very bargaining game,
it actually has a better name in game theory.
So it's more often called the chicken game
or the hocked up game, and this game, so usually,
when it is called the chicken game or the hocked up game,
usually just to make it more dramatic, we make the payoffs
for both playing hard worse, and we'll also often relabel it.
But again, so imagine that this is a game of war and peace.
All right, and again, wars, of course,
like what kind of bargaining?
Hard bargaining, peace is like soft bargaining.
And then, again, just to make it more dramatic,
let's make the war payoffs minus 10, minus 10.
So, you know, there's a great bloodletting.
And then let's make all the other payments
and the payoffs the same.
All right, so notice how these two games are essentially
the same?
All right, we're just relabeling.
And then for drama, we're going and making it more dramatic.
So we're making the payoffs the same.
All right, we're just relabeling, and then for drama,
we're going and making that payoff really bad.
Right, and again, if you want to make it even more dramatic,
say it's nuclear war.
So it's minus a million, minus a million,
something like that, doomsday.
All right, but the actual solution
of the game would still be the same.
All right, and in this game, you'll notice
that the two pure strategy national equilibria are
for one side to basically threaten war, and the other one
to say we're too weak to fight you.
And then the militarily aggressive country gets the good
deal, and the peaceful country gets the mediocre deal,
but at least they don't get,
neither of them get the really bad deal of actual warfare.
Right, and then still, the socially optimal one would be
for both sides to play peace, but in terms
of pure strategy national equilibrium, you don't get that.
Right, now here, of course,
there's a mixed strategy national equilibrium.
If this one is a mixed strategy national equilibrium,
so is this one, and of course, why is that?
Because they're the same game, right?
Just with slightly, the payout slightly changed.
All right, so anyway, so in this model says that, you know,
universal peace is not going to be equilibrium
because all countries are warlike.
You want to be the one peaceful country,
but if all countries are peaceful,
you want to be the one bully that threatens other countries,
and then they give you what you want, right?
And then the more horrible warfare is,
the more we make those payments bad,
then the less any one country is to be aggressive,
and then what's the probability that, you know,
so if this probability goes down to say 1 in 100,
then the probability of playing war goes down to 1 in 100,
then the probability of both sides playing war goes
down to what?
So 1 playing war, so p of 1 playing war equals.01.
The probability of both playing war is going to be that thing.
Yeah, that thing squared, so then it'll be 1
in 10,000, right?
And of course, if this probability,
1 playing war is 1 in 1,000, then the odds
of the actual warlike outcome would be 1 in a million.
So if these payoffs get really bad,
then the mixed strategy
in Nash equilibrium starts looking okay
because it means that people almost always be playing,
peace, peace, peace, peace is almost all that ever happens,
and then once in a while, these things happen,
where one country extorts another country,
and then once in a very rare time, say once in a century,
then all hell breaks loose, and you get horrible bloodshed.
Yes?
So does the Rand Corporation,
do they support global nuclear proliferation?
I don't know the position of the Rand Corporation.
My guess would be no, given that they have all those U.S.
government contracts and everything.
I don't think that they are going to start saying, yay,
global nuclear proliferation.
Again, remember, from the point of view, you know,
if you're just advising one country, then you might,
and if you're a country
that actually has a comparative advantage in war,
then you might say, well, our country should be, should go
and get to be this guy.
Our country should be the one that threatens other countries
and other countries to submit to us and do what we say,
and then let's make sure they don't proliferate.
So let's keep our nuclear monopoly,
which was the U.S. goal, and the U.S. succeeded in that
for how many months again?
Yeah, about 48 months, so a bit of us.
All right, so why don't we go and do our break now,
and then just when we get back, we'll finish this up
and then talk about the exam.
If I still have, yeah, so, and please come up and turn
in your homework and pick up the answer key, and also pick
up homework five, which will not be graded,
and there's no answer key for it, but if you are having trouble
with one question on homework five, you can email me,
and I'll point you in the right direction.
I was just going to talk.
All right.
I must have.
So.
All right, now if you believe that the reason why people fail
to reach bargains is bad luck, you should also be able
to believe that the reason why terrible wars break
out is bad luck, and I would say this is almost the standard
theory of World War I, right?
So almost the standard theory of World War I is
that all the British thought that the other countries would
back down and they would get what they wanted
and would not have a mass slaughter and other wars,
and normally they were right.
So if you know the history of Europe prior to that,
there are many other diplomatic crises over events
that didn't seem any bigger than the ones that started World War I,
and normally what happened, or actually what happened
in all the other crises is one side backed down
and the other side got what they wanted,
but this time every side said we're not going to back
down this time, and everyone,
people on all sides said yes we always say,
and then somehow nobody backed down,
and then there was a mass carnage,
the worst war that Europe had, and so I'm going to say,
by some measures the worst war that Europe had ever seen,
30 years war, if you count the whole 30 years of the war,
then that was actually worse, but although still,
as a percentage of the population,
but still total population, I think World War I was the worst
that had ever happened up to that point, and noteworthy
in that many of the national leaders responsible
for the war died, either lost their thrones or were dead
by the end, sometimes with their whole families,
so it was not just a small miscalculation,
it was a total disaster, right, so a story would be
that every country involved thought, well sure,
someone's going to back down, it won't be me, and as it turned
out, nobody backed down,
and then you got this terrible outcome, right, which again,
now of course a lot of people just think of it in terms
of pure stupidity of all the sides involved, but,
and if you look into more details than that,
I would say that story starts to seem more reasonable,
but nevertheless, at least a plausible account
of World War I was just that everybody thought
that everybody else would back down, which is exactly
what almost always happened,
but this time there was the, I guess, what would you call it,
I guess the quadrifecta of the four,
none of the four main countries backing down, five,
five main countries backing down, right, so Russia, Germany,
Austria, France, and Britain, like I said,
they're the key players, and then there's some other ones
who get involved later, all right, all right, all right,
now how does, oh yes?
Well, so using this model and kind of actually going back
to the question that Ash asked before
about the Rand Corporation, nuclear weapons, is this,
is there an argument that, to make, to say that,
with the proliferation of nuclear weapons, you know,
if you're a small state, you have some nukes, you know,
there's a reason that we're not going
to militarily threaten North Korea anytime soon,
for instance, because they can lob a nuke over and destroy Seoul,
so is there an argument to make
that there's less war with nations
that have something like that, or?
So. And does this suggest something like that?
So, well, so the answer is very clear and very grim, namely,
that, you know, if you have a lot of nuclear countries
where like any one of which can go and bring the world
in total devastation, the probability of a nuclear war,
of the maximally severe war goes way down, but the severity
that does happen goes way up, and in fact, that, and in fact,
when you, if you go and solve the mixed-value equilibrium,
there's a sense, in expected value terms,
there's an exact balance.
So, it's not actually a, it is not an improved mean outcome,
but it's an improved median and modal outcome.
Okay.
That's Taleb's argument against Peter, I think,
as to why the world is actually not safe.
Yes. That is a possibility.
Yes. All right.
So, all right.
Now, how does repeated play affect this?
Because notice, I've all, the way I've been talking,
this is all just about a single, you know, one-term interaction.
So, there isn't any kind of repeat,
no foresight, no reputation.
All right.
So, obviously, as soon as we open up,
as soon as we have repetition, we're going to have repetition.
then that outcome becomes sustainable.
Right, again, as long as we're dealing with,
so with an infinite repeated gain,
and actually since this is two equilibria,
even a finitely repeated gain in principle,
we can go and get to better equilibria using repeat.
So peace is certainly sustainable,
but again, there's also the possibility
that countries will try to build up a reputation
for being warlike.
So this possibility, a country will try
to build up a reputation for being
very military aggressive and even crazy.
It's kind of the North Korean strategy, right?
It's just like, we don't care.
Now, at this point, it does seem a little hard
to believe that the people in charge
don't care if they live or die,
because they've been living in luxury
for many decades, third generation.
So it looks like they are there for the long haul.
So they're probably not as crazy
as they seem to outsiders, right?
And so at least they are clever psychopaths
rather than raving psychopaths.
So the kind of people who will kill
totally defenseless people without mercy,
but if they're worthy,
you will go and do something back to them,
then it's a different story.
Yeah, so that is another possibility, right?
That these countries might try to be known
for being very aggressive, so do not mess with us.
And of course, this could lead to wars
that seems really pointless,
where people go and have millions of people die
for a very small objective.
And again, there could be,
again, it doesn't mean there is,
but could be the underlying objective
of we want our reputation to be great.
And you might even say the very fact
we're willing to lose a lot of people
for something that's inconsequential
shows how tough we are,
shows how little we value our own lives.
So do you wanna mess with people
who value their own lives so little?
So when you go and read stories
about India and Pakistan fighting over
an uninhabited mountaintop in the Himalayas somewhere,
one explanation, again, not necessarily the best one,
but one explanation is they're both trying to show
we're really tough and we will go
and we'll spend a lot of blood
for something that doesn't even matter.
So imagine what we would do for something that did matter.
All right, so there is that.
All right, now, just to have a little digression
into history, thought, and philosophy.
So how many people ever read Thomas Hobbes' Leviathan?
All right, and remember,
what are the five bad things about the state of nature?
Solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short, yes.
Like the five dwarves of the Hobbesian state of nature.
Solitary, yes, poor, solitary, nasty, brutish, and short.
All right, now, if you go back and read
exactly what Hobbes' argument is,
it's very striking once you understand some game theory
because there's an overpowering temptation
that people who know game theory have
to interpret Thomas Hobbes as if he was right.
But if you actually read his own words,
I maintain that you will go and say,
this guy doesn't know what he's talking about.
A very smart guy who just didn't even understand
the basics of what we now understand based upon this class.
Right, and why would I say this?
Well, so go and read it.
And again, don't read it with the presumption
that it's right.
Just read it, read the literal words
in the most natural, ordinary interpretation.
So here's what I claim Hobbes literally says.
He seems to literally say
that war is a strictly dominant strategy.
Right, and you're always better off fighting.
Why are you always better off fighting?
Yeah, actually, it's a story.
And it says war.
So either the other side was gonna fight anyway,
in which case, prepared.
Or you went, or you couldn't be sure.
And if you can't be sure,
then you should just go and kill people, right?
That makes perfect sense.
Right, and again, if you read it,
he does describe that it will degenerate
into universal warfare.
But the idea that there is any downside at all of fighting
seems completely outside of his thinking.
The idea that you might go and get killed
because you picked a fight with someone
that wasn't gonna fight you, totally absent.
The idea that you might have just peacefully cooperated
with someone, totally absent.
Instead, there is this very strong assumption
that whoever fights wins.
And even if both sides are fighting,
better to come and fight than to just be sitting there.
So either the other person is not gonna fight,
in which case, hit him over the head with a club.
And or if the guy's got a club,
hit him over the head with a club.
Right, which, the way I get it,
remember, he is talking about,
yeah, he's specifically talking about
two random individuals beating each other
in the state of nature.
All right, now just think about this.
Suppose that you are on a desert island all by yourself
and another person washes up.
How, what would have to happen
before you would consider it a good strategy
to go and murder that person
before they are able to go and cough the water
up out of their lungs?
How big are they?
That is a consideration.
All right, so suppose the person's like
two feet bigger than you.
Are you still inclined to try to murder that person
when you're all alone by yourself?
Probably not.
Yes.
And see, again, that seems like a very poor strategy.
Again, not that, well, how do you know
he isn't a Charles Manson?
I'm like a seven foot tall Charles Manson.
All right, I don't.
But it seems unlikely.
And if I do, and if he wasn't Charles Manson,
I murdered him, then I have to be,
I have to continue being alone by myself.
I'm like really lonely.
I have no one to help me with anything.
If I ever get sick, there's no one to bail me out.
I'm in a terrible situation.
And obviously, no one would think this
if it were opposite genders.
So if we're opposite genders,
there's a man on an island, a woman washes up,
no one thinks that the obvious prediction
is he immediately murders the person and shuts me out.
Or vice versa.
No one thinks that a woman sees a man
and washes him off the shore.
All right, better kill him.
See, it's the dominant strategy
according to Hobbes' Leviathan.
And then when you start thinking like,
how bad would the situation have to be
before it would be plausible that you would predict
that the person would go and murder the,
like the person who's already there
would immediately murder the newcomer.
So maybe if it's World War II
and you're an American on the island
and a Japanese soldier washes up,
right, maybe then you kill him.
Although I say even that depends on how many days
you've been alone on that island.
Like a week, yeah, you probably will kill him,
especially if you've already been in combat
and you've seen some friends get killed by Japanese soldiers.
Then murdering him before he does anything is plausible,
but you've been alone for a year,
how are you gonna murder this guy?
And it starts to seem highly implausible
that this would happen, right?
And again, partly it may just be that
there's some psychology that Hobbes is considering,
but again, there's also the obvious one of,
look, there's a chance the person's gonna try to kill me,
but there's also enormous gains of trade
when you're the only person around.
And if I kill a person, yes, I won't risk anything,
but I also will give up all the possible gains,
which in expected value terms are enormous.
So that's something very weird about the scenario.
Right, and then on top of all this,
there's something else that isn't quite reflected there,
but suppose that you go and decide
you're going to fight a stranger right now and you win.
Does that mean that everything worked out well for you
just because you kill another person in the fight?
Well, very often you get injured, right?
So suppose that in that case,
even if all you care about is physical safety,
there is a since possibility
that when you fight another person,
that even if you win, you will be injured
and the loss of the injury will outweigh
whatever risk that the other person posed to you.
Right, in fact, you could get mortally wounded
even though you won the fight.
That's a very extreme case.
But again, imagine that you go,
you could go and lose a finger.
Right, now like one finger lost.
Like well, what exactly,
and what was the other person gonna do to me
that was so terrible that it was worth losing this finger?
So, to me, this is like Hobbes' scenario
was interesting because almost everyone who reads it
acts like he is correctly describing what would occur.
And again, he's just describing two people
without any garment bumping into each other in the forest
and he sure seems to claim that they will definitely go
and fight to the death on sight.
And that seems like a very strange prediction
both for game theoretic terms,
namely like you're ignoring these benefits
and also you're ignoring the possibility
that you've been injured during the fight.
So, I mean like if you just said
they will immediately run away from each other
for fear of injury, that would make a bit more sense to me.
Right, you know, at least,
like you're just like, oh my God, run.
And that actually, I think that is more common in, you know,
so when there are unexpected meetings
between people in different groups in isolated settings,
very common they both run away in terror.
But you're like, I don't know that person, he might kill me.
But the reaction of, and therefore,
let me go and immediately fight this person
who might kill me.
It's like, well, why don't you just try running away?
Maybe that would work better.
So, like doesn't seem to be in Hobbes either.
All right, so anyway, when you think about a situation,
the equilibrium that Hobbes describes
sounds like prisoner's dilemma,
the actual situation seems much more like the Hawk-Dove game.
And again, then why isn't a guy as smart
as Hobbes correctly solve the model?
Well, there's no game theory at the time,
so he's just working it through verbally.
And if you know anything else about Hobbes,
he has a very dark personality.
So, and he did live through the English Civil War.
So he did see a lot of horrible stuff,
although I'd still say that if you step back
and thought about what occurred
during that horrible Civil War that he saw,
did he actually see what happens
when totally isolated individuals
meet each other in the wilderness?
No, he saw what happens when groups
who developed a strong group identity
and antipathy towards the outsider meet each other.
So not about isolated individuals,
but rather about what happened,
a story about group psychology,
which is again a very different story
about why you get bloodshed.
And again, so other interesting things about Hobbes is
people who are actually involved in war
have often noted that you have to really watch your soldiers
because a lot of the, most people are like,
whatever they say are very cowardly,
especially when their life is on the line,
they run and try to live.
Instead of doing the right thing
of trying to avoid dying for their cause.
So it's very normal to go and watch soldiers very closely
to make sure they're not running away.
And the worse the situation gets,
the more likely that you are to have officers
just shooting their own men for fear of them running away.
All right, so again, fitting in with the idea
that actually, if anything,
the strategy that occurs to people first is running.
And the only way that you're able to go
and get people to actually go
and endure a high risk of life
is either with very scary physical threats,
or you have to build up group solidarities
to such a high level.
Yeah, so I mean, like you easily believe that if you,
suppose you've got 10 American soldiers on the island
and one Japanese soldier washes up.
Then I think the Japanese soldier may get killed.
Because then there's 10 people, their group identity,
there's a guy, he's an outsider, let's kill him.
Right, and if you say, no, why don't we give him a chance,
then maybe you're gonna get killed too.
So, a reason for people who are not so brutal to go
and say, oh, I don't wanna be the one guy
standing up for the outsider,
maybe I'll be coming out the next outsider.
And since there's 10 people,
they can probably make it by with nine.
There was like two people,
and one guy said, let's give him a chance.
Oh no, all right, now I gotta kill two people.
First the new arrival,
and then the guy who said to give him a chance.
Let's get rid of both of them.
Right, now, why matters aren't worse.
So, there is a literature on what is sometimes called
the bourgeois solution to this,
to the Hawk-Dove problem, or the Hawk-Dove game.
So, sometimes it's called the bourgeois solution.
Although actually this gives the middle class people
too much credit, because it's actually a strategy
that we observe in all societies, in children,
and in animals.
So, but in the general,
the general description is property,
or just think about it as territory.
So, you may say animals don't exactly have property,
but animals definitely have territory.
So, area where the animal acts like this is my space here,
and you had better not mess with it.
Right, so the idea is that,
rather than having the equilibrium just be randomized,
there could be one where people have
the conditional strategy of fight on your home territory,
and run if you were on someone else's territory.
Or fight for your own property,
but run if it is somebody else's property.
And we see this with human beings.
So, anyone ever seen like time-lapse photography,
if someone leaves a coat on a bench,
and what generally happens over the course of 24 hours, say?
Does the coat immediately get stolen, usually?
No?
Now, and do people like shove the coat onto the ground,
and say, I wanna sit here?
Now, instead, normally people sit around the coat,
and no one touches the coat.
The coat just stays there, right?
And this is not just in capitalist societies,
this is just normal human behavior.
If there's something that clearly doesn't belong to you,
the normal strategy people have is just stay away from it,
and don't mess with it.
And, and again, like why?
Well, there seems to be some background equilibrium
people have in mind,
where if you go and just keep on your,
you just keep your hands to yourself,
and don't mess with other people's stuff,
then they won't, then you'll be safe.
But if you go and mess with someone else's stuff,
then they will resist you, and they will fight back.
So this makes sense for property, right?
But not just property is legally defined,
but there's also just informal notions of property,
like why you might not wanna go
and talk bad about somebody in public.
Have you ever seen someone's gonna badmouth someone
in a restroom, and they look around,
make sure no one's listening there?
So there's some sense where if you go
and publicly talk bad about someone,
you are intruding upon their personal space, right?
And then you have made an enemy, and they will fight back.
Whereas as long as you just go and keep it close,
and don't go and talk bad about other people, right?
Then they will, they will, they, they,
they will not be mad at you, and they won't do it to you.
So and of course, you got, you know,
even legal systems where they,
where it is definitely counted as murder,
to go and kill someone in the event of adultery.
Still, this is a, this is a classic fear,
like, so, like, if I'm cheating with this guy's wife,
and then what, what will he do to me if he finds out?
Right, and the idea, he might try to kill me,
or strangle me, or something.
The, these are, again, ideas which people have,
which probably actually deter at least some amount
of adultery, which is like fear
of what another person will do,
even though of course the law is totally on your side.
The law says you can't strangle me,
because I'm cheating, but nevertheless,
human emotions may say something very different
about what the relevant rights are.
And then, so I have a paper over there,
a camera, where we go over a lot
of the empirical literature here.
So there's actually studies of toddlers,
and their sense of property, all right?
So as you might guess, bigger,
bigger toddlers are more likely to end up with the better toys.
And yet, if you just go and randomly assign toys to kids,
there's a high probability that if you give a weak kid,
a small kid, a good toy, he still has it
at the end of an hour.
So the very fact that, that a toy has been,
a good toy has been assigned to a small kid,
seems to be enough to deter a bigger kid
from going and taking it.
So even though I'm big enough to go and take it,
there's still a fear of, look, he's little,
he can't really go and heal, like,
couldn't really beat me in a fight, but he might bite me.
He might scratch me, and so I'm just gonna go
and let him have the toy.
Like so, and these experiments with toddlers
are kind of fun, because you may have heard
that it's only capital society that goes
and teaches kids about property and so on.
If you ever had young kids, it's exactly the opposite.
We spend all our time telling them to not worry
about what their property is so much.
Think about what other people's property is,
but don't worry about your own so much.
Just share with other kids and stop being a crybaby.
But then we also tell them,
but if it's another kid, just leave him alone.
So, but anyway, the pressure is generally
not on telling people it's your stuff
and you don't have to share with anybody, kid.
I would recommend against it.
Or only share with other children
if they share something just as good or better with you.
Not propaganda that we usually give kids.
Instead, the propaganda is normally
to not be so proprietarian, and yet little kids are anyway.
Which again, is not so surprising
since there's also a literature on animal territoriality,
which Eric Hemmer and I also review.
Right, there's even this really weird thing
where butterflies who need to have sunlight in the forest,
so like they get some nutrient,
I can't remember if it's food
or they get vitamin D or something.
But anyway, if you have thick forest
where there's just little rays of sunshine
that go through all the leaves,
and the butterflies need to have a good amount of time
in that sunshine, and even there,
if a butterfly is there,
then other butterflies tend to just leave him alone
in possession of his good ray of sunshine.
Even a butterfly that's bigger than another one
could probably beat him for it in a fight.
But that probably can beat someone in a fight.
If you expect that they are going to fight back,
if you go and try to take what they consider theirs,
is not a very good deal.
Because, well, suppose there's like 70% chance that I win,
there's a 30% chance I lose,
and losing could mean I die.
And even if I win, I might get injured pretty badly,
so I'll just let him have the light
and I'll keep looking for some free light.
There was a question back there.
How does your experiment with children have toys
compared to the Piaget experiments?
I don't know the Piaget experiments.
It was like, they gave,
it was an adult and a toddler,
and the adult has two graham crackers
and the toddler has one.
And then they ask the toddler, is this fair?
And the toddler says no,
because the adult has two and I only have one.
And they take the toddler's one cracker
and split it in two.
And then right in front of them says, is it fair now?
And they say yes, because I have two and he has two.
They just don't have spatial awareness.
So maybe that's, I don't know.
All right.
So anyway, so this additional solution concept
is a reason to be more optimistic
about the possibility of actually getting
to this peaceful equilibrium.
Because if everyone actually has a strategy of,
I'm peaceful unless you go and intrude,
then the obvious outcome is nobody intrudes
and then you have peace.
And yet it is stable because if someone were to go
and cross borders, then you are going in court of danger.
And yet if it seems like,
well maybe that could work at the level of individuals
but not countries.
Does anyone here think the US might go
and invade Canada anytime soon?
All right, it seems unlikely.
Is it because the Canadian military is so powerful
that America is worried it couldn't win?
It doesn't seem too likely.
So what is going on?
probably a lot of the story is something like that.
And also notice that the border doesn't move even a foot a year.
The border just stays exactly there.
There's something very sacrosanct about that little line
so that if one country were to say, look,
we just want to move it one foot north, that's all we're asking.
That by itself could be something that broke a war.
It seems, in fact, pretty plausible.
If you wanted to go and get a war with Canada,
for the smallest possible cause, just saying
we want to move the border one foot north
seems like a pretty good way to do it.
That's what's going on in Kashmir.
They're debating about what is the sovereign territory.
So if one person is crossing that sovereign territory,
they're fighting over the whole.
Right, right.
Yes.
I mean, the US-Canadian case is more interesting
just because it's had, there's been
peace for over 100 years.
There's agreement on what the border.
Right, right.
All right.
So anyway, so people are more likely to fight
and attack their own territory than the expectation.
Makes the threat to fight or attack
more credible than the threat to fight if resisted.
Yeah, and actually, the main point
of the peace with their camera is on the black market.
So black markets are interesting because not only
is this property the government doesn't respect,
it's generally property the government says is illegal.
And yet, how many movies about drugs
have been based on the premise that someone
stole somebody's drugs?
Right, you can't go to the police
and say they stole my drugs, or they'll arrest you.
Right, and yet, there is a sense that if you
want to get in trouble with the mafia,
one good bet is to go and steal some of their drugs.
You say, well, if it's not recognized,
it's recognized by us.
So you better watch it.
All right, questions, questions?
All right.
So and then the last topic.
So rent-seeking and lobbying inefficiency.
Remember, we already talked about two kinds
of inefficiencies.
We talked about allocative inefficiency
and productive inefficiency.
All right.
So the allocative inefficiency is
the kind that gets almost all attention in textbooks,
especially I.O. textbooks.
So where you start off with this is your marital cost,
this is demand, and then we've got a monopoly here.
So we are pricing up here.
And then we have this triangle of deadweight loss,
which is the allocative inefficiency.
And then we talked about the further inefficiency caused
by having costs higher than they socially need to be.
So for example, this could be the marginal cost
of the brother-in-law of the dictator.
But here is the marginal cost of the most efficient firm.
And then as we saw, there's going
to be another set of inefficiency
here in the shape of a trapezoid.
And this is the productive inefficiency.
So this is all the inefficiency associated
with the fact that costs are higher than they socially
need to be.
So we've got a trapezoid and we've
got a triangle inefficiency.
Now, there is another kind of inefficiency
that Gordon Tullock is famously associated with.
Although there's a bunch of other people that followed up
on him as to whether or not they were actually
copying him and republishing or whether they're
independent discoverers.
We may never know.
But in any case, final form of inefficiency
usually known as lobbying or rent-seeking inefficiency.
So it arises when people use resources to cause
the transfer of resources.
So when people actually spend something
in order to gain control of a fixed pie of stuff.
And the simplest example would be something like this.
So suppose that rather than the brother-in-law just
getting the monopoly for free, instead you
have to go and fight in the legislature.
So you have to go and hire a bunch of lawyers
and you have to bribe a bunch of congressmen.
Or you have to go and hire some researchers to argue
on your behalf.
Or maybe you need to go and take out a big advertising campaign.
So you have to put up resources in order
to become the monopolist.
Now in the simple model, this rectangle here is what?
In the simple, so not with rent-seeking,
but the very simple story monopoly,
what is that rectangle?
Profit.
Yeah, profit.
That rectangle is normally monopoly profits.
But if you get this monopoly profit
by becoming a monopolist, there is
a reason to spend resources in order
to get that monopoly profit.
And so this goes from being all monopoly profit to just
being the gross monopoly profit.
It's a monopoly profit that you get if you win.
But in order to win, you might have
to spend a lot of resources.
And those resources get burned up.
They're not actually going to be enjoyed by anyone in society.
So just imagine a world where the more you spend
on your lobbying efforts to convince the world
that you deserve to be a monopolist,
the more you prove your chances.
And we can picture this like a tug-of-war contest.
So the game tug-of-war where there's a rope,
and then there's a thing of mud in the center.
And then you have people more pulling the rope.
And then imagine that each side can go and hire
more assistant rope pullers.
And you can end, you know, that's really bad.
Like, it's not just mud.
Maybe it's like molten lava.
All right, so you can keep adding more and more people.
Each side will keep adding more and more people.
And when in equilibrium does the expected benefits
of participating in this process go down to just the normal
level?
So anyway, Gordon Tollick's deep insight here
is we can think about this as just
being a competitive industry.
In competitive industry, in the long run,
price is equal to what again?
Yeah, margin loss.
But also, more importantly in this case, average cost.
So you keep getting entry in the long run
until price is going to be equal to average cost.
So what this means is that if initially the rate of return
to fighting over those monopoly profits is 10%,
this will give you more entry.
And then finally, you will get entry
until the rate of return in the lobbying industry.
We'll call it industry metaphorically
because it's not very industrious.
It doesn't lead to production, but it
does lead to redistribution.
You get more and more entry until our economic profits are
what?
Zero.
Yes, economic profits are zero.
OK.
And so that means that rather than this thing here
being true monopoly profits, that actually we
can go and think about this as yet another kind
of deadweight loss.
That whole thing can become deadweight loss.
Right?
So if there's a million dollars worth of benefit
from getting the monopoly grant, then in equilibrium
it seems like the total amount that people spend on lobbying
will be a million dollars.
Now, of course, the firm that wins
is going to do way better than that.
But on the other hand, the firms that lose
are going to be losing money.
I mean, it's just like, say, a patent race, where
whoever gets there first and wins,
they're going to be making good profits.
But when you think about the social cost,
you also need to subtract out all of the research
efforts of all the losers who get no gross profits
and still had all the research costs.
Right?
And in equilibrium, we need to have price equals average cost.
So the total amount of resources that people
spend trying to get the monopoly profit
will actually equal the monopoly profits.
So anyway, this is a lot like mixed value reasoning.
So in equilibrium, the payoffs of production and redistribution
are going to be equal.
And you keep entering this arms race
until the net profits of the privilege
are zero, which happens when the total cost of lobbying
equals the total value of the monopoly privilege.
And this has a special name.
So again, if this doesn't need to happen,
so if that does happen, then we call it full rent dissipation.
And this here has a special name.
It's not just a rectangle.
It's the telec rectangle.
Geometrically, the telec rectangle
is exactly the same as the monopoly profit rectangle,
only we now can reinterpret it as being deadweight loss
rather than transfer.
Right?
And now, look at how gloomy this market is.
We started off with a market where the total social surplus
was this giant triangle.
And we end up with this little stub.
We end up with that little stub of surplus at the end.
So this is what's left over after an incompetent firm
jacks up the price after fighting
for the right to do so.
And then, yeah, there's still something.
So there's still better to have a product that
exists than not exist.
But the social gain that we just realized
when we compare it to the potential is very small.
So there, I guess it looks like 1 9th, something like that.
As drawn, these are similar triangles.
You can go and do a little bit like that.
All right.
Questions?
Yes?
So that whole bottom trapezoid, that's all productive?
Yes, that's all productive inefficiency, exactly.
So is this more of a competitive market?
Yes, so the idea is that in a competitive market,
you could have this thing could have happened.
Yes.
So again, I suppose if there were two firms that
both had that, or if one firm had these costs,
but there was a potential one that was just as efficient,
then you actually could very well be right there.
Now, when people think about this situation,
common reaction is, well, we wouldn't
have to go and deal with this problem.
It wouldn't be a deadweight loss of the tele-rectangle
if instead of having lobbying, we just did competitive bidding.
So suppose that instead of having a giant argument or fight
about who gets the monopoly profits,
instead we just had the government auction it.
Then the government would raise this revenue,
and that would be a transfer to the government
rather than a deadweight loss to society.
OK, now, what Tulloch pointed out,
though, is that there really is a law of conservation
of rent-seeking, because if the government is able to go and get
all these monopoly profits, this is just
going to increase competition to become
the people in charge of the government who
are able to get the money.
So you can very easily see this in things
like medieval monarchies, where on the one hand,
if you are the king, you get all this great stuff.
But that means that other people look at you with envy
and say, if only I could become the king.
I could be the king.
I should be the king.
If I would just raise an army and kill
the people in charge, that would be me.
Of course, you're not the only one thinking that.
There's a lot of people thinking that.
So if you know the show or books Game of Thrones,
there's enormous surplus.
But basically, it looks like it's
all going to be dissipated.
There's going to be the whole area will be totally laid
waste.
I don't know the final outcome.
But realistically, it just seems like that's it for them.
But I suppose that wouldn't really
be a good ending for the story.
But the idea is that if it's really good to be the king,
then people will fight very bitterly to become the king.
So the king can very peaceably go and raise lots of revenue
from auctioning off monopolies.
There will be other people around, interesting
and very brutally, taking over that job.
So Game of Thrones is based on the War of the Roses.
So if you ever looked at the fraction
of the warring families that survived at the end of the war,
I think like 90% of them were dead by the end.
So they were killing each other left and right.
So if only they could have just lived in peace,
things would have been a lot better.
But instead, red dissipation came along.
And they fought for it.
Now, another example of red dissipation
that Talhah would like to talk about.
So Talhah's family, the family of Talhah,
he would like to talk about.
So Talhah spent quite a few years in China
during World War II and after World War II.
So he'd like to talk about the system of the Chinese civil
service exams.
So people often talk about how China
had these impartial civil service exams.
But the content of the exams was not
on anything in social science or anything
like that that would seem to improve your ability to do
the job.
Instead, it was basically just exams
about what long-dead classical thinkers said,
what Confucius said, things like this.
I once talked to a guy who had gone to, let's see.
So he'd actually done 20 years in a slave labor
camps under Mao.
But before that, he'd been at the International School
in Beijing.
But he said that his parents also
made him go and do Confucius and get
to be prepared for the civil service exams
if they ever came back.
But he was saying, so I heard that they was just
memorizing Confucius.
Is that true?
Yeah, that's what it was.
He was memorizing Confucius.
But anyway, so what Tullock said was
that under the old imperial system,
villages would look around for a really smart kid.
If they could find one, the village
would pour all these resources into hiring tutors and so on
so the kid could get a really high score on the civil service
test and then get a great job.
And then what is the kid supposed
to do once he gets this great job?
Bring us back delicious rents.
Yes, funnel money back to the home village.
So give all the money back to the home village.
And so you do have a competitive system.
But it's one where you burn an enormous amount of resources
as well as all the smartest people in the country,
studying subjects of very little practical relevance,
from what I've heard.
I did read Confucius.
I just feel, at least the analects,
this does not seem very useful for anything.
The right number of steps to walk through.
I don't know.
Maybe there's something I'm missing.
But it sure didn't seem like it was some kind of proto-economics
or anything else, cost-benefit analysis, or even game theory.
No, none of those things.
So anyway, so this is a story, again,
of rent dissipation, where people
know that if you become a civil servant by passing this test,
then you are able to bring home lots of rewards
to your village.
So they pour all these brains and all these resources
into getting that job.
So whatever system we use for handing out the rents,
people then pour resources into gaining that system.
So people members in politics, they'll
pay more to win a seat.
And of course, this works in a dictatorship or monarchy.
So if you get rich by handing out monopoly privileges,
then this strengthens the incentives upstarts to seize
a coup, to seize this realm, seize your coup, and so on.
So if you could actually go and get a really stable monarchy,
where no one thinks the rebellion would ever happen,
then maybe.
Although even there, there are always workarounds.
So I think the Japanese emperor, the line
was unbroken for thousands of years.
But there were still all sorts of civil wars.
How can you have civil wars, but the same guy, always
killing, the same line, always stays in power?
And the answer is, there are civil wars
over who gets to marry the emperor.
And the winner says, all right, emperor, lord of all the world,
you're marrying our daughter now, or else.
And also, all your relatives are going
to marry all of our people here.
And in this way, you can gradually
do a genetic takeover of the imperial house,
even though there is an unbroken line of succession.
You can have massive bloodshed, even when
there's no totally clear at all times
what the chain of what the line of succession is.
All right.
So and then a repeat play, could we do a better equilibrium?
But as usual, not necessarily.
Firm might lobby extra hard to get reputation for toughness.
You might lobby way past the point of profitability
just to scare people.
They never try to lobby against us.
We'll just pour as much money in as much as it takes.
All right.
So questions about this?
So again, this is the ultimate pessimistic diagram of markets,
because it shows where all three kinds of inefficiency
are piled on top of each other.
But on the other hand, you say it's also how much better
the world can be.
So yes.
So any time you just say the world right now
is way below potential, in a way that's very optimistic,
because there's so many gains.
It could be fantastic if only people would learn economics
and act upon it.
That's nice.
All right.
So questions about rent seeking and all?
Now, then let's talk about the exam.
And then I'll take any questions that you
might have about any material.
So the basics of the exam.
OK.
All right.
So the exam will be next class.
You know that, right?
And the best way of studying is to take
old exams under time pressure.
Take old exams under time pressure.
There are 14 old exams up there.
So the early ones are just a bit longer than the one
that you're going to get.
I gradually shorten the exams over time.
But essentially, the questions that
are asked will be very similar in form and difficulty.
See, then in terms of the breakdown of material,
when I write the exams, I try to get about 50%
of the questions from lecture, about 30% from homework,
and about 20% from the readings.
So remember this class has readings.
They're on a syllabus.
You may have been postponing them.
But you will be asked.
And I often like to go and write a question that
blends two of these things.
So you mentioned something on homework,
and then how it's something that you read, change that.
See whether you can combine those two things.
Now, important things to know about the exams.
The exam is fully open book and notes.
So you can bring any written materials
that you want whatsoever without any limit.
So you can bring a dictionary if English is not
your native language.
If it is your native language, you
can bring a dictionary to give you anything you want.
You may not use an electronic device,
because you could be in contact with the outside world.
And that's what I don't want to allow.
People often say, can I just put it in airplane mode?
No, because you would just take it out of airplane mode.
So that doesn't really solve anything.
So yes, you are allowed to print off your entire hard drive
if you want.
So that's perfectly fine.
If you look at the amount of time you'll have,
it's not super rushed.
But if you want to just take your chances
and not do the readings and then rush through them
during the exam, that's possible.
Not only I wouldn't recommend it.
So mostly, this is just if you're
someone who draws a blank under pressure,
oh my god, I forgot, what is this?
And you can go and check your notes,
and then you can show what you actually know.
I'm trying to reduce the effect of a nervous personality
during an exam or just sudden stress prone amnesia.
Now, since I am letting you have all your books and notes,
and of course, since this is a PhD class,
there are very few questions involving rote memorization.
So almost all the questions require you to genuinely understand the material
and think about it, talk about it.
What does it mean to genuinely understand material as opposed to not really
to only pretend to understand material. But one good test is
if I can give you a question that is not exactly the same as one that I've already
asked you and you can still do it. Usually it's only a small change.
I can change the question a little bit and you can still do the question.
That shows you really understand. If you only do exactly the questions we've done, then you don't
really understand. Now, an important warning.
Sometimes there will be questions that are about models.
And when a question is about a model, you should just talk about the model.
So in the coordination game, how many of the delivery are there? Then don't start talking about Esperanto.
Then there's no need to
discuss the real world. In the coordination game, there can be two pure
strategy Nash equilibria and one mixed strategy Nash equilibria.
But sometimes there will be questions that ask you about the real world.
And if the question asks you about the real world, is it okay to say assume Bertrand
or Assume Chrono Collusion
or assume anything. If it's a question about the real world,
you need to actually argue. So it's good to use a model from class, but you want
to begin by arguing the model's relevance.
Or at least close. Say, this model may not be perfect, but it's a reasonable
approximation in this particular case we're talking about.
Similarly, if there's a question like, is it a good model?
In explaining the real world. You don't want to just give some circular thing
saying, of course it's a good model because it's internally consistent.
Instead, if the question asks you to assess the empirical relevance of the model,
you need to understand the model well enough to see discrepancies and then
talk about them.
In the Berkeley competitive model,
what is an obvious discrepancy between going to the movie theater on a bad day
and the Berkeley competitive model?
Lowering the price a penny.
We see a bunch of vacant seats and the price seems to be way above
the marginal cost.
It's an essay question and someone wants to say, I worked in a movie theater, let me explain
the marginal cost of letting one more person in is way higher than you think.
Do you know what the cleanup costs are? Do you know how much one more body raises the air conditioning
costs? Do you know what the average amount of damage that one person does
to the screen? If you start adding it up, even if I'm a bit
suspicious about the numbers, still, if that's your argument,
I'm going to look at that and say, well, that seems like the person is at least on point, relevant,
and maybe. So it seems like a pretty good essay
anyway, so that could be a good way of doing it. So yes, the Berkeley competitive model is totally relevant
and the price is not above marginal cost. You really understood the industry
as I do. So you could go that route and that could be a great essay.
But if you just go and repeat back
what the model says and then ignore facts that would appear
to be inconsistent with the model, on a question about the real world
you'll do poorly. So often I will actually use the phrase
in the real world.
So that is a dead giveaway that I'm actually, you'll want you to go
and compare what we've done in class to the real world.
Although sometimes I'll also just, I will
describe events at which are clearly supposed to be in the real world.
I think you have a better question, like, if you were playing a repeated prisoner's lemma against another
student in this class, how would you play and why?
And if your answer is, I would have defected turn one
because that's what backwards deduction says, you're not going to do very well on it.
Because I don't think you, first because I just don't believe you.
I don't believe you would play that way.
Firstly, no human being does play that way. Unless you were to go
and say, well this is the way I always do things.
If you flesh it out and start giving details. Or if you were to even say,
well I think that the other people in the class would not play like normal human beings and I would
just be so worried about this that I would just not trust them.
At least give me a story where it sounds like you
have thought through the problem and you've understood the complexities and you're still going
to say something strange. That's a much better thing than just saying something
that seems like you're repeating back what a model that has
obvious, seemingly obvious problems.
Let's see. So we've got the breakdown,
we've got the notes, the distinction between the real world and
a model. So in my public choice class on the first homework
almost everyone answered all questions as if I was asking about models even though many questions
were clearly about the real world. Which fits my pet theory that
the main intellectual harm economics does to people is to make
them forget the real world. When the whole point of the subject
is ultimately to take what we have learned and apply it to the real
world. To understand the real world. It is kind of
our fault for not mentioning it more.
It seems like you should take it for granted that that is the ultimate goal
even if we don't discuss it in every class. Let's see.
So other things to know.
Many people consider my exams difficult but this is
only because they're focusing on nominal grades instead of real grades.
I do write exams trying to get a 50% average. I try to get the maximum
spread so I can really see the difference and people will understand the material well.
People don't understand so well. But a 50% will generally get you about a B+.
The B plus is the real grade, the 50% is the nominal grade.
It's all curved so there's no reason to be
agitated by the low absolute
percentage and there is a rationale for it.
Just be forewarned and don't be upset.
Let's see. Other things. I will not be present for the exams.
Julia Norgaard will be doctoring. Some people are annoyed
that I'm not here to answer questions. All I can say is you would be just as annoyed if I were here.
My standard answer to every question is
part of what the exam is testing is whether you understand the question.
In general, if I were here I would not really answer your questions either.
The marginal difference between me being here
and me not being here is really basically nothing.
That is key.
When answering questions you need to understand what the question is.
This is actually good advice for any exam but probably even more
important for mine is answer the question that's asked.
People will often go and answer a different question than was asked and then when I'm
grading it I have to go and try to read their minds. Does the person actually understand
anything here? I mean they seem to
but maybe they're just answering a different question because they know that but they don't understand my question
which is what I'm really looking for. I do grade you based upon
your responsiveness to the question that was asked. This may seem
pretty obvious but again people will often
just bend along for a page. If you really don't know anything about it
then I would say spend your time on something where you can get some points because you're not generally going to get
points just by going and talking about something that has the same keywords
as the question.
Anything else that I should mention?
That's all the bureaucratic stuff.
This exam will include all material from weeks one through seven or is it one through six?
One through six. Everything is fair game.
If you ask me what am I likely to emphasize my answer is I am
deliberately playing mixed strategy Nash Equilibrium in order to prevent
you from being able to game the system. My goal is to write an exam that is
unpredictable enough so that you learn all the material which of course
as PhD students your goal is to become a master of this craft
so all this material should become known to you and no time like the present.
Yes, Ash? Will there be any questions that will require a calculator?
No. Alright, so I said you can't have an electronic
device of any kind because now I can't even tell the difference between electronic devices
that have internet access and those that don't. So yes, nothing will require a calculator.
So either you round or the numbers
will be even. This is another common thing that occurs
on exams. Yes?
What are the time constraints? So the time constraints, so I believe that
it is, so I believe you have 120 minutes
to do the exam. So it will be exactly like
the last exam. So why don't I just double check that.
Actually it doesn't have to be here because this is only the answer key.
Yes, so
120 minutes and there will be 6 true or false explain
questions and then 3 half page essay questions.
So you will have 120 minutes
and there will be 6 true or false explain questions
and then there will be 3 half page
essay questions. Where the essays might also involve
some math. Yes? Just any general tips for an essay other than
keep on point? Yes, so stay on point and
answer the question.
The main thing to remember is when I'm reading the exam I'm doing my best to read your mind
and figuring out how much you really understand. So
if you can give me some additional sentences that reveal that you have
full or deep understanding, that is great. If you add on further sentences
that just ramble on, that isn't very helpful. But there is the judgment.
How much do I need to say in order to convince him? So normally
for the essays it says 4 to 6 sentences. So 4 to 6
well chosen sentences is a good amount on those normally. Oh yes,
you will write directly on the exam. People sometimes say they need more
space than I've given them and they are incorrect. You do not need more
space. The amount of space is there as a guide to
what a reasonable answer length would be.
If you have really big writing or something that maybe you need to do, but then just write
on the back. You may have just answered this question, but do we need a blue book?
No. Do not bring a blue book. Write directly on the exam.
Absolutely. It causes moderate trouble if you bring a blue book.
Let's see. Alright, so the other
bureaucratic questions. These are only just about the structure
and nature of the test. Alright. And now
you have one opportunity, although it's not your only opportunity to ask me questions
about anything we've talked about in the first six weeks. So I'm going to be around
most of the time until the midterm. So it's perfectly fine if you'd
rather go email me or come to my office or Skype me or whatever
or talk to me on the phone. But if you have any question about the first six
weeks of work material, anything at all, I'm happy to go and take
these questions right now. Yes. So I have a question about the relevance of the
MSNE. So I understand when you're creating the test why it's relevant
if you're trying to get on and off a train, why it would be relevant. But in that circumstance
right there, you know, the cooperation game, there are two PSNEs. There's
one that's a focal point. Why would anyone ever
want to... There exists one. I recognize that there is a
situation where no one would change. But why would anyone want to play it?
Yes, that is a great question. And what I'd say is that the only
reason you'd ever want to play it is if you happen to be
radically divided. Although I still say it's worth talking about
in sort of a dog that didn't bark sense. So because
just reason why is it that it's so normal for one language to take
over a country? Why is it that it's so normal for one currency
to take over a country? Just saying that because the mixed strategy
and natural equilibrium is not stable, so naturally if there's anything short of a very
even division, then there's a movement to an extreme. So, but yeah.
I say that the equilibrium itself is not something that's merely relevant, but
the absence of it is something that's very relevant and we see a lot of different situations.
Like you know about the tipping point.
In a sense, what it is about? A lot of it is about why the mixed
strategy and natural equilibrium is not stable in a lot of situations.
So that's one case. Let's see. Any other
questions about anything from weeks one through six?
Anything at all? There's no pressure to ask right now. I mean you can ask
me privately, but yes. So the homework five of course you said will
not be collected, will not be graded. Right.
But what would be, how might
this, I'm assuming that this is sort of like just a good comprehensive
overview of some of the other previous concepts we've had. No, no, homework five is actually new stuff.
Oh it is? Okay. Yeah, it's like questions about the stuff we've done today. Okay, so
my question would be therefore how might this manifest itself on the test?
This is a good question. As much as anything else. You might have exactly
one of these questions on the test. You might have a question like this with one word changed.
You might have, you know, like all totally possible.
Again, so if you go over past exams you
may notice that once in a while a question gets recycled, although very rarely is it
recycled without an alteration. The only questions that I get
recycled without alterations is questions that almost nobody gets. Then sometimes
I'll put it on again. And to see when then you actually get some
credit for having gone and been diligent enough to go over all the old exams and really
master like even the harder questions.
But that would be unusual. But once one, yeah so, once we're under
graduates I ask the same question on all three exams.
Because I kept botching it every single time. First one, like two people out of twenty-five
got it. Then five out of twenty-five got it on the next midterm. Then finally
like twenty out of twenty-five got it. After I'd given them
the exact answer on the answer key two times.
Yes, it was an easy question too. But it was a very emotional question
though. And so, and they answered with their emotions instead of with what they've been taught.
The question was, you know, diagram what happens if you
abolish the minimum wage and welfare.
And like you, when you ask, you're like no diagrams at all. Just like revolution the people
will default.
Leave Ms. Arob laughing.
That sounds like a question.
Alright, so other questions about
weeks one through six. So you're saying an answer that involved revolution
and they missed like not getting full marks. Yes.
You said diagram what happens if you abolish the minimum wage and welfare.
You use the fine demand diagram to show what happens if you abolish the minimum wage and welfare.
Yes, they were very upset by that question.
Yes. Yes, if you wanted to do the extensive form for
a two game coordination game, would you
have to do the two person moves
for both players. Like if player one moves first, then if player two moves first?
So making the interesting version, you need to go and show
the dotted lines around the second actor's
choices to show they don't know. That's not that their information set doesn't
tell them where they are. Because otherwise you can solve it by backwards induction.
So if you're diagramming this one here,
what you need to do as an extensive form is
do
left right
left right, left right
three three, five five, zero zero
zero zero, and then we do that.
So that player two doesn't know where he is.
That's the way you show it as an extensive form. And if it was a simultaneous game,
would you have player one or player two move first?
Yes, this is showing simultaneous game.
As you might remember, we talked about in week three, for all practical purposes, there's no difference between
a sequential game where you don't know what the other person did before you, and a
simultaneous game. In the same way that we could either play rock, paper,
scissors by doing it at the same time, or we could both
write it down, and then I reveal mine, and then you reveal yours.
But you aren't allowed to erase or change it after you see mine.
So we both turn it in, so they can be opened simultaneously,
or imagine we fold it, and then one person can either get two slips
and go, ah! And then they're both open at once, or, once they're
handed in, could open one, open the other. It's the same thing for all purposes,
since we don't have any chance to modify our behavior based upon what the other person did.
Other questions?
For the simultaneous game, you always have the back one?
Yes, yes, for yes. If you're doing the extensive form, that's right.
But I remember that in our homework, it said
that there are following extensive game
and they use backward induction, so that means there is confusion here.
Ah, so in that case, I just took it for granted that there would be the dotted lines around,
whereas actually, no, no, if there's backwards induction, you know, so the others, again, you can't do
backwards induction if you do have this. So, you know, I believe the game
that you had in the homework was actually a sequential game. So that extensive form should have been
an extensive form, or the extensive form should have been sequential.
So you're saying that linear is also sequential?
Yes. So, you know, well, actually, so normally
actually, it's just taking for granted that it's simultaneous unless it is
specifically said to be sequential. So it is unusual, actually, to bother
mentioning, and I will not, I won't promise to mention that it's simultaneous.
It's just normally simultaneous is assumed unless you say sequential.
So, you know, certainly for anything like this, you know, like anytime
you just have normal forms, then simultaneity is taken for granted.
So basically, you know, simultaneous
play is the default assumption, always, and
unless we say otherwise.
Let's see, other questions. Weeks one through six.
Alright, so, it's not your last chance.
Don't feel desperate.
I'm trying to get out of my responsibility to teach you by asking you for questions
when you're too tired to ask. So I'm not trying to do that.
So going once. So we're not leaving this.
Going twice. And going three times.
Alright, so now, we'll just get started
on the next set of notes.
So now, this is not going to be on the midterm.
This will not be on the midterm, but we're going to get started
because we have so much material to cover in this class.
One quick question. So, it looks like the Winters Curse and the
Monument Book are anonymous texts?
I don't think we've had any assignments.
I'm going to double check that he uses a syllabus, but that sounds true.
...
CREPs will be fun.
Alright, so week eight is on a topic
that is very rarely named. Symmetric information.
So, how many people have ever had a lecture on asymmetric information?
That's almost everybody. How many of you have ever had a lecture called symmetric information?
Now, it is likely that you have actually seen a bunch of symmetric information
models, but strangely they don't actually get labeled as symmetric information
models. They just get taught as something else.
So, I think it's worth pointing out that before we do asymmetric, we're going to do symmetric.
And that's what we're going to start with. Alright, and we're going to start with
the most basic model of symmetric information.
So, notice, now is perfect information symmetric?
Yes, because everyone has full information that's symmetric.
But you can also have imperfect information that is symmetric, where
everybody is going to be equally
ignorant. Everyone will be equally uninformed. And all
the models that we're doing in this week are going to be ones involving that kind of
equal lack of information. Alright, so, and starting
with expected utility theory.
Alright, so,
how do people choose between gambles? So, and
big question, so what's the relation between the value you put on having
X with certainty, so X with probability equal to one, versus
having X with probability less than one?
Alright, now, the very simplest theory that we could do
would be expected value maximization.
So, expected value maximization, so expectation of value.
So, this would just say that people choose whatever option gives them the highest
average monetary value. Alright, so
this implies that you would be indifferent between a thousand dollars with probability one,
or excuse me, probability 0.01, and one dollar with
probability 0.99, and 1099 with probability one.
So, just to clarify this, so basically you have a lottery ticket which is worth
a thousand dollars with probability one, or excuse me, probability 0.01.
So, probability one. And one dollar with probability
0.99. Alright, so this is one ticket.
See that box indicates that's the ticket. Or,
you could have a different ticket. You could have 1099
with probability one. And if you maximize
expected value, everyone would be indifferent between these two examples.
Alright, now this is a really tractable theory.
It's very simple, and we actually already know how to do the math.
Right, so just multiply the probability times the amount, plus the probability times
the other amount, and sum it all up, and there you are.
So, that would be a great theory if it were at all empirically accurate.
Unfortunately, it's very inaccurate.
So, for example, is there anyone here who if you had the
choice between a billion dollars with a one in a thousand chance, or a million dollars
for sure? Is there anyone here who would go for the billion dollars with a one in a thousand
chance? I don't know. Maybe I, I kind of
wonder about that. A million dollars wouldn't change my life that much, but a billion dollars
would be really different. So, but no, I'd probably settle for
the million dollars as well. Almost everybody would. And even with that, how about
a billion dollars for sure, or a trillion dollars with a one in a thousand chance?
Or,
how about a quadrillion dollars with a one in a thousand chance,
or a trillion dollars for sure? So, it's almost
everyone would have a pretty strong preference for the more certain result at these
amounts. And a lot of people, well, what would I do with a quadrillion dollars?
Push up the price level.
What's that? Push up the price level. Yeah, I think, I'm picturing
a quadrillion dollars worth of stuff rather than a quadrillion dollars worth of
paper. But, you know, it could go either way.
Alright. So, anyway, all this suggests that we need to get a
richer theory of choice and uncertainty, and that richer theory is called expected
utility theory. Right? Where utility is a key. Rather than going maximizing
the average value of the stuff,
the average number of dollars that we're getting, we're going to maximize our
average utility. Our average utility.
So, this is called expected utility theory, and it has, it's also
associated with two German names. It was also called von Neumann-Morgenstern
expected utility theory. Remember anything I mentioned? Von Neumann
was the inspiration for Dr. Strangelove.
Right? With the doomsday machine. You saw the movie.
Your game theoretic education is not complete until you see Dr. Strangelove.
It's actually neither your game theoretic education nor your behavioral economics education
can be complete without seeing the movie.
So, the intuition of expected utility theory is that instead of maximizing average wealth,
people maximize their average utility.
Now, what's the difference? Well,
the easiest is to go through and tell you the procedure, and then see
what the procedure means. Alright, so here is the three step procedure
for calculating expected utility. Alright, step one.
So, assign numerical weights to outcomes.
With better outcomes, getting higher
weights. We're getting better weights. Then two,
step two, is we linearly weight outcomes by their probability.
...
By their probability. And then three,
choose whatever has the highest
linearly weighted outcome. So, choose the highest
linearly weighted outcome.
...
Do I have time to give you an example? Yes. Alright. So,
here is one example, just one, of
assigning weights to outcomes. How about I say here is my function. Utility is
equal to the square root of my wealth.
Utility is going to be equal to the square root of my wealth. And then
suppose that I've got a 50% chance of 10,000 and a 50% chance of zero.
Or I could have 2,000 with certainty. How do we see
what I'm going to do? Alright. Well, the expected utility of the first gamble
is going to be equal to.5,
this is a 50% chance of the first outcome, times
$10,000 square rooted.
Plus.5 times
$0 square rooted. And that's the expected utility of the first thing.
So, it's the probability times the weighted outcome
plus the, times the weighted outcome of the first outcome, plus the
probability of the second outcome, times the weighted value of the second outcome.
Alright. And then, the expected utility of the second
gamble is going to be the probability, which is 1, times the square root
of 2,000. Alright. And,
let's see. So, this first one is 50. Comes out to 50. And the second one
comes out to 44.72. So, if these are my only two
options, do I want to go with gamble 1 or gamble 2? Gamble 1.
Gamble 1, because it has the higher expected value. And again, the components.
So, we've got this weighting function here. That tells us
how good every outcome is. And then, to get the expected utility, we take
the linear probability. So, notice, these.5's are straight off the lottery tickets.
Those just come out. So, it's 50% chance of the first thing, 50% chance
of the second thing. And if we're doing expected utility theory, we don't modify
them. Now, you can imagine all kinds of weird utility
theories. We could have one where we take those probabilities and we square them.
Or take their square roots. But, if you're doing that, you're not doing expected utility
theory. Expected utility theory is take them unaltered, linearly, put them in,
and then multiply them by the value function. And the value
function does not have to be linear. That is where expected utility theory diverges
from simpler theory of expected value maximization. Alright.
And in three weeks, we will pick up with this.
Thanks.
