As I am sure everyone else feels the same way, no better place to be at 7.20pm through 10pm on a Monday night.
And so we will proceed.
So we finished up with signaling last week.
Actually you could spend many years studying signaling if you were so inclined.
But this is all that we're going to do in this class on the subject.
In my view there's still plenty more to do on it, so we shall see.
But, and then we got a last topic.
So the winner's curse.
Another fun and kind of surprising case where economists did actually add something to practical decision making.
Not surprisingly.
Moral hazard, like I said, everyone in church knew about moral hazard before economists started talking about it.
Adverse selection, probably a bit more influence from economics.
But the winner's curse and other things, economists actually said something.
So, simple case.
So suppose we start with a second price auction.
A second price auction is one where the highest bidder wins and he pays the bid of the second highest bidder.
So if the bids are 10, 9, and 5, who wins?
What is the money bid 10 and the winner pays how much?
9.
That's a second price auction.
And if this were a first price auction, who would win?
10.
And what would he pay?
10.
10.
Now you may immediately realize there are different incentives for your bidding in a first versus second price auction.
So in a first price auction, if you truly value 10, do you want to bid 10?
Probably not, because then even if you win you get no surplus.
So you don't want to do that.
On the other hand, as you're going to prove on the homework, if it's a second price auction,
then normally it makes sense to just bid your true value.
Because you don't pay your true value.
You pay the value of the second highest person.
And you'll actually get a chance to prove that is a very good strategy.
Normally.
Yes.
So like if I want to blow up the boat and the guy bids 9, I could bid like 1,000.
Yeah, exactly.
I don't think he's going to bid 1,000 once.
Yeah, you could bid 10K and you still pay 9.
Because I can drop out, right?
If he bids 1,000, I can drop out.
So hold on, this is a first or second price auction?
This is a second price auction.
Yeah, second price auction.
But yeah, I mean you get the idea.
I could just bid 1,000 and then like assuming the guy is not going to want to bid 1,000 once,
he's going to have to pay at least 1,000.
Yeah, exactly.
So again, normally we picture this as sealed bids where you just write your number on a piece of paper
and then we sort them out.
But you could just as easily imagine that it's an auction where we raise the price by a penny a time
until finally there's only one person left.
And notice that's the same thing, right, for all practical purposes.
So again, imagine that we just start the price at zero and then we raise it by a penny per return
and then we finally get to $5.01 and this guy drops out, right?
And then we raise it up and we get to $9.01 and then this guy drops out
and then this person here pays $9.01.
Once there's only one person left, then that person wins.
So it's just the difference of a penny.
So anyway, first price auction is the one that we usually immediately think of
where you pay whatever you bid.
But second price auction is also effectively in pretty wide use
because any time you just raise the amount in small increments until only one person is left,
that's virtually the same as a second price auction.
Might make sense.
Okay.
So imagine we got a second price auction and we got N participants.
Now, of course there's many other fun auction rules.
There is the all-pay auction where everyone has to pay whatever they bid.
Some highest bidder wins, but everyone pays whatever they bid.
So all the people who don't win pay their money and then get nothing.
You can do that.
Why would anyone participate in an all-pay auction?
Bids are likely to be lower.
Yeah, bids tend to be really low in all-pay auctions,
so maybe you will get what you want for pennies on the door.
Of course there's all the losers, but you always take a chance there.
Okay.
Now, we got N participants,
and then let's suppose that every bidder has rational expectations
about the true value of the item being auctioned.
So what does this mean?
Well, it's something like an oil well, right,
where you're at least allowed to drill in an area and find the oil,
where the value to each person there is not based upon a personal interpretation
of the joy of the oil, right?
It's just based upon what is the market price of the oil that is below that ground.
Similarly, this can even be true for art collecting.
If we suppose that you are all investors in art,
so you're not buying it for enjoyment.
You're buying it to sell on the market at some point.
Okay, so that would work too.
All right.
So suppose that everybody goes and has rational expectations
about the true value of the auction.
So everyone is going to have their own valuation.
So your own valuation is VI, which is an equal to V,
which is the true value, plus your own personal error term,
your own random mistake, which could be high or low.
Okay.
And then since we got rational expectations,
assume that the mean of the error is zero,
and it's got a variance of sigma squared.
Okay.
Now, since your estimate is unbiased by assumption,
it seems like the sensible thing is just to bid your true value.
As I said, on the homework you'll get a chance to prove this.
But intuitively, suppose that, you know,
let's go back to, you know, so we got like true values are 10, 9, and 5.
These are true values.
Now, so this person here is, you know,
suppose this person here, they go and bid 10.
All right.
And then, of course, they're going to win,
because this person is not going to bid any more.
There's no reason to bid more than your true value, right?
Right.
If you bid more than your true value, then there's two scenarios.
One is you lose, in which case what happens?
Zero.
Nothing.
Right.
Easy come, easy go.
On the other hand, if you bid more than true value and you win,
what has just occurred?
You lost.
You lost.
Yes.
You have won the auction but lost the value race,
because you have paid, say, $9.50 for something you only vetted at $9.00.
That's stupid.
And that's the second highest price below your true value.
Yes.
I said, either you lose, in which case you're fine.
Right.
Or you win, in which case you regret it.
Oh, I see.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
You're absolutely right, which is why, yes, completely right,
which is why proving this is a little bit harder,
and that's why you get to do the homework.
Anyway.
All right.
So, anyway, so this person here,
so suppose that you're thinking about bidding $10.00,
and then there's a question of what do you gain if you go and cut your bid?
All right.
So, again, if you bid $10.00, and, you know,
the other person has no reason to go above $9.00,
so if you bid $10.00, then you're going to wind up paying $9.00.
Right.
Now, suppose you cut your bid down to $9.80.
Do you still win?
And what do you pay if you bid $9.80?
You still pay $9.00.
What if you go and you cut your bid to $9.50?
What do you pay?
$9.00.
What about if you cut your bid down to $9.01?
What do you pay?
$9.00.
What if you cut your bid down to $8.99?
Then what happens?
Then you lose, and you actually don't get the item.
Right.
On the other hand, if you were to go and raise your bid, what do you get?
Raising your bid doesn't get you anything either, right?
You could bid $1 million, and you still pay $9.00.
Right.
So, anyway, that's the basic intuition for why it actually is least weakly dominant
for you to bid your true value.
All right.
So, anyway, suppose that everyone goes and bids their true value, right,
and figuring, look, I've got rational expectations,
so if I bid my true value, what can go wrong?
What can go wrong?
And it turns out that, surprisingly, given the setup of this problem,
if you win, you should expect to lose money.
Why?
Well, so if this is your estimate, so the estimate is going to be your view of the value,
your best guess of the value, equal to the truth plus the error,
and you know everybody else is the same, right?
So if you look at this, who's actually going to win the auction?
The person with the highest error.
Yeah, the person with the biggest positive error is going to win the auction
if you've just bid your true value.
And then you lose a loss, right?
You basically lose, and you wind up paying that amount,
paying an amount equal to the true value plus the second biggest error.
Now, here's the thing.
The average error is zero, but the average error of the winner is positive,
and that is the danger.
That is the danger because if you, you know, so, of course, on average,
you just bid it and you're fine, but you just bid your true value,
and if your error is zero, as it is on average, you just almost certainly lose, right?
Because there's going to be someone with a positive error,
it could be a large group of people, right, a large group of bidders.
But if you win, on the other hand, you wind up overpaying.
Okay, so that is the problem that is known as the winner's curse.
Because if you win, you will wish you had lost.
If you win, you wish you had lost, but you know, be careful what you bid for,
you might get it.
So if you bid what seems like a good amount to you,
normally you just walk away with nothing,
but if you win it will be because you had a very high positive error,
and therefore you wind up overpaying because, again,
you will pay the value of the second most deluded person,
most overly optimistic person.
Does sellers having a negative error versus sellers just pricing low
to attract a number of buyers, or bidders rather,
does that come into this at all?
I mean, you could just, like,
principally you could reverse it and make this,
so this is all for ease of buyers.
You could just easily reverse it and make it sellers,
where as long as the seller doesn't know the true value of what they're selling,
then the problem is that the ones that are going to offer the lowest price
are going to be the ones where they are most likely to have underestimated
the cost of doing it.
So it's totally symmetric.
So the more serious your error, the more likely you are to win.
Where win does not mean make money.
Win means be declared the winner of the auction,
which are two quite different things, right?
Have you ever had the nightmare that you accidentally go to an auction
and you accidentally bid at the wrong time and then you owe $10 million?
How many Simpsons episodes are based on that?
I feel like there's been so many auctions on the Simpsons.
You just scratch your nose, but you accidentally put your bidding thing up,
and sold to this idiot over here.
You're like, what? Sold.
This was like three weeks ago.
There was a bad auction episode.
So that is the idea.
If you win, you're likely to make a serious error.
Now, what can you do about this?
Well, if everybody knew everybody's VI's, then there's a really easy solution.
So you just take the average of all of them,
and then that gives you a better estimate of the truth.
So basically, if you could just go to every person and say,
what's your estimate of the true value? What's your estimate?
Everyone will be honest.
Then you just go and you take them all and average them all,
and then on average that's going to be an accurate judgment.
Of course, in the real world, you would not expect people to go around
and answer truthfully whatever they believe the value of the object is, right?
Okay?
Now, there is another thing that you can do.
Another thing you can do, which is,
so of course you could actually release all the model,
or you could just notice, well, wait,
on average how much does the winner overbid by?
Suppose that the winner overbids by an average of 20%
when they're doing it naively.
Then all that you could need to do is take your estimate
and say bid.8 of that.
Well, let's see, hold on.
I said they're bidding 20% too high.
So that's 6 fifths.
So actually you want to have 5 sixths.
So if you were just to go and bid 5 sixths,
then at least on average you would,
if you won, you would be glad you won.
We're going to be seeing how many of you bid 5 sixths of your estimate
that you're probably going to lose.
Say, well, you'll lose, yes, you will.
So if everyone else keeps doing it, you'll lose,
but you'll be glad you lost.
And then if it so happens that you win,
you will not be sad that you won.
So it's better to lose auctions but not money
than it is to win auctions but lose money.
So anyway, basically, so intuitively,
if you look and see the winner is typically losing money,
then the obvious thing to do is to take your initial naive estimate
and then deflate it so that you can once again expect to make money.
So, basic point.
And then if you do win, you will not be burned.
Of course, if everybody does this, then all the bids get depressed,
but then on average, the winner is going to be happy that he won.
If you deflate it enough.
Now, how does this work in the real world?
Well, so some economists went and looked at what was going on,
and specifically they did bidding on petroleum,
or like potential petroleum, so an area believed in petroleum,
and then they noticed there were patterns of persistent overbidding.
But then, before too long, what firms started doing was
not going and explaining this whole problem,
and it's not clear that they understood at all what was going on.
All they would do is come up with a naive estimate,
and then just subtract a third, and then did that.
And if you ask them, why do you do that?
And they say, well, we went and calculated our thing,
and then we just do our standard industry thing,
and subtracting a third at the end.
But why do you do that?
Well, when we don't subtract a third, we lose money.
So this is one where they atheoretically hit on the right answer
without having much of a clear ability to explain what's going on.
So, I mean, this is something where the economists did not show up
and give them a new business strategy,
but they were able to show up and explain this weird fudge factor
happening at the second to last step,
where you just go, well, let's just go and subtract this thing
that everyone knows you have to subtract, or else you lose money.
So that's how they worked it out in practice.
So, let's see.
Yeah.
So, the unrelated example, I remember in the state of New Jersey,
if you were hiring a mover, they would go and calculate out the rate,
and then they would go and subtract somewhere between 40 and 60 percent
from whatever their second to last number was.
And I remember when I was asking them what's going on there,
and they said, well, so this is an interstate move,
and so we're allowed to discount.
I'm like, okay, but why is it like 40 to 60 percent?
And they said, well, it depends upon demand.
So if it's a slack time, then we'll take off 60 percent.
If it's a regular time, like 50, peak time would be like 45 percent.
I'm like, why is it so big?
Anyway, so when I looked into this,
the state of New Jersey does actually fix the prices for moves.
But then as long as it's a move between states,
you're allowed to put a discount on.
But if it were intrastate, in principle,
they would have to actually legally charge whatever that high number was.
Now, it seems like a pretty crummy price control for it from anyone's point of view
because they basically self-assess each item, like how many boxes,
and it didn't seem like there was any system
to make sure they put down the right number of boxes,
and I think it depended upon the size of the boxes.
You could just go and change large to medium boxes
and then get the price down that way.
But anyway, this is another case where they do all the math,
and then the second to last step, enormous discount,
and then final number, and this is the easiest way to practice.
My question?
So the winner's curse does apply to like a first price auction as well, right?
Yeah, it's just easiest to see in the case of a second price auction.
And notice, it does not apply if it's just a variation on how much you like the product.
So if instead of epsilon i being an error,
instead it is just an amount of utility that you get,
then it's no problem.
So again, if the person that wins the Picasso auction
is the person who loves Picasso the most,
that's just a normal efficient outcome.
But what's interesting about this is we are actually assuming
that there's a true value that you're doing,
say, for a firm that just wants to resell the oil,
and then the problem is not variation in the value you assign,
but a variation in your estimate of how much oil is there.
All right.
And then if you read Lansbury's chapter on this,
which I think is assigned, I don't remember, but anyway,
he uncharacteristically misstates the theory,
possibly just for entertainment value,
but begins with, if you're reading this book,
you probably overestimated how good it is.
And the idea is that when you're looking around for books on the shelf,
like what are the ones, you know,
who are the people who are going to pick up
the Armchair Economist off the shelf right away?
Are they going to be people who accurately forecast its value?
Are they going to be the optimists?
That sounds great, and then you get it.
But anyway, that's only if you act naively,
but on the other hand, if you realize that whatever you're picking up
will tend to be worse than you expected,
then you will make an adjustment,
lower your expectations down to a reasonable level,
and then you would not actually be disappointed by the results.
All right, so you can make your own judgment
about whether you're good at this.
Have you successfully lowered your expectations
down to a realistic level by this point in your life?
When you're a kid, like probably most people do,
most kids do have an overly optimistic view
of how much they're going to enjoy almost everything,
and then things can get pretty disappointing for those kids.
I thought this was going to be the best birthday ever,
but it's only like the third best birthday.
All right.
All right, so questions about The Winner's Curse?
Are you completely happy about The Winner's Curse and everything about it?
Yes, happy about it.
Intellectually satisfied by The Winner's Curse.
All right, in that case, we'll move on to efficiency implications.
So as I said, there are plenty of e-contact books,
and I think they're still being written,
that say that when there's imperfect information, markets fail.
And this is a gross overstatement and demonstrably wrong.
It's like weird GMU lore that says that it's wrong.
But there are ironclad counter-examples
that every economist who can do math will say,
yes, that is a counter-example of the claim that markets fail
when there's imperfect information, so that claim is wrong.
All right, so general rules.
First, if the imperfect information is symmetric,
so we've got symmetric imperfect information
where nobody knows any better than anybody else,
then we've got market efficiency.
At least in the sense that there's nothing that anyone can do to improve anything.
All right, now, what if all market agents are equally informed,
but the government knows more than all the people in the market?
Is that symmetric or asymmetric?
It's asymmetric, because to us, there's got to be anybody in the universe.
So if the government knows better than all the people in the market,
that would be a case of asymmetric information.
And you might very well say, well, of course, whenever a government says
there's a problem with imperfect information,
that's because the government knows better.
The government knows better, or at least claims to know better.
Isn't it odd for the government to go and try
to fix an information problem when it doesn't know any better
than anybody else?
Now, if this is true, so if it's true
that the problem is simply that there's
asymmetric information but the government has
extra information, then there's a really simple, light-handed
intervention government can do.
And this is publicly reveal what it knows.
So the government can solve the asymmetric information problem
by giving away its information.
And you say, who would believe the government?
Well, if the government is really
so noble in its efforts and so vast in its understanding,
then people would be hanging on the government's every word
to go, oh my god, the government says
that these cars are a bad deal.
I don't want them anymore.
Now, you may notice out of all of the discussion
about the opioid epidemic, what is
one thing we pretty much never heard the government say?
Any government agents here?
Maybe they do it, but probably they actually
do it in K through 12.
And this is, the government has determined
this is really dangerous.
And you don't know this yet, but we're telling you,
it's dangerous.
So that could be yours.
What is the solution to the opioid epidemic?
Just the president gets on the news and my fellow Americans,
the government has looked into this,
and we found that these drugs are dangerous.
One in 10, more and more are more dangerous than you think.
OK, all right, carry on.
Problem solved.
Just you.
Yeah, give them a ceiling.
All right, we solved that.
We've revealed this information.
And of course, they could get more detail saying, look,
according to our calculations, there's a 3% chance
that if you use these drugs regularly for the next five
years, you will die.
Just thought you ought to know.
I know I'm dorky.
Yeah, we have a question back there.
All right.
So in this case, the government reestablishes
symmetric information.
And so no need to do more.
Now, there are plenty of times where government
does go and warn people.
Although it's not that common that they stop at that.
But this is just, we're just sharing this information.
So the Surgery General has determined
that cigarette smoking is hazardous to your health.
Put that warning there.
And now you know what the government doesn't know.
Now you know what the government knows.
All right, so that is simple stage.
Now, if you've got asymmetric information,
then there's going to be some efficiency implications,
as we've seen.
But what are they?
Well, so even when market outcomes are inefficient,
government may be unable to prove matters.
So moral hazard.
Here there is a general problem with asymmetric information.
And you do get inefficient results with moral hazard.
But what exactly is the government
supposed to do about it?
What's the government supposed to do about it?
If you get creative, you can think about things.
How about jailing people for lying about whether they smoke
or they apply for health insurance?
Do that.
All right, what's that?
What moral hazard problem does that solve?
People lying about smoking.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
People don't lie about smoking anymore.
Now, just put a warning up there.
Now you're going to do it.
You're going to reveal it.
So you could do that kind of thing.
Or let's see.
There's other things.
So you could actually have the government
could go and tax unhealthy behaviors.
Now, again, of course, if the government couldn't find out,
there'd be a problem.
The government could actually mandate
that people go and be monitored.
Or you could go and use facial recognition technology
and then immediately funnel all the information
to insurance companies so they know whether you're lying.
This is a really popular idea, right?
All right, secure the market failure.
We now are going to tell insurance companies
everything about you.
So again, not very popular, as you might have heard.
By the way, so there is not only a popular but also
a legal interest in preserving personal privacy.
And what is privacy, really?
Privacy is asymmetric information,
which we've got a bunch of models saying this potentially
leads to inefficient results.
What's so great about it?
And most of the arguments for privacy,
the simple arguments anyway, are kind of odd because, well,
so we all have a secret to hide, don't we?
But who are we hiding it from?
Wouldn't that person be better off if they knew?
So who's to say that it would be better
if everyone keeps their secrets?
Maybe better if everyone's secrets were released.
What are you trying to hide?
So at least we're thinking about.
So you could develop a more complicated economic model,
for example.
Maybe there's just pure embarrassment.
So maybe people are giving you secrets just because they
get embarrassed.
Other people find out.
It's not that you actually are trying
to take advantage of anyone else or anything like that.
We all would feel better if no one
could know what we're thinking all the time.
That's possible.
But on the other hand, a lot of the secrets people really
don't want to be found are the kind of thing
that a private investigator would be hired
by somebody else to discover.
Anyway, so moral hazard is one where usually government just
gives up on it.
Or as I said in the case of Obamacare,
one obvious effect of Obamacare is to make moral hazard worse.
And what are the remedies or anything?
So the remedy is live with it.
Live with worse incentives.
Sounds not really much of a solution at all, is it?
Now finally, there are a lot of cases
where government can improve matters,
but actual regulations do the opposite.
And this is, again, something worth knowing.
So we're on this list.
So limiting contractual punishment.
So as I said, contractual punishment,
this is where you sign a contract where
you say, if I am caught doing something bad,
I will pay a fine.
And this is actually a way of dealing with moral hazard,
first of all, because when you sign that contract,
what are you doing to yourself?
You're giving yourself a minute.
So suppose you sign a contract saying,
if you catch me smoking, I owe you $10,000.
What are you doing about the incentive to increase
your risky behavior if you get the insurance?
Curving it.
Yeah, you're curving that incentive.
Maybe you're getting rid of it.
And what advantage is there for the consumer
of curving your own opportunism?
You're more likely to be sold insurance.
Yes, more likely and lower rates.
Lower rates.
So imagine that you could waive your right to clear bankruptcy
for a loan and then get 1 percentage point off the loan.
That could be a good deal.
So what do contractual punishment schemes for that?
Contractual punishments can be used
for dealing with adverse selection
because it is a way for you to convince the seller that you
aren't, that you are, in fact, the good kind.
Says, look, someone who is good would not actually
go and offer me this deal because they
would expect to lose from it.
So the very fact they're offering this deal
means that this is probably going
to be worthwhile to sell the insurance at a low rate.
So yeah, so contractual punishments
can be used for many purposes.
So they're used to some minor extent in labor markets,
things like jobs where you have to go and prepay
the cost of your uniform or equipment.
What happens if you go and you get a job
and then you pay for all of your uniform and equipment,
especially stuff you can't resell because it's
the uniform and only of that employer, and then they fire
you?
So suppose you get fired the day that you
start after you shell out a week's worth of income
for this job.
How do you feel about that?
Bad, pretty bad.
So this is a reason for you to behave at least well enough
to not be fired on your first day.
Now, my econ one teacher, Bill Dickens,
had a paper co-authored with a bunch of others
about why employers don't use this to a much greater extent.
For example, why is it that in order to get hired,
you don't just post a big bond and have employers then
seize the money if they're disappointed with you?
Now, this is not so different from the old school strategy
of say, I'll work for you for free for a month.
If you don't like me, no hard feelings.
Just fire me.
Now, is that labor contract legal?
Maybe.
It's a definite maybe on its legality.
So isn't zero less than minimum wage?
Yes, it is.
But there is an exception made for unpaid internships.
And then as to whether you could convincingly
argue to a jury that it was, in fact, the case,
or if you could just stop it from ever getting to a jury,
which is another great strategy.
I suppose if it ever got to a jury,
you would lose, but it never gets to a jury.
That's just as good as being in the right, isn't it?
All right.
You're into it.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
All right.
Yes, so by the way, so the Bureau of Labor Statistics
has official rules for when unpaid internships are legal.
And the official standard is so bizarre.
It's almost hard even to say it with a straight face.
But here's the standard.
You are allowed to hire unpaid interns
as long as the interns provide no immediate benefit
to the employer whatsoever.
That's the only way in the case of which it is legal.
So on my reading, if you ever get your boss a cup of coffee
as an intern, then they have to pay minimum wage.
Now, yet unpaid internships continue.
They're all over the place.
And plenty of cups of coffee are probably
brought to bosses without anything happening.
How can this be in the real world?
How can it be that the underpaid internships are existing
in defiance of the actual regulations,
at least the plain language reading of the regulations?
Well, how do the laws get enforced in generally America?
So are you complaining?
Yes, someone complains.
So you'd have to have an intern that comes and sues you.
And this does not sound like a really winning lawsuit, does it?
Because if they only were to intern for you
for free for a summer, then what would you even owe them?
Minimum wage for a summer?
And they've got to get a lawyer for that?
So how much is the lawyer going to charge
to go in and do the case?
Maybe more than the money.
And let's see.
And then on top of it, of course, you
cannot or are in no way sure of winning.
And then there's another little problem,
which is that you might be burning
a bunch of bridges in an industry where you want to work.
So even if your employer does not hire you back
for a real job after you do the underpaid internship,
do you want to have them as an enemy?
Is it a good idea to collect enemies in this world?
Would you just recommend that you go around
looking for enemies?
So if you're a professor, you might
want to collect some friendly intellectual adversaries.
That's not quite the same as enemies.
So that's the best story probably for what's going on,
is that even though the law is being broken with impunity
all the time, nevertheless, it actually
is almost no one's interest to go pursue these cases.
Really, the only way that it would make sense for these
cases to happen would be if one lawyer were
to do a class action suit where he gets
100 disgruntled interns.
But they all got to be the same firms.
You can't go and sue an industry.
You can't sue 10 different firms when you've
got to go and sue them individually.
So that's, again, a saving grace.
So you've got limiting contractual punishment.
Something else, so there's limiting risk-adjusted
premiums.
So again, the whole idea of adverse selection insurance
is that it is hard for the first people to drop out
are the safe people.
And so the people that stay around and buy insurance
are the high-risk cases.
But this would not happen if firms
could charge different rates based upon different risks.
Now, in a simple adverse selection model,
why don't firms just go and tailor the rates to the risks?
In a simple adverse selection model, why don't?
What's that?
Because they don't know the brand.
They don't know.
The insurance company, despite all
of its quantitative commuting power,
has no clue at all who dies and who lives.
In the real world, of course, insurance companies generally
have great quantitative people who know lots about this stuff.
So if they were unregulated, they
would go and tailor the rates to the risks, which
would then mean that healthy people would
get insurance for low rates.
And what would happen to sick people?
They could still get insurance if they wanted for high rates.
And normally, regulation tries to stop this.
And not entirely, so usually it's
OK to have a little bit of separation.
But regulators don't like it if, say,
a perfectly healthy 18-year-old can get insurance
for $5 a month, and a 60-year-old with cancer
is paying $10,000 premiums.
So then this is why there are regulations that go and try
to compress the premiums.
And a side effect of compressing the premiums
is to cause which market failure?
Adverse selection.
Adverse selection.
And again, if you were to go and push people on this,
I think it's fair to say a lot of people
just have no clue what they're doing.
And adverse selection, in their minds,
is really just a code word for what it is they really
want to do, which is to have low-risk people subsidize
high-risk people.
But again, if people were being more honest,
they would say, well, sure.
There's no market failure at all.
Maybe insurance companies are great at figuring out
who's sick and who's healthy and charging everyone
an actually fair premium plus operating expenses.
But I don't like that outcome.
I don't want an outcome that's efficient.
I want an outcome that's fair.
And a fair outcome is for the healthy people
to subsidize sick people.
Now, again, of course, if this is a case where the sick people
are little children with leukemia,
it's very easy to understand the appeal.
When, as in a lot of states, the high-risk people
are people who have gotten into multiple bad accidents
and are still on the roads, then it's
very hard to understand what people are thinking.
Other than my dad's very well-thought-out position
of, Brian, people need to drive.
People need to drive.
It is a requirement of human life to drive.
And if insurance companies can charge really high-risk people
really high rates, they won't be able to afford driving.
An approved version of this would be, well,
those people drive anyway.
But then it's like, well, you don't
take that excuse from people who lose their licenses altogether.
So why take that excuse from people who could have gotten,
were legal to drive, but they drove without insurance
even though they were really high-risk?
So anyway, you got that one.
And then last one that I have a whole book on
is subsidizing education.
So if you believe that there's much to the signaling
model of education, this means that there
is an inefficiently high level of education
because one of the main reasons to go to school
is to show off and impress employers.
But if everyone shows off, if everyone impresses employers,
this just raises the expectations
for how much education you have to have,
causing credential inflation, where
the amount of education that you need
is higher than for one and the same job
or is higher than the past.
So economist Richard Vedder has this joke
about a future where to get a job as a janitor,
you need a master's in janitorial science.
A reader from Korea actually sent me
what appears to be a genuine news article
about how a third of the applicants
for a government janitorial job in South Korea
were college graduates.
And now the people hired three have bachelor's degrees
and one had an associate's degree.
So it's not actually a master's in janitorial science,
just a bachelor's degree in janitorial science.
Or of course, they don't really have
bachelor's degrees in janitorial science.
They probably have a bachelor's degree
in, say, Korean literature.
And then they wind up competing very fiercely
to get a job as a janitor.
Great system, right?
Sounds like a path to a successful society
is to have all of your janitors spending 17 years in school.
So that is another example of what I'm talking about,
where in a single signaling model,
there's already a general tendency
to excessive education.
But then what does government come along and do?
Subsidize it to make the problem worse,
which is also known as pouring gasoline on the fire.
So questions about any of this?
All this means you can often admit
that a severe market failure exists
and then still blame the government for making it worse.
Because the fact that government could improve the situation
does not mean that it does.
You've got to look at the world and see
what government is really doing.
And just like in the old Soviet Union,
there was an enormous amount of pollution.
There were socialists who said, look,
as long as government is running the economy,
then they will optimally trade off the cost and benefits
pollution so there won't be any pollution problem.
But the Soviet Union seemed to have a horrible problem.
And it looked like even though the government was running
the industries, they seemed more focused
on making a lot of tanks this year than about cancer
10 years from now.
All right.
OK, so everyone happy?
Or suitably peeved?
Or inspired to go and carry out a great research
program to expose the horrors of the system?
All right, there's all sorts of possible reactions.
All right, now let's move on.
So up till now, I've occasionally
alluded to the existence of another field called
psychology.
Now, when I was in grad school, the word psychology
was never pronounced without a sneer or sarcasm.
Psych-a-ly-ty.
If you just want to be psychologists about this.
All right, anyway, I'm not going to do this
because there is so much that economists
have learned from psychology.
There's so much we have learned.
But even better, there's still a lot of stuff
that hardly any economists are aware of.
And all you need to do to get papers
is to find ways of finding out what is so much
something useful psychologists know
and then be the first economist to apply it
to something an economist care about.
And then you've got a paper.
Now, of course, we're going to be talking about are mostly
cases where it's already been done.
But there's so much more out there
because psychology is an incredibly
diverse and broad field.
There are many kinds of psychologists
that don't even talk to each other.
So this means that you could just
go and talk to a bunch of different kinds
and likely to go and find something out that you can use.
So let's get started.
Now, most economists just take the basic assumptions
of microeconomics for granted.
That's there.
That's what we know.
So very rarely do economists empirically
test the basic microassumptions.
But you might say, well, the elementary micro theory
almost seems true by definition.
Like the thing where the transitivity,
like if A is preferred to B, B preferred to C,
then A is going to be preferred to C.
You've seen that one before?
All right, so isn't that, at least that kind of just seems
true by definition.
How could anything be otherwise?
All right.
But we're actually going to see even that stuff you can test.
But in any case, if we assume the preferences are stable,
preferences are stable, they don't just
jump around all the time.
And this is almost always done in empirical work.
When economists do empirical work,
they almost always assume stable preferences.
In that case, we get a lot of testable assumptions.
Why would economists assume stable preferences?
Suppose that the supply goes up and the price goes up.
And then you were just to say, well, what must have happened
was that the preferences of consumers changed.
And so demand went up and went off at the same time, too.
We have no actual evidence of this.
You just say it.
This would not seem very satisfying to most economists,
because it seems like it's a theory that
explains whatever happens.
And theories that explain all conceivable events,
what do we call those?
Unfalse survival.
Unfalse survival, or tautologies,
or crummy theories.
It's like, wait a second.
If capitalism does well, then you
say that it's exploiting the third world.
And as poorly, you say that it's collapsing
under its internal congregations.
So what are the observations that shows that you're wrong?
There are no observations that show I'm wrong,
because I'm right.
There is a little bit of pushback to this.
So Fisher Black had the line, the easiest theory
to falsify is one that's false.
But still, there is a lot of resistance
to unfalsifiable theories.
And then furthermore, if we go on
and assume that preferences are selfish
in the ordinary language sense of the word,
and this is also a very common auxiliary assumption
for economists to use.
In like, if demand for wheat goes up,
we normally think that customers are going to pay more.
But imagine someone would say, well,
but since wheat farmers love their fellow men,
when they find out that other people need more food,
they'll work harder to go and grow them more food.
And so maybe the price won't go up at all.
And in terms of logical possibility, is that wrong?
Yeah, you know, imagine that the consumer is my son,
and I'm the farm owner.
And then my son wants more food.
Do I go and check out the price for my kid?
So now for now, dinner costs $10, kid.
No, normally if my kids get hungrier,
I just get more food and give it to them.
So that's what it's like to have a market where the sellers love
the buyers so much that the normal functioning doesn't
really hold anymore.
So lurking in the background of our story about markets
is the very plausible assumption that wheat farmers don't
love you, and that they're just growing wheat for the money.
Can you believe this?
You ever thought about how little the wheat farmer loves
you?
You're going to get a bag of flour.
And so he's going to buy it.
And I thought he loved me.
But now, when I just realized he's just
selling me flour for money, for what?
And then when we expand things further
to expected utility theory, expected utility theory
adds on a bunch of further empirical implications.
Things like there will be a linear effect of a risk going
from 0 to 1, or 1 to 0, or 1 to 2.
So remember, one implication of expected utility theory
is people won't pay a special premium
to drive risk down to 0.
They'll pay the same amount to go from 2 to 1
as they'll go from 1 to 0.
And that's testable.
And you probably have an intuition that's wrong, right?
And that intuition is very likely very true.
So there's a big literature at this point, which strangely
is usually called behavioral economics, which
does all the tests that other economists,
both economists usually don't bother doing.
Again, why behavioral economics?
What kind of a name is that?
It's a stupid name, right?
It's like, well, all economics is about behavior.
So what are you talking?
Anyway, this is another one of those cases
where you would either fight an entire profession for a word,
or you can just get with the program and use the same word
in the same way as everyone else,
and everyone understands you.
And then the only drawback is when you teach it
to someone else, you have to give this thing up.
But again, it would have been much better
if it had been called psychological economics.
Or sometimes it is just called psychology and economics,
something like that.
Or it could have been called that.
And those are alternate ones.
But behavioral econ is the name that it's primarily used.
So that's the one we're going to be talking about.
It's basically psychologically informed economics.
So behavioral economics goes and does empirical tests
that most economists just don't bother doing,
because they think they know how they're going to turn out.
Or they just think of them as so true by definition,
how could they be wrong?
And the product of behavioral economics
is anomalies, results that are wrong.
Or namely, things that are the empirical results that
seem to congregate very simple economic models.
And of course, one thing you can do
is try to make the anomaly go away
and say, well, it looks like anomaly actually
really makes sense.
It can be explained totally by normal micro theory.
Another thing you can do is, no, the facts are solid.
The theory's wrong.
You can do that too.
And by the way, who is the economist
who famously had a column in the Journal of Economics
called Anomalies?
Richard Naylor.
And at least some people are suggesting
he's the only economist to ever get a Nobel Prize for a column.
I think that is, there's a chance that's right, actually.
So what you normally would do with the columns
is you talk about his own research
and research of other people.
Sometimes it would only be about other people
if he hadn't been involved.
But he did have his finger in, say, many pies.
And so if you could go and mention that he'd
done something about it, you could mention that,
but only other people as well.
So this is a long-running column.
We're just explaining to other economists
there's some facts that don't fit the theory.
All right, does anyone have questions about that?
OK.
And again, of course, to be a real anomaly,
you want the evidence to be robust.
You don't want it to just be one little experiment that
found something weird.
You want it to be a whole pile of evidence,
a stack of evidence.
Like, how do you explain this?
Look at this stuff.
Like 1,000 pages of results.
All right.
And again, so this is a long-running column.
All right, so starting off with this evidence
that people are sometimes violating very basic axioms
of choice theory.
Now, do behavioral economists claim
that all regular economics is wrong?
No, they don't.
And actually, if you read the original and others closely,
normally they are happy to admit, well, sure,
the theory explains all this other stuff.
And the naive implications of someone
might want to draw a wrong.
So for example, if you go to read Robert Shiller
in his Irrational Exuberance, a Nobel Prize winner,
famous for his behavioral economics and finance,
does he claim that he's got some great list of investing
strategies that you can use to get super rich really easily?
No, he doesn't claim any of that.
Does he claim that he can forecast
what the market's going to do with any kind of accuracy?
No, he doesn't.
Wall Street hates him.
And see how he won so much money with this one simple trick.
Yeah.
Is that a real thing, or is that just a lie?
I was just thinking of that one, like the click bait.
Yeah, that is a good click bait.
Anyway, if you go and read the books,
the books are not click bait.
They're usually kind of boring.
And they usually contain admissions that,
like the anomaly is often very small,
or it's one where you might have to go and live for 1,000 years
to have a 40% chance, or let's say,
55% chance of making money off of it.
So normally, when you actually read it,
you will find out their claims are fairly tame.
Although, when it's popularized, the popularizations often
go wild.
It's like, this is the guy who showed
that all neoclassical economics is completely wrong
and worthless.
And occasionally, the authors themselves,
when they give the two-sentence summary of their work,
make it, or actually, when you listen to that,
sometimes they actually are guilty of challenging
the popularizers with their work here.
So anyway, if you read the real work,
then what they're saying is not particularly shocking.
All right, so all of these violation of choice theorem,
those who are going to have choice theory, sometimes
called irrationality.
Sometimes called irrationality.
And again, especially if you're an economist who got your PhD
before the rational expectations revolution.
So if you're an economist who got your PhD before the 70s,
then you're likely to use the word irrationality in this way.
You violate basic axioms, that means rationality.
Now, how many economists who got their PhDs before the 70s
are still around?
Walter Williams.
Yes, Walter Williams.
Be happy about all the economists that have reached
these ripe old ages.
Every economist is guaranteed to live to at least 90.
This is what we are promised by becoming economists,
to be in good health until at least 90.
And we live to be like Coase, we live to 102 or 103.
So a few years ago, Coase was still rolling around.
And he was like, that guy had multiple successful papers
in the 30s.
And he's alive.
And he's talking to us.
Wow.
All right.
This is all causal, by the way.
This is proven to be causal.
Study economics will make you live to these great old ages
with your health, both physical and mental, totally fine.
Chosen right.
All right, anyway.
So the number of people who use the word in this way
is dwindling, but nevertheless still some out there.
Now, before we start going over the evidence,
it's going to be worth pre-answering
some common objections.
So one objection says, look, all theories are false.
So don't go and tell me my theory's false.
What matters is prediction.
Now, this, by the way, is one of the stranger pieces
of philosophy that economists have picked up from readings
philosophy of science.
All theories are false.
So how many decimal places?
Are some theories true to one decimal place?
And again, when you think about more,
it's like you go and ask a farmer how far is the town.
He says a mile.
And then you drive there, and it turns out that it's 0.98 miles.
And you say, the farmer lied.
Or the farmer was wrong.
Did he?
Or did he just round according to normal conventions
and what he told you is, in fact,
exactly true to the normal number of decimal places?
Anyway, to my mind, that's one of the really odd things
when people claim that all theories are false is,
to an infinite number of decimal places, fine, but who cares?
But are they false?
But are some theories false to a practical number
of decimal places?
That's good enough.
But anyway, when someone says it doesn't matter whether or not
that turns out theory is wrong, it matters prediction,
main thing in behavioral economics is, fine,
we show that our predictions are wrong.
So don't stop listening.
Just look on.
You want to find out about wrong predictions?
I'll tell you some wrong predictions.
Second common objection is to say the deviations cancel out.
And again, the standard behavioral econ answer
is not the ones I'm telling you about anyway.
In fact, I've got a bunch where they don't cancel out.
So these are systematic differences,
systematic oddities.
In things like, if some people overpay
to reduce the risk to zero and some underpay,
then it might bounce out.
What if there's just a systematic human tendency
to overpay for getting risk down to zero?
And then a third common objection,
this is one which I have more sympathy,
but I'll just run with it anyway.
It's to say the anomalies rise to a mean sentence.
And at least one common reply is to say
that actually the stronger incentives often don't matter.
And many of the anomalies have been seen in financial markets
where it seems like there's a big incentive to get it right.
If you follow Nassim Taleb and Richard Thaler on Twitter,
recently Richard Thaler was scolding Nassim Taleb
for his skin in the game slogan and saying,
actually, there's not much evidence
that skin in the game matters.
If you listen to the Dan Cahan seminar that
happened at the beginning of the semester,
he actually presented some really interesting evidence
that incentives matter a lot.
In particular, that making people pay something
when they make a mistake does actually
increase accuracy of predictions.
And particularly showing is that a lot of ideological bias
goes away if you get penalized for wrong answers.
So anyway, so to some extent over the next two weeks,
I'm going to be playing devil's advocate.
So I may overstate the case when I
am going through the evidence.
What's odd about this stuff is there are a lot of economists
have either one strong reaction or another.
So this reaction of behavioral economics
is the only useful thing to know and everyone else is an idiot.
And anyone who even tries to go and use
a standard neoclassical model to explain something
is just being an automatic fool.
And there's another one saying that behavioral economists
don't know anything and they're just
going to try to ruin a great subject.
And I have heard both these reactions.
So hopefully we will reach a happy medium, a nuanced medium.
You don't need to just say they're half right in every
case.
You can say some cases neoclassical view is right,
some cases behavioral view is right, and so on.
So questions about this?
Everyone happy?
I see that phone is really strangely off.
I guess they just never just stay.
So let's just start off with the case of preference reversals.
So for practical purposes, economists almost always
assume that people have constant preferences over outcome.
Constant preferences over the outcome.
What does outcome mean?
It's basically your list of stuff,
your inventory of possessions.
That's your outcome.
And again, constant preferences mean
that the amount that you like the stuff does not change.
So you just keep liking it over time.
So behavioral economists have a bunch of what
appear to be counter examples.
And you can get an individual to prefer A to B or B to A
for what appear to be completely irrelevant reasons.
And when this occurs, it's called a reference reversal.
So what is a really clean example?
A really clean example is when you
have two logically identical descriptions
of the same situation.
But people prefer one.
They'll prefer one that's described in a certain way
and the other described the other way.
So think about this.
Suppose that you want to convince someone
to get surgery.
You're a crooked doctor, or maybe you just know better.
So suppose that the surgery has a 90% chance of not killing.
10% chance of killing.
So 90% chance of surviving, 10% chance of dying.
90% chance you survive, 10% chance you'll die.
Now notice, if that's true, is that always true?
Yes.
Yes, these are two logically identical ways
of describing the very same distribution of events.
Now, if anyone here ever worked in advertising or marketing
or anything, just common guess, just common sense,
which one do you want to use to sell someone
on your chart, your description, do you
want to use to sell them on your surgery?
90% chance of surviving.
You've got a 90% chance of surviving.
Suppose you want to convince them to not get the surgery.
Then you say, 10% chance of dying.
You're going to die.
These are just two different ways
of organizing words to describe exactly the same events.
So if human beings had conscious preferences over outcomes,
wouldn't make the slightest difference which way
you describe them.
But there are plenty of experiments
where you see that it does matter.
Yes, if you do use this description,
there'll be higher uptake than if you use this description.
Most of the evidence is hypothetical,
like imagine we're patients.
I don't know what you're talking about.
Or actually, I think there's also
ones where they give medical students hypotheticals.
Like, what do you like?
You're randomly assigned to saying the treatment is 90%,
90% survival rate, or 10% death rate.
And even medical professionals, at least aspiring medical
professionals, give pretty different answers
based on the description.
You may even notice that if you've
described yourself as either a glass half empty
or a glass half full kind of person,
notice these are the same thing.
The only difference is how you describe or conceive
the very same volume of water.
OK.
All right.
So this is one puzzle.
And it does seem like this plays into a lot of marketing.
Like, so much marketing is not about conveying facts
so much as relaying facts in a way that sounds good.
All right.
So let's see.
There's so many examples.
Let's see.
The ones that either come to mind
are not fit for this classroom use.
It's classroom use.
But let's see.
Let's see.
Example you want to share?
Like how you might re-describe the same thing?
Let's see.
Yeah.
Here's one.
So you could go and say that there
are four majors that have a higher average earnings
in economics.
Or you could say economics is one of the top five earning
majors.
Same thing, right?
And yet, if you wanted to sell people on it,
which way do you want to package it?
There, there's a little bit of linguistic ambiguity.
So it's not quite as accessible.
All right.
Now, another thing that has been noted in some experiments,
people will sometimes select a bet
that they put less monetary value on.
All right.
So in particular, suppose you give people a choice of two
bets.
So you can have this one.
So you can have an 8 and 9 chance of getting $4.
Or you could have, and this is called the high bet,
the high payoff.
Or you could, if that's one possible thing,
or you could have the low probability one.
This is a 1 and 9 chance of getting $40.
OK.
All right.
So if you give people a choice, do you want to have this or this?
Most people want to have this.
this one. All right. But if they own the gamble and you try to buy it from them,
most people want more money for this one. Which is weird. Normally you think
that people who choose whatever they attach the highest monetary value to.
Right? And yet here are cases where you choose this one, but you seem to put a
higher monetary value on that one. That is all. Again, how do you show this? You
don't actually generally get the same person to do both things. Instead you do
standard experimental design where you randomly put half the people in the room
into one treatment, half in the other, and then show that the people that are
given the case where you choose, most people do this one, but the case where you
decide whether you want it, well how much you want it to pay you to sell the bet,
people put a higher, put one more money for that one.
So the question would stop at this. Do you have a question?
Looks like you're a little puzzled. All right. All right. All right. So. And these are the, of course there are many others, but this is just the flavor of a lot of these results.
Right now, preference reversals have gotten a ton of attention. So I think there's got to be at least 50 papers on this topic, maybe like 100 papers on preference reversals.
At least, you know, like it's not totally clear the real world significance is very much.
So yeah, so if you are going to persuade people, you probably do want to tell them the glass is half full.
But there are some, like there's pretty, pretty strict bounds to how much your
re-description can get you. So, like, can you get someone to play Russian roulette by saying there's a 5, 6 chance of surviving?
That doesn't seem too likely.
And in particular, if you go and look at the experiments, usually what they do is get close choices.
They usually get some very close choices between them. And then they show that irrelevant factors change people's decisions.
Now, what if you got very different choices? Like, suppose that these were tickets for like Bach or Ozzy Osbourne were your two choices.
Now, how often would it be the case that you just do a slight alteration and then you get people to really change what they want?
Yeah, there's something where people who prefer Bach to Ozzy Osbourne normally really prefer that.
And people in the opposite of that preference are usually pretty, their minds are pretty made up.
Alright. So imagine that instead of this being an 8 nights chance of $4, you're like an 8 nights chance of $34.
In that case, you're probably not going to be able to get any preference reversal here.
So the way they get it is by making the results quite similar.
And then, and you might at least say you're kind of tricking people.
Over time, I guess I would say that I've moved more to the view that, you know, at least some of this stuff does explain a lot of what's going on in marketing.
And marketing is a big industry.
And, particularly, like whenever I try to explain to kids how to persuade other people of anything, I think I am ultimately going to say,
look, don't say it that way, say it this other way, which means the same thing, but put your best foot forward at all times.
Act like a winner. Talk like a winner.
Don't say I lost twice. Say I won 17 times.
And make sure everybody knows it. And then repeat that a bunch of times.
17 time winner. Me.
And put it that way.
And it seems like people do, generally do pretty well with this.
I mean, anyone have a friend who's quite good at what they do, but they're just terrible at marketing themselves?
And then, how well are they doing?
Like so.
It seems, I guess, the older I get, the more times I see someone like, there's no reason they wouldn't be succeeding other than poor marketing.
Alright.
So, questions about this?
Happy?
Alright.
Okay.
So, then moving on.
Endowment effect and status quo bias.
Alright.
So, another well-documented way people deviate from basic choice theory
is that people's, in the real world, people's endowments will often interact with their preferences.
So, normally when you go and write down the utility function, something like u is equal to x v alpha y the 1 minus alpha.
And in this utility function, do we need to know how much x and y you started with, do you have any idea what your utility is?
No.
Alright, so, this is what you like, and then if you happen to start off with a lot of x and no y,
then you say, well, of course, you're just going to go and sell your x to get more y.
And all that matters is the market value of the assets you start with.
It doesn't matter what the composition is.
Alright.
And yet, in the real world, there's quite a bit of evidence that when people own something, it changes how they feel about it.
Changes how they feel about it.
So, the simplest example of this is called the endowment effect.
Alright, so you've heard that possession is an intention of the law.
And it turns out possession is also a cause of liking stuff.
So, if you possess something, you seem to like it more and put more monetary value on it as a result of that.
So, this is a classic experiment where people are either given a coffee cup,
or they're given the offer, and then the experimenter tries to buy it back from them,
or they're just offered a chance to buy a coffee cup.
And they find a very large difference in the prices.
So, people want a lot of money to give them a stupid coffee cup that they've just been handed,
but they have little willingness to pay for the coffee cup.
And again, this is all random assignments of people in the experiment.
So, it seems odd.
They're having the same deal to say, well, coffee cup raises your wealth,
and this naturally is going to change your demand for everything.
So, you get one coffee cup, you're now richer, this raises your,
so when you're richer, you're going to want more of everything, including coffee cups.
But again, for most people, how much does one coffee cup affect your wealth?
Microscopically.
So, basically, you'd have to imagine some incredible wealth elasticity of coffee cup demands.
Like a rationalized result, which no one ever believed this until they needed to make the assumption in order to explain the anomaly.
All right.
So, anyway, so this is a general result.
Now, it's one where if you have ever interacted with children, you know this is fact.
So, if you go and tell a child, this is now your pen.
What is a great way to make them cry?
Take it away.
Take it back.
Say, here's your pen.
It's totally yours.
And then, give me that.
And then, you said it was mine.
I did, didn't I?
I don't care.
I saved my pen now.
That's right.
I gave it to you, and now I took it back.
And the kid will cry and be miserable, whereas if you want to lend an item to a child, but you want it back, the wives need to tell the child, is, I am lending you this pen.
It's still my pen.
I'm allowing you to use it for this time period.
At the end, you must give it back to me.
Do you understand?
And then, even then, some kids will cry, but they cry less when they return the pen.
So, have you seen the kind of junk that kids will cry over?
I mean, I've seen kids pick up a stick, which to all adults seems to be no better than a thousand other sticks lying around.
But that stick is now their special stick.
And Lord help you if the child loses that stick.
They're like, oh, my special stick.
It's such a great stick.
So, it was like the very fact they owned it.
Now, this is a very important stick.
If that stick hadn't been there, they would have found another stick to fall in love with.
And that is what is so odd.
Now, notice this has some interesting implications for the Coase Theorem.
So, Walter Williams told you all about the Coase Theorem, right?
But that is all based on the idea that the value that you assign to an asset does not depend upon who owns it.
Because a simple statement of the Coase Theorem says that whoever ends up with a property right as long as transaction costs are zero,
has nothing to do with who started with it.
Because as long as I value more than you, then if you start with it, I will just pay you the money and you'll sell it to me.
But the endowment effect says that the value will itself be determined by who owns it.
Now, this does not necessarily mean any inefficiency.
You just say, look, whoever starts with it just likes it more.
But it does mean that even with zero transaction costs, there will be a tendency for whoever is given the property right to retain ownership of it.
Alright.
Okay, and then if you start thinking about cases where the endowment effects matter.
So, like how many people will keep a parent's home because it's their family home?
Even though if they hadn't been raised in it, they wouldn't have particularly liked that home.
Or my favorite example is how many parents would be willing to replace an existing child with a child that is better in every respect?
So imagine a genie comes and says, hey, tell you what, snap my fingers, you're the kid you've got.
He's gone.
Replaced by a child that according to your own values is superior to the existing child.
And he says, but remember, I'm not approving the child, I'm disintegrating the child, the first child.
And then I am creating from nothing a new, better child.
But still totally 50% in your genes, everything you've ever cared about, still better.
And how do people normally react to this hypothetical?
Would I go and disintegrate my child to replace him with a superior child?
Yes.
Or.
Yes.
Of course, couldn't you say that with zero transaction costs, the endowment effect would also be priced because of zero cost to price anything?
And so therefore it would steal it.
I mean, so it's not really a counter example to the version that it ends up in the hands of whoever is most efficient.
It just says that there's a tendency for whoever is given the thing is to be efficient for them to keep it.
But maybe I'm not sure.
Yeah, like the world of zero transaction costs, you have zero uncertainty, everything is priced.
And the endowment effect would also be priced.
Let's see. So then we'd have to imagine where you start off from.
Either person owns it and then you have a willingness to pay for it then?
Or again, there's just a problem that in order for there to be prices, you have to know what people own.
It's not actually, not only the goods would be priced, every aspect of the goods would be priced.
But we have to imagine, so where do we start?
At the second the market opens, who owns it?
You could have nobody owns it. It could just be an unknown thing that's owned by the auctioneer.
Well, but then that doesn't account for the cost of the thing.
Yeah. So at least it's a little fuzzy as to what it means in that case.
So the way I interpreted the question was, you could actually put a price on the extra value that the person is attaching to that item because they own it.
So that would be like me saying, I'll disintegrate your kit, give you a new one, and I'll pay you extra to recoup the losses of the person.
Right. But the cheating could say, well, why should I have to give you anything to recoup?
He's better in every way. Just make a list of everything you like about this kit.
I will go and add a little bit to everything on the list.
And now, why don't you want me to get rid of the first kit?
Of course you're going to miss him, but you're going to love the next one more. He's better in every respect.
I have known a couple of economists who just spit in the bowl and say, absolutely, unhypothetical, I'm out of here, get rid of my kit and replace it.
But most economists, even the very, very hard-nosed economists usually will say, fine.
I love the kit that I have, whatever he's like.
And this is one where, you know, you could do the experiments earlier.
So now imagine that just prior to conception, the genie says you can have either this child or this child, you've never met either of them.
Then almost everyone would choose the child that is superior in their eyes in every way.
But once you are given the worst child, then that causes you to love that child above the child that seemingly,
according to everything that you allegedly hear about, is actually a better child.
That even happens after conception with sex selection and sex ratios.
Right, I noticed that one of the biggest causes of having a child is accidentally getting pregnant.
Right?
And there are many people who, before they got pregnant, totally don't want this baby, I don't want one.
And then afterwards, there is a strong tendency for people to change their minds.
It's much less common for someone to go and think they want a baby and then say, oh my god, I don't want one after all.
So, again, it seems like just even receiving an embryo is enough to make people say,
you know that embryo I was struggling with the whole night to not have?
Now I would do anything to get him.
That's odd, right?
Okay.
So that is the endowment effect. And why don't we go and take our 10 minute break now.
Thank you.
Alright, so questions about the endowment effect?
We're learning about the endowment effect.
Alright. In that case, we'll move on to something similar, which is status quo bias.
Alright.
So, experimentally, it seems that people are often reluctant to either buy or sell.
So whatever mixture of things you give people, they don't want either, at least there is a reluctance to go and adjust it.
Even if it's an experiment where you just randomly handed out stuff to people,
and you might think that then if anyone happened to be randomly given an unusually large amount of something,
they might not want to sell it, but it seems like people like to just stick with what they've got to a surprising extent.
Alright.
Okay.
And furthermore, you can make something more popular just by calling it the status quo,
just by saying we start here, and then what do you want to do?
When you think about government policy, at least to me, these seem like very egregious cases where
suppose that people just weren't aware that there's foreign language requirements in US schools,
and then you said, you know what we need to do?
We need to add a foreign language requirement.
Probably a lot of people would say, well, I don't know, that's really such a good idea,
and if you really need foreign languages in the modern age, we'd better do computer language.
But if they know that we already have it, you say, well, why don't we get rid of it?
Then it's like, oh no, well then, I mean, there's so many uses for it, it trains the mind, it's so good,
and you see this in foreign policy.
So should we go and support rebels in Syria?
Well, are we supporting rebels in Syria?
If we're not, then we should, but if we are, then we should.
I know this is very common reasoning for people, and it seems to be, like,
what else can you say other than status quo bias of thinking whatever is is a good idea,
and we should keep doing it.
So the very fact that you know that it is being done changes your mind about whether it's worthwhile
and in the direction of what is is worthwhile.
In particular, of course, in experiments, you can go and get transactions costs down to a very low level
to really confirm it.
In the real world, there is always the issue of maybe it's just transactions costs that explain it.
So that is a problem.
Of course, you can try in the real world to look at cases where the transaction costs seem unusually low,
but still there's always a doubt in the real world, maybe it's just caused by transactions costs,
which is another explanation for why people don't want to change things around.
Questions?
When you talk about how things become more popular by being designated as the status quo,
so would you file the anchoring effect under this, like the first number of people here tends to, like,
they're all there.
At least it's very similar, yeah.
So there's a set of experiments that I'm going to discuss where you just spin a wheel right in front of a person
or they throw some dice, you know it's random, and then you say, all right, here's the number.
Do you think that the next person who walks in that room was going to weigh more or less than that number?
And it seems like even though you know it's random, the random number changes your view about what's going to happen.
This is usually called anchoring because it's like, well, I mean, yeah, it's random,
so it's not going to be exactly what the dice said, but it's not going to be more than, like, 20% more than what the dice said,
is it?
It's like, well, that makes no sense at all.
The dice are random, so how could, like, why would your view about what's going to happen have anything to do with this?
And yet people seem like they do.
As I said, in the real world it's always easy to say that the endowment effect and status quo bias are illusory.
And you say, look, it's either transactions cost or maybe it's just an information cost.
So, you know, the status quo option usually gets to be the status quo option because most people like it.
So think about the toppings on a Big Mac.
Why are those the toppings on a Big Mac?
Probably.
What is it?
Special sauce, au froid, you know, like anyone memorized.
There used to be a commercial where they listed all the toppings on a Big Mac.
All right.
Well, how do McDonald's decide those would be the default toppings?
They tested it out.
Probably they tested it out and find out what is it that most people like.
And then when you go and receive that offer, one reason to say, well, I'll do whatever you say,
is if you think that they have deliberately picked out a set of options that most people like, and you say, well, I like most people,
so I'll probably like what most people like.
And there's actually a separate literature on trying to figure out or trying to forecast your own satisfaction.
And one common rule of thumb that's been offered is instead of thinking about what you like, to ask the waiter what most people like.
And at least for some purposes, it is more predictive to do what most people like, according to an expert,
than to do what you think you will personally like.
To me, this result has never been at all plausible because I'm so weird.
But I can believe it works for other people.
Okay.
All right.
So normally there's some information conveyed by something being the status quo.
Like suppose that you believe in America.
So you just believe in America.
America does good stuff.
In that case, if you find out that America has troops in Syria, what's a natural inference?
It's a good idea.
America, why did they decide to have troops in Syria?
And you find out America does not have troops in Syria.
What is a natural inference?
America, why did they decide to not have troops in Syria?
So in the real world, if you think there is a process that tends to select right answers,
then whatever the status quo is, it's natural to go and believe in that.
So that is a general problem if you think that there is something very functional about the status quo.
All right.
And then as I said, most experiments do focus on these close choices.
So the question, if you need someone 100 coffee cups, how would they respond?
Wouldn't they sell most of the coffee cups?
And I don't think that experiment was ever done, but let's see.
I'm thinking about his name.
Let's see.
Field experiments guy, Chicago.
John List.
Yeah, John List.
Yes.
I wanted to say Jonathan Fast, who is a former student here, and is not in person.
So he actually did an experiment with baseball cards,
where he tried seeing whether there was
a dominant effect for baseball cards among
professional baseball card traders and found that there is not.
So people basically are buying and selling for a living,
seem to act in accordance with the simple standard theory.
Even though if you were just going to give everyone this class of baseball card,
a lot of you probably would say,
well, this is my baseball card now,
I'm going to keep my special baseball card.
If I were to give you a whole box of the baseball cards,
you might want to keep one and then sell the rest back and
be happy just to get rid of the weight.
All right. So questions about this stuff?
Yeah. So to me, it was when I was doing economics in the family that I
realized that the endowment effect has huge effects in the world.
And just the way that unplanned pregnancy so often,
not just lead to someone reluctantly,
unhappily having a child,
but actually to being super glad about it.
That's pretty odd in terms of any kind of normal economic theory.
And yet it is a very strong part of human experience that this person that
you totally didn't want and you act and like,
when you find out pregnancy, my life is over.
Then three years later, instead of saying my life is over,
I can't imagine my life without you.
And again, this is not like this happened once in a thousand times.
This is a very common occurrence.
So pretty hard to work,
hard to reconcile with any normal economic theory without adding in
just the very fact that this child is Korea,
like becomes yours through this process.
My baby. This is my baby.
And now I love my baby.
Like your baby's a jerk.
It's one of the worst babies ever met.
I love him anyway.
Everything about him. I love his lies.
I love his tantrums.
All right. So that seems like a pretty strong and clear case.
All right. Questions, questions.
All right. And moving on.
All right. Selfishness and cooperation.
All right. So how many times have you heard the Adam Smith quotes?
Told to you just since you started your PhD,
not from benevolence of the baker make his bread,
but from his own regard to his own self-interest.
Right? Economists love this quote.
And yet if you look many of the same economists,
you say so economists think people are selfish.
They'll go, no, no, I just think that maximizing utility function.
A Smith quote is not about maximizing utility function.
In, if you had said bakers bake bread out of benevolence,
is that maximizing utility function?
Sure. So why is that an important and insightful quote?
And why do economists keep coming back to it?
I don't keep repeating that quote.
Shows that altruism isn't necessary.
It's sufficient but not necessary to produce the goods.
I mean, but like Smith didn't say,
benevolence is not necessary to bake the bread.
He actually said benevolence doesn't bake the bread.
It's self-interest that makes the bread.
So, it tends to be people are selfish.
Yeah. This is a,
this, there's no reason to bring that quote up,
unless you're making a point about how people are selfish,
and that selfishness leads to good outcomes.
But you know, there's no point saying
selfishness leads to good outcomes,
unless you also are saying that selfishness is common.
Right. And of course is underestimated.
So anyway, economists in
practice almost always assume human selfishness.
Again, there are special narrow cases
where they have a specific justification,
like if you're doing economics of parenting,
then we usually say parents love their kids.
Or if you're doing economics of charity,
then there's probably some charity on the pulse.
But for all the other cases,
it's totally normal for economists
to just take selfishness for granted.
And it's only when someone starts whining
about your assuming selfishness that they start coming up,
and start saying, no, no, it's just a utility function.
And again, normally when the person who
complains about the selfishness leaves the room,
then what do the economists go back to doing?
Yeah. Assuming everyone, assuming people are selfish.
All right. So anyway. Now, pure theorists are
the ones who usually want to go and say,
I don't assume selfishness at all.
No, I just assume that there's a well-earned utility function.
Which is that people care about
only their own endowments,
their own material possessions.
That sounds kind of like a selfish person.
All right. So anyway, pure theorists
often will run away from the Smith quotation.
But whenever we apply economics in the real world,
selfishness is almost always right there, front and center.
And again, not just some kind of
everything is selfish no matter what you do.
But even like narrow selfish.
Like Smith, if you were to say,
well look, if you like baking bread, that's selfish too.
Is that what Smith is getting at?
No. He's using self-interest in the normal sense.
According to which a person who bakes
bread and gives it to strangers
because he loves everybody is not selfish.
But a person who bakes bread to make money is selfish.
And you say, well, if they're both for
your own personal satisfaction,
why is one more selfish than the other?
I say the easy answer is because of the English language.
Because that's what the words mean.
Like a person who just loves other people
and gets super happy helping orphans.
We don't say this is a selfish orphan lover.
We say this is a nice person who likes helping orphans.
So you're only doing it because you like
helping orphans for free, jerk.
No. That's the very definition of altruism.
If you like, at least it is one perfectly fine form.
If there's someone who does it out of
a sense of duty even though they hate it,
you might say, oh, I find they're unselfish too.
But even there, you say, well, who's more unselfish?
The person who helps the orphans out of love or the person
helps them because they feel like
Manuel Kant proved they have to do it.
At least it's an interesting,
you're like, well, I don't know which one is
the more unselfish according to normal English.
Okay. So when economists use economics to explain the world,
we normally do assume human selfishness in a narrow sense.
You ever heard of Don McGraw's story,
a question about kidneys?
Comes down to this. Can I have your kidney for free?
No.
What if I need it? But I need your kidney for free. Can I just have it?
I need my kidney.
Yes.
What?
I need my kidney.
Yeah. Well, actually,
a doctor would tell you that you only need one.
You've got two. Just like elective surgery.
It's no big deal.
Like one in 10,000 death rates,
it's like an auto accident per year,
and like I'd like a kidney.
So very few people are inclined to give a stranger their kidney for free.
And they would say, well,
like this would really turn the recipient's life around.
I think I'll still won't do it.
It isn't a normal human reaction.
There are a few people like Dylan Matthews and
Vox when he gave his kidney away to a total stranger.
So this is a case where someone says he's a utilitarian,
and he appears to act like that is very consistent with doing that.
But most people aren't like that.
Okay. All right.
Now, a slight variation that economists have sometimes brought in,
especially when they're doing economics with family,
is to go over biology and talk about inclusive fitness.
All right. So how many of you here have ever read The Selfish Gene?
Where's your dog in this? A few people.
All right. So this is
a simple Darwinian theory about who you really love,
and who you are just using.
And the story is, well,
suppose that cavemen were willing to go and
give their food away for free to total strangers.
All right. So what's this going to do to their number of surviving descendants?
It's going to hurt it. Right?
On the other hand, suppose you had a caveman who had his own flesh and blood,
his own biological children, and said,
meh, you're never going to do anything for me.
Right? Dead and no way going.
What would happen to the children of those cavemen?
Also, not many of them survive.
So what is selected by evolution?
It is to not care much about strangers,
but to care a lot about your own biological relatives.
Right? And in particular, inclusive fitness says that
the genetic equilibrium is one where the genes are maximized.
And this occurs when you go and value
other people based upon how genetically related they are to you.
So basically this means if you can,
so each of your children,
you share half their genes.
So it says you'd be different between your own life and two kids.
Or your own life and eight cousins.
Right? Or your own life and four half-siblings.
Sound right? All right.
That is what inclusive fitness is all about.
It does explain a lot.
If you think about it more,
you will notice some anomalies to that too.
But anyway, there are some economists who have added
an inclusive fitness and say, well,
when someone goes and is generally selfish,
but they lavish stuff on their own biological kids,
we're still going to call them selfish, broadly speaking.
And again, I would say this is not so weird.
So imagine, you know, think about all the TV shows where there's an axe murderer.
And as usual, the axe murderer's dad is
a billionaire who buys him the best legal defense he could possibly get.
And you go and confront the family,
the victim is going to confront the billionaire and say,
you're a horrible person trying to put your axe murdering son back on the street.
And then the billionaire says,
I love my son.
All right. The point of this is,
are we supposed to think of the billionaire trying to put his axe murdering son back on
the street as being a selfish jerk or being a wonderful loving parent?
Normally think of them as a selfish jerk because sure,
they do love their own kid,
but they don't care at all about all the people that their kid is going to murder with his axe.
So that is a sense in which you might say that inclusive fitness,
it's still basically in the same general realm of human selfishness.
Or you know, you found out that some guy in the mafia gave his daughter a really nice car,
would you say, oh my God, I've totally rethinked my view of this man?
No, it's like, well yeah, well that's just what you'd expect a mafia boss to be like.
Murders his enemies, but buys his daughter a great car.
It doesn't change my view about him as a villain at all.
Okay. Now, as you might remember from week six,
when there is repeated play in a game,
then totally selfish non-relatives will still cooperate.
Why? Because of reciprocity.
Right? You're cooperating in order to get something.
So there's that. So mere cooperation is not good evidence against human selfishness.
You need to focus on cooperation where one person gets
an endless stream of free stuff and the other one knows they're not going to get anything back.
That is the clear case where it's not just implicit trade.
Right? Whereas most relationships,
even once you think about between friends,
they fit the model of implicit trade pretty well.
Like think about cases where there's two friends and one of them always helps the other one,
and the other one never reciprocates.
How stable are friendships like that,
where it's totally one way or like that?
So generally going forward, those seem to be very stable friendships.
Stable friendships are ones where there's reciprocity,
where each side is able to help the other.
And of course, it doesn't need to be to balance out every single day.
But if 10 years have gone by and the one person who gives has never gotten anything back,
that's a case where you'll start to wonder what is going on there.
Right? All right. So questions about that? Yes.
But if the toxic friendship goes on for 10 years,
it's probably going to last because it's your toxic friend.
So you could just save it with that tautology or you could say
maybe this is a case where the selfish relationship story doesn't really work.
Again, like the really clear case would be adoption.
Right? So most people adopt a baby at birth,
love the baby exactly as if it were their own biological child.
And what does Inclusive Fitness say they should do with this baby?
Say they will do, not should, but will do.
Love it one over six million.
Yes. So you'll send it back like,
what are you going to do for me? We don't share any genes.
Right? So now again,
if you think about evolution more broadly,
it's realizing well, a lot of our evolutionary impulses come from
environments where you would never meet an unrelated baby.
Right? So like in a primitive tribe,
if someone dies and they have a baby that's around,
what are the odds that you are actually a close relative of that baby?
Very high.
Yeah, really high, right?
Because there's only 30 people in this band.
You're probably related to that baby 17 different ways.
Right? Yes, you think of it,
the level of incest in a primitive tribe is really high when you think about it.
Woof, woof.
Yes. All right.
Okay. So anyway, so mere cooperation is not good evidence against human selfishness,
and again, remember Thomas Hobbes and we talked about him?
The idea that everyone were totally selfish,
there'd be no cooperation is a little bit ridiculous.
Like there's, there's cooperating out there is reciprocity,
and that's enough to go and sustain cooperation in a lot of situations.
But still, in the real world,
it seems like we're seeing more reciprocity than selfishness predicts,
and there's a bunch of experiments that have shown that you can replicate this in lab.
Right? Right? People often cooperate,
even in one-shot prisoner of solemnness.
There's no repeat. And you can even, excuse me,
you can give full anonymity.
So everybody's got, everybody knows,
like you'll do them, no idea who the other person is,
or your partner is, you don't know who's stabbing you in the back,
and yet there's still these modest levels of cooperation.
And why? Why? Why would you guys cooperate?
I mean, like, common answer would be because it's the right thing to do.
I'm a nice person.
And I, you know, and you might say,
well, I'm doing this because I trust other people.
And it's like, well, but if you, you know,
if an evil person trusted other people,
he still wouldn't cooperate, would he?
If it's one shot and no one ever knows who you are,
then you go, yeah, I trust other people.
We're not a bunch of idiots.
I'm going to go and rip them all off.
Ha ha. All right.
And so what is the obvious explanation?
Why would someone cooperate when you've removed every possible selfish reason to do so?
For an unselfish reason.
Because they care. Because they care about other human beings to some extent.
And in Superman 2, there's the villain General Zod.
Not the pale imitation of General Zod in the more recent Superman movie,
unwatchable, but the original General Zod played by Heron Stamp,
who, you know, a towering figure in super villainy.
And there's one part where, you know,
like the three villains from Krypton are fighting Superman.
And then Superman desperately rushes to go and prevent some humans from getting killed.
And then I think General Zod says,
I've discovered Superman's weakness.
And what is it?
He cares for these things.
And the other Kryptonian says,
his pets. And he is presuming.
So to the villains from Krypton,
the idea that Superman might care about a human being that serves no useful function for him,
no selfish function is just weird, but
they observe and say, hmm, how odd.
I conducted a controlled experiment by throwing a bus
at those people and he made an effort to save them.
What could they possibly do for him? Nothing.
There's only one logical inference left to draw.
He likes them.
All right. So a lot of this evidence on cooperation in
Prisoner of Solemnus comes from public goods experiments.
So even in one-shot games,
it's very common for there to be 46 percent cooperation.
When you do repeated play,
what you usually see is there's actually a decline in cooperation.
Because some people realize,
oh my God, my partners are not being
fair and they're cheating me so I'm going to stop cooperating too.
Right? But there's also a common result that you can get
cooperation up to a higher level again just by saying,
all right, new tournament.
And just like that,
again, that takes up just relabeling things.
New round. And they're like, oh my God, it's a new round.
Right? What has changed?
You're still playing with the same people.
Still, almost all the incentives are the same just because
the experimenter declares new round, this changes things.
But it seems like it gives people hope that people will turn over
a new leaf and they will start cooperating because, let's see.
So I think when Hillary Clinton became Secretary of State,
she said she was going to press
the reset button on relations with Russia.
I think they actually got a button and gave to
her as a gift and pressed the button and said,
let's press the reset button together.
And it didn't seem to work in this case.
So the experiment lacked external validity.
But, there you are.
All right. Now, there's a lot of extra experimental elements too.
So how about tipping?
So, why tip?
Now, if you go back to the same restaurant frequently,
you might say it's to get better service because
you think the servers will remember whether you're a good or bad tipper.
What about whenever you're never going to go back to that restaurant again?
Do you still tip?
Yes.
Oh yeah, sure you do.
Now, we know for the data, almost everybody tips.
So I have asked people who work at these restaurants,
how often does someone simply give no tip at all?
And I think it's one percent of the time.
This is even people who do work with
customers where they're never going to be there again.
So of course, there are a lot of patterns of tipping like,
one that every server that I've talked to
attest to is the elderly are terrible tippers.
The elderly give very bad tip.
And especially, what they said is,
what's tough about the elderly is they might appear to be
extremely happy and they still give you a low tip.
Now, my dad who is turning 80 soon,
he has received bad service in all his restaurants for as long as I can remember.
And at first I thought it was just his own paranoia,
but I got older and paid attention.
No, he really does seem to receive unusually bad service.
And I didn't figure out what's going on.
The best I can tell, they immediately just see this guy cannot be pleased.
This guy, whatever we do,
he's not going to be happy and so they just don't put much effort in him.
Ironically, he's actually not a bad tipper.
He's always dissatisfied, but the tip is still okay.
All right. So anyway, so tipping is one where this is a big part of a big industry.
I mean, it's not to say that tipping is always unselfish.
So again, there is repeated gain reason to do it,
but what if you're not going to?
And also notice that there are a lot of informal norms,
like it's considered rude for the waiter when you put down the tip to immediately look at it right in front of you,
and then give you a thumbs up or a thumbs down based upon your tip.
This is generally considered very polite.
So normally, they will go out of their way to not look at what you've done,
and then you just leave.
I gave you all that I wanted,
which was nothing. All right.
And then of course, there is charity.
So the United States does have an unusually high rate of charitable giving,
something like two percent of GDP.
Some of this you can say is not true charity, and very reasonably.
So for example, what is the soundest reason to donate money to your alma mater,
the school you went to?
To get your kids in.
Yeah, to get your kids in.
They're basically bribing the school to let your kids in.
All right. So that's pretty reasonable.
Or what is a reason to donate money to your church?
Tax deduction.
Well, so again, if you say tax deduction,
there the problem is that if you're doing it,
If you're donating money, you're still making a lot,
like most of it is still going to be lost to you.
Yeah, so you know, like suppose,
like if you have a one-third martial tax rate,
then if you donate a dollar to your church,
that's still basically donating 66 cents after taxes,
so why selfishly give up 66 cents?
So why give anything to your church?
So you don't go to hell?
What's that?
So you don't go to hell?
Don't go to hell.
There's that one.
Of course, if you believe that was a strong motive,
then a lot of other behavior wouldn't happen either.
Right?
Right?
Like, let's legalize murder,
because people don't want to go to hell, do they?
Don't they know that murder is burned in hell
for all eternity, so what's the big deal with this?
So, well, here's one thing.
If people notice that you never put money in,
like what will they do?
What will your fellow parishioners say about you
if they notice that you never put money in?
Especially if you drive a nice car.
Fat cats.
Yes, that jerk, greedy, stingy, a lot of bad things.
Yes?
You can say the same thing about murder too, right?
If you go into a parishioner's say, kill somebody.
Yeah, sure.
What do you mean?
You're not gonna say that.
You're not gonna say that.
You don't live in a church.
Right?
Of course, if you want to murder someone,
if you're planning on murdering someone,
the people at church will talk about you.
That's not, that doesn't sound like such a severe sanction,
but on the other hand, so,
importantly, you'll say,
any sociologist who studies religion will say
that a lot of religion is not actually about theology.
Instead, it's a social club.
It's a place where you go and meet people
and hang out with them and make friends
and possibly find spouses for your kids,
or maybe you go and round a business.
It's been noted there's a very high percentage
of realtors that are active in a church of some kind.
Interesting.
Salespeople in general seem to be very active in churches.
Right?
And if you were visibly stingy,
then a lot of those social meetings
probably wouldn't happen for you.
And instead, there'd be a bunch of people who say,
yeah, there's the guy who shows up
and never donates anything.
So, yeah.
So, would it be a reasonable hypothesis from this
that if churches get electronic giving,
the more they get it,
the less they're gonna get overall,
because then there's less of a pressure to give in person?
Yeah, yeah, that seems pretty plausible.
Again, of course, they might come up
with some other way of honoring givers,
like coming up with a list.
You may notice it's very common in philanthropy
to list your donors and put them,
if not to go and say exactly how much they gave you
to go and have five tiers.
You know, there's the bronze tier of giver.
There's the silver.
You know, there's the gold, and there's the platinum.
There's the triple platinum.
And then there's the best human being ever
who gave all this money.
So, and then, yeah, so someone mentioned tax incentives.
So, there are cases where it is selfishly a good idea
to give to charity,
paid for tax reasons.
But basically, this is when you give in kind,
and then you overvalue the market price
of the merchandise you're donating.
So, suppose that you go and donate some clothes
that you could sell at a vintage clothing store
for 100 bucks.
And then on your tax forms,
you go and value them at purchase price.
Then, you might say,
well, I gave $3,000 worth of clothing donation.
This saves you $1,000 in taxes,
which is $900 more than you could have sold them for,
so that's a selfish reason to go and donate to charity.
So, that is an interesting loophole.
Tax code generally tries to make it hard
to get away with stuff like that,
if you are paying attention.
Okay, so you got charity,
and then voting is another one
that people have often brought up.
Of what will happen to you if you don't vote,
in all likelihood?
Overwhelming probability if you refrain from voting
in a presidential election.
What the hell?
Is the same thing will happen
that would have happened if you had voted.
All right, so why do people bother doing it?
And the usual story is out of some kind of civic duty,
which again sounds like some kind of unselfish motive.
You are going and giving up
and making a donation of your time
in order to be a good citizen, something like that.
All right, so real world significance.
So, you are clearly in the air to some degree.
Right, and you think about it,
so like you are making and accepting favors
and strangers all the time.
So, think about how many times a day
you let someone cut in front of you in traffic,
or someone allowed you to cut in front of them.
Right, now here people often will wanna say,
well, you're just doing it for fear of road rage.
Right, you don't wanna get shot for being young.
Right, so there is a level of driving so aggressive
that you maybe are endangering yourself.
But again, this is where someone goes and waves you in.
Right, and this happens.
Right, and they could have just driven up
without it being obvious.
Especially like sometimes when someone lets you wait
like five or 10 seconds.
So, usually when it's at five seconds,
we're like, all right, I guess the person's distracted.
I'll just go and we're both better off.
But, whereas if I try to enhance signals,
then I might waste more of our time.
But, maybe this is just me
rationalizing this selfish thing, possibly.
All right, but in any case, the main thing to remember is
even if all 2% of those charitable nations
are genuinely caused by altruism,
this still means that people are keeping
one fraction of their money for themselves.
98%, right, and I have occasionally heard the excuse of,
well, there's just no good charities out there.
Or at least I can't find them.
I say, you know, like how about GiveDirectly,
like all the stuff on the GiveWell website.
These all seem like very reputable
cost-effective charities.
So, you know, you could totally do it.
It doesn't seem like it's very hard.
I said, why are people not doing it?
Again, the simple story is you don't donate to charity
because you would rather that you have another 20 bucks,
even though you've got plenty,
than that total stranger in Kenya had 20 more bucks.
Yes?
When I say to people, oh, there's no good charities,
I ask them, why don't they give the bum a road of $5, right?
Because that goes straight to the guy,
and there is no like, monetary cost, right?
Well, there's a realistic story,
the bum is just gonna spend it on alcohol,
and he's gonna make his life even worse.
Right?
I mean, not only do a lot of people say that,
it's probably plausible.
Yeah.
Right, so, you know, he's $5 closer
to drinking himself to death.
Yeah.
Sometimes he needed a drink.
Other times, though, you need nothing.
But the world doesn't give us what we need, does it?
Yeah, and I have actually, like,
a couple of times I've heard people even go and say,
like, well, like, I don't think it's at all obvious
that someone hungry in Kenya benefits more from my money
than I benefit from a ski trip in Aspen.
And they're like, all right,
if that's your view of the world,
I don't know what the point of you
continuing this conversation is.
Almost no one on earth but you
would find that even remotely plausible.
So.
I don't know, I guess you just love skiing that much,
I suppose that's possible,
but it seems hard to believe.
All right, so, everyone happy
with selfishness and unselfishness?
Aren't all three of these examples
of extra-experimental evidence
kind of tied up in signaling, too?
Like, I know I tip.
Ah, yes.
I know I tip more when I'm out with people
than if I'm eating by myself.
Yeah, so again, like, so, yes,
there is a signaling explanation for all this.
Totally selfish people might publicly give to charity
so that people think they're nice.
Right, so, yeah, there's a signaling story,
and actually you can start coming up
with some kind of pro-social signaling story
where if there's positive externalities of the signal,
then maybe there's actually a net social benefit
of it happening, maybe.
Again, of course, then you wanted to go
and narrow it down, let's look at the anonymous donations.
So, you know, Robin Hanson is a theory
that everybody really knows
who made the anonymous donations,
and then you're getting extra credit for being modest.
So, I wanna donate as a modestly,
so I'm gonna donate anonymously
so that everybody knows how great I am.
Like, hmm, there's something odd about it,
or maybe an enhanced version of Robin's story
is that this is like a signaling gamble
where when you donate anonymously,
maybe there's a 70% chance no one finds out.
There's a 30% chance word leaks out,
and then people really love you.
It's like, do you know, I already gave it all anonymously.
He must really be a great guy.
Oh my God, he's not just like those other billionaires
who give money so people will think they're good.
He's really good.
Why would he do it otherwise?
And it's like, well, maybe he's really doing it
because he thought it would leak out.
All right, so you could have that story.
He planned the leak.
Yeah, yeah.
So, yeah, so tipping in order to go impress other people.
Then again, so like when I talk to people in the servers,
so a stranger passing through town eating alone,
how many of them don't tip at all?
Almost all of them tip something,
although again, it probably is less than people in a group.
And yes, I have heard from people in the industry
that the best tips come from groups of men
with a female server.
And that is the, and actually I've heard servers say
that when this happens,
and initially a male server's assigned,
they will quickly swap out servers
so that they maximize, for the mutual benefit.
It's not clear if there's any table
where male servers get especially good tips,
but what comes around goes around, so reciprocity.
So I don't know whether the waitresses kick back
the extra tips they get when they are given a good table
or whatever.
So questions about selfishness?
Selfishness, I'm happy with this.
All right, yeah.
I did have this argument with Steve Perlstein
when I said, you know, I think the main thing
that businessmen are after is money.
And he told me this was this ridiculously narrow view
of things, and like, really?
Like, it's really, and again, it wasn't that he said,
it was slightly overstated, he just said,
look, you don't know anything about this.
I'm like, ooh.
Right, well, it started off when I said
that I thought most politicians were power hungry,
and then he just said, you don't know
what you're talking about, Brian.
Then it went on for about 10 minutes
before he said, look, Brian, I'll agree
that they're ambitious, but not power hungry.
I'm like, it just sounds like thrifty versus cheap.
It's just two adjectives that describe
the very same behavior.
But there's no, like, we don't even really disagree,
I don't think.
But then we went on and said, well,
how about business people?
Do you think they're, you know, he said,
why do you think someone goes into politics?
To help people.
Really, and like, do you think business people
go into business to help people?
And I was expecting him to laugh, and he said,
not exactly to help people.
All right, so, but, you know, they do it
to like, create something, and like,
boy, how often do they want to create something
and lose his money, though?
Not very often.
All right, now, moving on.
All right, so fairness and ambiguous.
So, opposite of selfishness is just altruism.
So you either, you care about yourself directly only,
or you care about other people directly.
Right, but, when we go and look more closely
at the facts, we see something richer
than either selfishness or altruism going on.
All right, so, one big thing.
The way that we treat people often seems to be
driven not so much by altruism as by concern for fairness.
All right, so, what's the difference between altruism
and concern for fairness?
So, think about, you know, these two scenarios.
All right, so, one of them is, you go and you buy
your kid some dinner, and then he spills it.
All right, now, how many parents will say,
well, I did what I was supposed to do.
I served you one dinner, and you dropped it,
and now it's your tough luck.
How many parents will have that reaction to their child?
Very few, right?
And, what, and if someone were to say,
like, why are you going and buying that kid
another, a second dinner after he carelessly
dropped the first one?
Normal parental reaction is, because I love my child.
All right, now, on the other hand,
suppose you go and you give a $20 tip
to a server in a restaurant, and then, as you're leaving,
you see that he accidentally drops a $20 bill
in the candle, and it burns up.
How many people would rush back
and give him another $20 tip?
All right, and if you did see this,
would you think, well, that's what,
you know, he just, you know, that was just
what was required of him.
No, I mean, so, this is right there.
So, these cases seem to be different.
It's one where, for the kid, you genuinely care
about how the kid is doing.
So, if he accidentally loses the gift,
you just give him another gift.
For the server, on the other hand,
it's more like, I care about whether I treated him fairly.
Was my behavior above reproach?
And then, if it turns out that the waiter
actually lost the money, he's like, well, I did my part,
and, like, maybe it's his fault.
He should have been more careful with the money, right?
Or, again, suppose you found out that your waiter
was behind in his rent.
How much more would you be inclined to give the waiter
in the tip?
Probably a lot of people wouldn't give anything.
It's like, well, that's his problem.
Like, he gave me my, he served me my dinner,
and I gave him the regular tip for the service,
and he's gotta figure out his own life.
This is not my problem.
All right.
So, this is the idea of fairness,
that a lot of our concern for others
seem, or seems to be, on inspection,
more about concern that we treat others
in the appropriate way, rather than concern
that their condition is actually good.
That's the idea.
All right, and some experimental applications.
So, in ultimatum dictator experiments,
it's very common for first movers
to split the second mover with a split with the second mover.
But, people almost never share their winnings
with the first person they meet outside of the experiment.
All right, so what's going on?
Why is it that you're so concerned
that you share the money with the other person
in the experiment, but you don't need to share it
with a stranger?
Well, that means you're playing a game,
and in a game, there are rules for what's fair, right?
And if you fail to abide by those rules,
then you are an unfair person,
and people don't wanna be that.
But on the other hand, if you don't share
with a total stranger, then you're just,
you know, like, the rules don't really require
that I share with that person.
They weren't even playing.
So, why should I have to worry about
whether they got enough out of it?
Yeah?
So, you're letting the shared space come into that,
and you're sharing the context of the game,
and then once you leave, you're not gonna see each other.
Yeah, exactly.
So, this is one where you're concerned
that you treated the person fairly in the game,
even if you're never gonna encounter them again.
So, on the one hand, it's not about repeat.
It's not like you're gonna bump into your partner again,
you know, at least highly unlikely,
but you're gonna look at yourself in the mirror
and decide, did I rip that person off?
Did I play in an unfair way?
And you may feel bad about yourself,
again, which is not what the simple model predicts.
You know, simple selfishness says,
you might be concerned about how fair
you are perceived to be,
but if you remove all visibility to what you're action,
you know, where if it's anonymous or there's no repeat,
then you won't care.
And in fact, it seems like people do care.
Okay.
All right, so that's fairness.
Anyone got any questions about that?
And again, like a lot of our driving norms
seem a lot more about fairness
than they are about actually caring
about the well-being of the other people on the road.
So, you know, like there's one fairness norm
that if someone lets you in,
then you should let someone else in.
Doesn't even have to be the same person,
but it's like if someone didn't do a solid,
so I will do that,
and the next person, I'll favor and return.
So, again, like even norms about paying it forward,
by not paying it back, but paying it forward,
that's part of the fairness norm.
Right?
So, yeah, and this actually does kind of go back
to the fact that I'm amazed
at how hard professors work for their students.
Because if you know what professors' incentives are,
we get almost nothing for doing anything for you guys.
Right, so if we were getting student evaluations
below a three, which would be maybe like
the second percentile of a student evaluations,
then we might not get tenure.
But you gotta be at like that first, second percentile
of student evaluations for that
to prevent you from getting tenure.
And do you think our raises are based
upon student evaluations?
A little bit, but the big gains all come from publications,
either from outside offers,
or just you got good publications.
I've never heard anyone got a $10,000 raise
for being a good teacher.
But I've heard about someone getting a $10,000 raise
because the research was doing so well.
All right?
And yet, you may notice that professors
are not doing the bare minimum amount of work
that they could get away with.
They could do a lot worse,
and still not only not be fired,
but nothing much would happen to them.
And so, the best story is professors
have some internalized norm of what fairness
requires them to do for their students.
You think about this, why do professors
ever write a letter of evaluation for anyone?
What a waste of time.
Right, so boring.
And long after the student has any chance to go
and give you a good evaluation or anything.
So, what's the point?
If it's a PhD student, then maybe this is part
of your long run plan for global domination.
Because it's like, all right, well,
I gotta have to get my students into good positions
so they can go and cite me,
and then they can go and have a generation of students,
and then the grand students will also be taught to cite me,
and this way I will rise through the pyramid,
and actually the most successful economists
do exactly this.
So, go ahead.
You ever heard about the difference between the number
of PhD students that Buchanan had versus Tullock?
I mean, Buchanan had like 150 PhD students in his career.
I think Tullock had one.
Right, and it's a coincidence that Buchanan
got the Nobel Prize and Tullock didn't.
I don't think, I mean, there's multiple issues going on,
but Tullock also went out of his way
to insult people in Sweden,
and Buchanan went out of his way to be on his best behavior
whenever he was within 1,000 miles of Sweden,
but still, at least this is,
there's something to this where top people wanna go
and create, and have intellectual children,
so they can have intellectual grandchildren,
and intellectual great-grandchildren,
because remember, the generational time in academia
is only like five to 10 years.
So you can have, you can really be, if you're 80,
you could have great, great, great, great,
great intellectual grandchildren
churning, getting their PhDs and citing you,
and how do you think those people
have articles with 10,000 citations did it?
Is it just merit?
No, it's gaming the system and making more of you.
But, so that's a reason why you might try to get
your very, like your personal students good jobs,
but again, 95% of lawyers' recommendation
are nothing like this, and selfishly,
it's a total waste of time for the professor,
but most of us do it anyway.
Most of us do it anyway, out of some sense
of I'm the professor, and fairness requires
that I do this, and what kind of a jerk
would I be if I didn't do it?
The fairness norms are much weaker for
do I have to ever referee an article?
And the norm has been going down, down, down
for what's actually what people feel like they have to do,
and I think we are sort of at the point where
most people just feel like they don't have
to referee at all.
But then again, I will still hear about famous people
who spent, who took a week out of their life
to referee an article, and I'm like,
I can't believe this person has been
half as successful as they are
spending 60 hours on something with no real payoff for them.
And possibly if you're at that elite level,
then again, there's some kind of implicit
payroof rating, and editors will reward you
for your detailed report by giving you
good referees, subsequently, maybe.
All right.
Okay, so I mean, if that's fairness for you,
questions about it?
Please, all right.
So in particular, when I hear about,
not in economics, of course, where we're all,
all the teachers are great, but in other departments,
I've heard about some incredible levels
of laziness and neglect, and how many students
actually even will give the professor
a four instead of a five on student evaluations
to retaliate for the professor's laziness.
Maybe 5, 10 percent.
Everyone else still says, oh, this guy's great.
Never passes back homework, rambles on, doesn't really expect anything.
Yeah, but he's great. Yeah, excellent.
All right.
Now, a second motive that we see, which is also not in a standard model of selfish behavior is vindictiveness.
The desire for revenge.
And we can see this very clearly in the ultimatum game.
If you go and give significantly less than half in the ultimatum game, a lot of people will reject your offer, reducing their payoff and yours.
And what possible motive could they have?
Well, again, in an experiment, you can go and narrow it down so they don't know who you are, they don't know anything about you, they'll never find out.
So why go and give up $4 to go and make the other player $6 poorer?
Because you hate that person.
Because you are angry.
I want to send them a message. What's the message?
I don't like you.
You made me mad. You hurt my feelings.
And now I'm going to hurt your feelings.
You thought you could rip me off, but you can't.
So there's that.
And this is true especially when we've been treated unfairly.
So there's a connection between fairness and vindictiveness.
One of the most common reasons people have to act vindictively is that they think that the other side acted unfairly.
And so now I am willing to lose something in order to make you suffer.
Although, it's unclear whether you want to call it vindictiveness, you might just call it spite.
So there are some experiments where you give someone a chance to go and hurt another person who hasn't done anything to you.
And a certain number of people will do that.
And it's like, here's the most successful, basically you give a test, everybody goes and gets paid based on the performance of the test.
Your performance is based purely on your performance.
And then you go and ask people anonymously,
would you give up a dollar to take a dollar away from the person who got the high score on the test?
And a lot of people, maybe a third of people will say, yeah, hell yeah.
I'm going to wipe that smug look right off his face.
And you might say, why do you want to hurt this person?
This person didn't get the money by doing anything to you.
Like, if you had done better, you would have gotten just as much as he had.
And it seems like, why should he have all the money and me not?
Why, I ask you.
I'm going to go and show him, does he think he's better than me?
Well, he won't after I ruin his life.
So there's that.
That is another reason.
It's just trying to hurt someone.
So there's the Ayn Rand phrase, hatred of the good for being good.
So I want to hurt those people. Why?
Because they're successful and I'm not.
And you might even, in perspective, find that you too have felt this on some occasion.
You might say, well, it's because people believe the rule zero sum, but what if you make it totally clear?
Like, it's not zero sum, it's positive sum.
Now, I don't like the idea of anyone being more successful than me.
Alright, now, notice that this is actually a psychological result where economists are being unduly optimistic about mankind.
Because if everyone were purely selfish, how much energy would be put into spite?
Anonymous spite. Non-repeat spite.
You might act like you want revenge if it's going to change someone's behavior,
but would you ever just lose money in order to hurt another person?
No.
But in the real world, people do this.
So anyway, there's this long-standing idea that economists have this ridiculously negative view of human nature.
But this is actually a way in which economists have an overly positive view of human nature.
So, again, which is not really a point in our favor, but it just means that the critics are missing a lot of what's going on in the world.
Before pointing that out.
So, you just think about all the things that would never happen if economists were right about human nature.
Like, how many murder-suicides would there be if economists were right about human nature?
What would spur a person to a murder-suicide?
Like, you made me really angry.
So angry that I would rather be dead than live in a world where you're alive in it.
And that does not sound at all like what an economist thinks.
Of course, murder-suicides are rare, unfortunately.
But they do happen.
So, you could really stretch your imagination and say, well, this is some kind of effort to go and send a warning to people.
But it's really quite a warning.
So, with inclusive fitness, there could be a reason to do it, right?
You might go and do this for the sake of your family.
Like, someone goes and hurts your family, and maybe only if a month lives, you go and kill them and then kill yourself.
And then, are people going to mess with your family after that?
And, especially, suppose your family's reputation were doing this kind of thing.
Like, we have a higher rate of murder-suicide in our family than any other family in the country.
So, you ought to be really nice to us.
Don't break our hearts. Don't fire us.
Don't do anything that would make us question whether we want to be alive or not.
So, you could go and tell that story, but it seems pretty far-fetched.
I mean, obviously, in a world where the economic model of narrow human selfishness were true,
there would be almost no suicide bombing or anything like that.
So, there's a lot of the worst things that we actually see in the world
that a model of pure human selfishness would say would not occur, actually.
Here's another one.
How much pure bullying would happen in a world where everyone was selfish?
So, I mean, think about the bullies that you knew growing up. I assume none of you were the bully.
Maybe, yeah, but even I bullied a couple of times.
You're like, who can you bully?
But, it did happen. But, anyway.
So, how much money was actually made by the bullies?
What financial gain? I mean, there's the stealing the lunch money bullying.
So, there is that kind. But, most bullying is more of, I'm just going to be mean to a person.
Right? And, what is in it for that person?
The person who was doing the bullying, what did they get out of it?
But, mostly it's just like sadistic pleasure.
As well as the status among other people who also enjoy sadistic pleasures.
And, like in a world where everyone were perfectly selfish,
almost all this bullying would be wiped off the face of the earth.
And, people would at least treat each other with indifference.
It was the big improvement over what a lot of kids face, right?
Just imagine if everyone who bullied you just acted like you were alive.
It would be a big gain.
Alright. So, alright. Now, real world significance of all this.
Alright. So, easy to see this on some level.
Alright. So, let's see.
So, like, you know, even when there's no repeated interaction,
we often give up small personal benefits to what fairness requires.
Expect others to do the same.
Alright. And, you know, some of the more convincing cases,
so maybe prices and wages would move around more if these fairness norms are weaker.
Especially wages. So, we'll get to that.
It's very unusual for nominal wages to ever fall.
Especially, like, their base nominal wage.
Bonuses are more flexible, but base nominal wages,
and it seems that it's heavily driven based upon a widespread perception
that it's super unfair to ever cut someone's nominal wage by a penny or more,
by a penny per hour, and that only a monster would do this.
And, given that employers know that there's a very strong negative reaction to this,
they're afraid of the predictiveness that they would provoke in the workers,
and so we very rarely see noticeable changes in nominal pay.
At least nominal wages.
Alright. And then there are some other markets where they're notoriously,
there are, like, prices are upwardly flexible, such as for concert tickets.
So, there are at least some cases where the concert tickets are clearly underpriced,
and then they get bought up really quickly, and then there's a rationing mechanism,
but scalpers figure out a way around the rationing mechanism,
and this is why you have to go and go through the security to show your monorobot
that it's just buying up tickets to resell them.
And again, why don't the original performers just go and raise the price?
So, there are some complex profit-maximizing stories saying things like,
well, they're concerned about not just their fans today, but the fans of the future,
and if you just charge the highest possible prices, then you are alienating young fans,
and the young fans are going to be around a lot longer,
and so it's all a very complex profit-maximization problem that you plan,
what is it you plan when you're 80 years old, and you're Simon and Garfunkel,
you want the people who are grateful to you for the cheap tickets they got 60 years ago
to come to your concert.
Alright, so, there are some stories like that,
but the simple one that people usually say is they just think it's unfair to charge that much.
My brother once actually had Super Bowl tickets that he managed to get at the list price, like 200 bucks,
and I think they got up to like $1,000, and then my brother did sell them.
Although, even there, he was wavering.
My brother's not an economist, so I would be the same, like, you know,
I wouldn't pay $1,000, so why would I give up $1,000 when I could sell them for that?
Makes sense to me.
Alright, questions, questions, anyone happy?
Alright, so, now, another oddity,
this is one that's gotten quite a bit more attention in recent years,
almost entirely through papers where James Heckman is a co-author.
If you look at James Heckman's productivity, it is beyond all belief,
and you'll notice that they're almost all co-authors, so I think that explains a great deal,
but Heckman being famous and awesome in many ways can get co-authors that are really good,
and they'll probably let him put his name on it for 5% of the work, say.
Also, a lot of his co-authors are former students, so it may be that they are repaying his pedagogy.
Possibly.
Alright, so, there are a lot of economists who go beyond the assumption of constant preferences over time,
constant preferences means over time,
to the assumption of identical preferences for all humans.
What? All humans have the same preferences?
And yet, this is actually a view defended by two Nobel Prize winners, Stiglitz and Becker,
in a paper that was extremely influential.
And a lot of the argument came down to say, look, you can explain anything with preferences,
like why did the man drink motor oil? Because he liked the taste of motor oil.
Alright, that's pretty lame.
So, instead of giving us, ourselves, the infinite room to explain differences between people by differences between preferences,
why don't we go and look at different constraints that they face, or different income levels, and explain it that way.
The kind of most plausible examples they would have is,
suppose you see that people don't eat much ice cream during the winter, and they eat a lot of ice cream in the summer.
Does this mean that the preference for ice cream changes over the year?
And Becker and Stiglitz would want to say, no, there's a constant preference for ice cream,
but your desire for ice cream depends upon the weather.
So, the true fundamental preference is constant.
But, the appearance may be flexible because your circumstances have changed.
I mean, this would be really clear if it were, like, you want a snow shovel in the winter but not in the summer.
Does this show that you like snow shovels in winter and don't like snow shovels in summer?
No, it shows that you have no use for the snow shovel in the summer, but you have a use for the snow shovel in the winter.
In both cases, your fundamental preference is for a drivable driveway.
And that's what's constant.
And then weather changes the constraints.
And then they start, well, alright, what would you say about librarians seeming to be people who like jobs that are quiet,
and like jobs where they talk?
They want to say, no, no, no, what's going on here is that each kind of worker invested in a different kind of human capital.
And now they invest in human capital, they are better.
The librarian is better at producing librarian services, and the salesman is better at producing salesman services.
But it's not because they have a fundamental difference in preference.
These are two different ways of making money.
And let's see, I think actually this is in a footnote, where there's this old story about why are there so many Jews in finance?
And then there's, you say, well, Jews just like finance.
So there's that one.
And then, but then there's a story going back a much longer time saying, no, in the past there were a bunch of regulations
which kept them out of all the other occupations, and finance was one of the few that was left.
So they went there, and once they're there, it's easy for them to pass those job skills on to their kids and their kids' kids.
And that's what's going on.
And Stigler and Becker did say, yeah, that sounds pretty good, although on a footnote they said,
that still doesn't explain why they just didn't convert to another religion.
And they said, well, we'll just leave that for future research.
But again, the spirit of it is to say, well, everyone would convert to whatever religion will actually give them the best deal.
And so, and again, this is where many people just start saying, really?
But anyway, can they really be saying what they appear to be saying?
And I'll say, yes, they are saying what they appear to be saying.
So whatever differences that appear to happen between people, it's really only on the surface that some people like one kind of music rather than another,
and that's just a raw, unexplained thing.
And instead, they say, no, no, what happened was that people like Chinese opera,
early on they were in a situation where there was a lower cost of building up Chinese opera appreciation capital.
And people who grew up liking rock and roll grew up in an environment where it was easy to acquire rock and roll appreciation capital,
and their fundamental preference is identical.
Yes?
So the librarian, if I can just use this example, like they have skills now, but we call those preferences,
how would you explain why they even decided to give those skills?
Because surely the librarian got the librarian skills because she likes it.
Right.
So the secret record story is, look, we are confident that if we were to go and do a very detailed study of the person's life story,
we would find that they had better opportunities for acquiring these librarian skills.
So any of that could just be that you grew up in a family of librarians or readers,
and other people grew up in a family of talkers, that kind of thing.
So you have better opportunities for acquiring certain skills,
and that explains the differences in what naive people have called preferences.
And again, so a lot of it comes down to is just a slogan.
It says, look, you can explain everything with preferences.
It's not falsifiable, and so we shouldn't go and appeal preferences to explain anything.
So I had a paper a while back, which was never cited by Heckman, but I'm not vindictive.
I'm just glad that someone prominent is pushing forward the ball of truth, even if I get no credit for it.
So anyway, what I point out in the paper is that there is a big literature in psychology on personality,
and there are many things you can say about it.
First of all, it seems like personality is a strong genetic component.
It's not just something that you learn through experience.
Secondly, personality is very predictive of a lot of outcomes,
and it's very nicely maps on to what we think about preferences.
So you find out what kind of personality librarians tend to have.
They tend to be introverts, salesmen extroverts,
and furthermore, it usually seems like they were this way from a very early age,
long before they were planning a career or anything else,
and furthermore, if you go and do Twitter adoption studies, you can see that this is not just appearance,
but actually there is a strong genetic component to personality.
So in this paper, I go over a lot of evidence from personality psychology
that indicates there is a lot of preference heterogeneity.
There are many people who just at a very gut level hate the stuff that you like,
and like the stuff that you hate,
and contrary to Stiglitz and Becker, there's no sign this can be reduced to their life experiences or anything like that.
Not that life experiences don't matter at all,
but that there's a lot of things about people that are there that seem to very deep set
and have very little to do with any kind of a conscious or even subconscious decision to acquire a certain kind of capital.
So, for example, criminals.
Criminals have distinctive personalities.
Like, they tend to be high in anger.
Wow.
And they tend to be low in empathy for others.
And they also tend to be lazy and impulsive.
And moreover, they were seen this way by adults in their lives from a very early age.
And is it so surprising that the people with these preferences
are more likely to pursue a career involving violence or robbery,
and of course end up in jail a lot?
Makes a lot of sense.
So, I mean, there's been quite a bit of work on the criminal personality,
which can be fixed very nicely in this, as well as on the genetics of criminality.
As many people get creeped out by the idea that there could be genes for crime,
but it really comes down to this.
Do you think the genes could affect personality?
How could they not?
Do you think personality could affect crime?
How could it not?
Well, then of course genes affect crime.
It's not that there's like the murder gene, but there's a bunch of genes
which tend to lead to a bunch of other things, which tend to lead to a bunch of other things,
and that's all we need to detect an effect of genes.
All right.
So questions about that?
So some of the best uses of personality psychology are for occupational choice.
It's not very predictive of income,
but it's very predictive of the kinds of jobs you're likely to have.
So you get a number of introverts in sales, very few.
A number of extroverts working as librarians, again, very few.
This was one that really struck me.
So in the Myers-Briggs personality test, there's a thinking versus feeling dimension,
and this is also the biggest gender gap,
where men come out much more thinking and women come out much more feeling.
But then if you go and look at males,
there is a male occupation that is extremely feeling,
where basically the men have a very feminine personality.
What's the job?
Priests and monks.
Priests and monks.
So male priests and monks have very feminine personalities
according to statistical generalizations about personality.
When I first read that, I was like, wow.
That explains a lot.
It explains why when I was in catechism and the priest was saying,
you have to love everybody.
I hate this guy every day.
It made me so angry.
I don't love those people.
So that to me at least was a bit of a revelation.
He was a man, but he had a very atypical personality for a man,
which again to me just creeped me out.
I'm just being honest.
This is what I felt when I was ten years old.
I should get credit for honesty.
Isn't it a puzzle then why a lot of major religions don't allow women in clergy?
Well, let's see.
If you were a very feminine man and you wanted to crush the competition,
so it seems like if they did allow women, then they might lose their jobs.
Maybe that's not even a bad story, is it?
You might say, well, if they were really that nice,
they wouldn't want to crush other people.
Of course I want to help people, but first I want it to be me.
I don't want to be the one that has to do it.
Then there's a really neat paper that talks about using personality tests
to go and predict long-run life outcomes.
This is a paper that says, well, it's not that impressive
if you use current personality to predict current life outcomes.
That's kind of obvious, and you might just say there's reverse causation.
Like maybe for a jail, it makes you a 20th person.
What this paper did is it did a meta-analysis of papers
where you get personality at 18, and then you look at life outcomes
like one or more decades later.
The paper found a lot of neat results, saying personality is predictive of unemployment,
predictive of divorce, predictive of suicide, predictive of being in jail.
Again, this is not just saying that your current personality is predicting your current outcome.
It's saying that you find out that you're depressed at 18,
and this gives us some ability to predict whether you'll kill yourself by the time you're 40.
That seems pretty impressive that you give someone a paper mental test,
especially one where the questions seem kind of stupid, like I often feel sad.
Very true, somewhat true, neither true nor false, somewhat false, very false.
I know economists who just say these questions are meaningless and pointless.
That's what you say, but they predict, so they're not meaningless and pointless.
Do those, when they check up on people, do they reevaluate their personality as well?
Normally not. Normally the whole goal is you get an early measure at 18,
and then you just see what it tells you later in life.
Again, because if they did later measures, then there's always the objection of
life is causing personality changes rather than the other way around.
Another interesting result in personality is that people,
there are some clear patterns in how personality changes with age.
In particular, as people get older, they become less open, more conscientious,
more extroverted, more agreeable, and less erotic.
Don't have to memorize that.
Here's the interesting result.
People generally substantially overestimate how much their personality has changed.
If you give someone a personality test and then give them another one 20 years later,
they'll give the test and think, my God, I'm a totally different person.
They say, actually, we got your original test,
and there's a 95% correspondence rate between these two test results.
You didn't change very much.
Now, expected utility anomalies.
Like I said, expected utility theory puts some definite restrictions on
what you will do under uncertainty.
Many of these have been experimentally falsified.
One thing is people seem to be risk-averse over utility rather than just wealth.
The way that economics defines risk aversion is with this utility of wealth function.
That's what we use to define risk aversion.
Remember where if the negative of the second derivative over the first derivative is less than zero,
then we say you're risk-averse.
Remember that.
But in expected utility theory, it doesn't make sense to be risk-averse over utility itself.
We've already factored that in.
Yet, in the real world, if you tell people, look,
suppose you could either have a.6 probability of having a happiness of 10 on a 0 to 10 scale,
or you could have 5 for sure.
A lot of people will say, I'd rather have 5 for sure.
Unhappiness, not wealth.
They're not even maximizing their expected happiness.
There's some kind of risk aversion over the happiness.
It's like I'd rather have certainty of moderate happiness than a gamble where there's a good chance I'll be super happy,
but there's also a risk that I won't be happy at all.
So that is not in the theory, and yet it seems that it comes out of observation.
Another thing is many people are risk-averse relative to a reference point.
So suppose Bill Gates plays poker.
In the real world, if Bill Gates loses, he loses when the stakes are like a dollar hand.
Can you believe that Bill Gates might actually have a worse day because he lost at poker?
Like playing for him is an amount of money almost too small to imagine.
Can you believe that he might actually have a bad day?
Yeah, right?
So I will say that I have done a bunch of debates.
Some of them there's a vote, and some of them there's not a vote.
And you know what? I like the ones without a vote better.
Because the ones that have a vote, there's a chance that I will feel like a loser.
Whereas the ones without a vote, I always win this.
I've never failed to win a debate without a vote.
Whereas the ones that have votes, then on the one hand, I'm like, well, I definitely have the better argument.
I don't know what's wrong with these people, but still, I have lost.
So given that, and this is where there's no stakes.
The payment that you receive for being in the debate has nothing to do with whether you won or lost.
And most of the time, a month later, no one on earth remembers whether you won or lost except, of course, you.
I know what the votes were for every debate I've been in, I think.
That never goes away, especially the losses.
And this is true even though I know that there are some things that are logically relevant that strongly predict when you're losing.
In particular, if the resolution is something that almost no one would agree with initially, you almost always win.
I mean, imagine this. Suppose that initially 100% of people vote against you.
Can you lose that debate?
The worst scenario is you tie, because you gain no votes.
And if you persuade one person, you're declared the winner of the debate.
So you can game the system and just try to lobby for ridiculous statements that almost no one would agree with,
and then you just try to win a few people over to them, and then you win all your debates.
The last debate that I did, they did have a vote there at Kenyishek. The resolution was, I think, the education system is a waste of time and money.
And before he looked at me and said, well, I don't think there's any way that you could lose this debate, Brian.
And I'm like, hmm, well, I respect you all the more because you realize that.
But still, I'm going to like beating you.
And yes, I did beat him, and it wasn't hard because initially only 15% of people agreed with me, and then I got it up to 30.
So wow. I doubled the share of people who agreed with me. Fantastic.
All right. Another thing. So a choice is not linear in probability, as expected utility predicts.
And this can be demonstrated with the L.A. paradox, which is on the homework, but next homework isn't due for two weeks.
So no reason to rush through it right now. We can do it next class.
All right. So we are done for this evening.
