So we've just done mixed strategy Nash equilibrium.
And now we're going to move on to the concept
of sub-gain perfection.
This is another one on the short list of abbreviations
you need to know.
SGPNE, sub-gain perfect Nash equilibrium.
And then, of course, there is SGPPSNE,
sub-gain perfect pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
And SGPMSNE, sub-gain perfect mixed strategy Nash equilibrium.
So these are all in the same family,
so we don't really have to analyze three different things.
So here is the key idea of sub-gain perfection,
which is an additional refinement that is often
added on top of Nash equilibrium.
And it's like this.
Now, this is just an example.
I'm not actually trying to threaten or scare anyone.
But imagine a world where I threaten
to fail any student who leaves early from class
for any reason whatsoever.
So I say, I'm not really saying this,
but imagine anyone who ever leaves early
will fail the entire class.
That is it.
This is the rule.
It will be enforced.
Choose your course wisely.
Now, if you believe my threat, probably none of you
will leave early because none of you
will regard whatever it is that you'd
be doing instead of staying in class till 10 o'clock
to be more important than getting a passing
grade in this class.
Given that you bother being here at all,
and you've gone through the whole process to get here,
it is unlikely that you actually would want to leave,
given this threat.
Because you'd have to go and throw away all this work
that you put in.
And presumably, the reason why you put in all this work
is because you anticipate a lot of benefit for yourself,
high expected value.
So you do know why you're here.
You don't just come.
This was not a choice made lightly, I assume.
Correct.
You didn't just say, well, maybe a PhD in economics
might be the order of the day.
Instead, you probably deliberated,
and you decided you want to be here.
You don't make a choice like that lightly.
Anyway, so if you believe my threat,
you're not going to leave early.
And therefore, I will never actually
have to impose my threat.
I won't actually fail anyone if you
believe that I would fail anyone who went and left early.
Now, this sounds like a Nash equilibrium.
Because if you believe what I said, you won't leave.
And since you aren't leaving, there's no incentive for me
to go and be reasonable.
There's no incentive for me to say, well,
this punishment's awfully harsh, because I never actually
impose a punishment.
So what's the problem?
It doesn't take any effort on my part
to go and have a really harsh punishment that never happens.
At least it doesn't seem like it involves a lot of effort.
Now, to most people, this seems like an implausible prediction.
Sounds like a Nash equilibrium, but it
doesn't sound like a very good Nash equilibrium,
because you know I wouldn't want to actually carry out
this threat.
So first of all, of course, it might hurt me
to carry out the threat.
I might feel bad if someone left early because a child was sick.
And then I failed you because you
had to go to your sick child.
So I might feel bad about doing that.
And then given that I might feel bad about doing it,
in some cases, maybe I would feel bad
if I wasn't sure that your excuse was good.
So you might say, I had a really good reason.
And I say, well, I don't know if you had a good reason.
And that might weigh on me.
Maybe you had a really good reason.
Maybe I went and failed a person who
would have been a fantastic economist,
all because of this stupid rule that I enforced so rigidly
and with such harsh punishments.
And then even if you ignore any of my feelings,
maybe I actually enjoy being sadistic.
Still, it is likely that any student that
was going to fail you in this class, any student that
was experiencing the punishment, would complain.
Where do you start complaining?
I don't do this, but where would you start complaining?
The alphabet.
What's that?
The alphabet.
There's an alphabet today?
I don't know.
Maybe.
I assume that you would go to Dan Hauser, the chairman
of the Department of Complain, or maybe you
go to Chris Coyne, director of graduate studies.
So you go to them, and you just say, Kaplan is crazy.
Kaplan is cruel.
He is harsh.
He's unreasonable.
He's a danger to economics.
And you go and complain.
And maybe you actually convince them.
But even if you don't convince them,
they might go and email me and say,
there's some unhappy students here.
They're making my life worse.
And then perhaps there could be an implicit threat.
Well, if you do things to people that
lead them to make my life bad, who knows what I might do?
I might get upset, and then I might
have to go and make somebody else's life bad.
Who knows who that would be?
But maybe it would be me.
So any time that I'm doing something
that causes students to do things to other faculty
to make their lives bad, and then I
have to live with these faculty.
And so right now, I'm on track to become the longest serving
professor in GMU history.
As I started here at 26, I've never had any other job.
So I could be here for 70 years with some luck.
You know there's no mandatory retirement or anything.
Did you include this in your decision
to come to get a PhD in economics
so that you can go and keep doing this job for as long
as you could somehow get to the classroom?
And who knows what the system will be in, what is it now?
50 years?
Who knows what it will be?
But anyway, it seems like the gravy train will continue,
probably, right?
Right?
Right.
Came here to seek rents.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah, came here to chew gum and seek rents,
and I'm all out of gum.
All right.
So then even if the chairman just rebuffed you and just said
whatever Brian says is great, then you
might go and complain to someone higher than the chairman,
complain to the dean, start complaining.
It would just be easier just not to go and enforce the rule.
All right.
All right.
Now, how would a threat that you know that I would never
actually carry out actually wind up changing your behavior?
It would seem strange.
So if you knew that I wouldn't really do it,
then it isn't very scary anymore.
If it isn't very scary, why should you go and worry
a lot about the threat?
You just treat it as an empty threat.
You know, like the classic parent's threat
on the road to Disneyland to say, look,
if you don't start behaving, I'm going to turn this car right
around this minute.
Does anyone ever have a parent who actually carried out
a threat like that?
Yes.
All right.
So there are a few.
Yes.
But not very often are these threats carried out.
I didn't.
I like it.
And you're scarred for life after that.
So I think some people would be.
Yes, once I was on a committee.
It was a great appeal committee.
So James Buchanan, Nobel Prize winner,
was teaching a class, and there was
a student who said that he was unfairly graded.
Now, do anyone know what the official GMU
standard for overturning a professor's grade is?
Manifest unfairness.
Manifest unfairness.
Now, the case was handed to me when I was in my very first
year.
So right out of graduate school, I
was called upon to decide whether a Nobel Prize
winner in my own department had been manifestly unfair or not.
And in my judgment, it wasn't manifestly unfair.
So the student won his grade race from a C to an A,
over the word of a Nobel Prize winner.
But anyway, so there's a case where
the system was very stacked against the student.
But if it was an instant fail out of the program,
then who knows.
Now, there's a general term in game theory
for all problems like this, not just for sub-game perfection.
It is called the problem of out of equilibrium play.
All right, so because I can optimally
choose bizarre behavior in situations
that I know will never happen.
But then, knowing what I would do in situations that never
happen can actually change your behavior in situations
that happen all the time.
Which when you first hear it, sounds crazy.
But this example is pretty clear.
If you really believe that someone's extreme threats were
true, then it would make sense for you
to change your behavioral logs.
Even then, there's a question, but I
know that you wouldn't really do it if we ever
got to that situation.
But in terms of Nash equilibrium,
that doesn't matter.
Because Nash equilibrium just says that given what I've said,
you don't want to change your behavior,
given what you've said, you don't want to change your
behavior, or given what I'm doing,
you don't want to change your behavior,
given what you're doing, I don't want to change my behavior.
And it seems like these extreme threats qualify then
as Nash equilibrium.
And that is odd.
So questions about that?
See how it's weird?
So you've probably experienced idle threats many times
in your life before.
And you quickly get a sense that these are idle threats.
And normally, they don't change your behavior.
Although, if you're very naive or young,
you may actually believe the threat
to turn the car around on the way to Disneyland.
Yes?
One example I was just thinking of
was at the height of the Cold War, US versus Soviet Union,
and mutually assured destruction.
I was just wondering if that would be an example of that.
It might be.
Although, it's certainly discussed in the same context.
Although, of course, the whole doctrine of mutually assured
destruction was, that was one where it wasn't quite that.
Are you familiar with Mad Mutually Assured Destruction?
You've seen Dr. Strangelove?
All right, so great movie for game theory.
And Dr. Strangelove is actually based very closely
on von Neumann, who I've mentioned.
But anyway, the idea of mutually assured destruction
was you have the US and the Soviet Union.
And each believes that if I nuke you, you will nuke me.
So I go and use my nuclear weapons on you.
You will use your nuclear weapons on me.
So no one wants to go and start this,
because it will lead to destruction.
So it wasn't actually the same thing.
It would be more along the lines of,
if you use one nuclear weapon, I will unload my full arsenal
on you.
That one sounds like you wouldn't want to do it, right?
Yeah.
Because, wait, they do one weapon,
which destroys one city, which you like a lot.
But still, then you're going to end the world?
So it seems more likely that you would go and then, say,
send one missile back at a similar city, or maybe two,
just to prove your point.
And say, and what are you going to do, launch four?
Well, we all know what that's going to lead to.
Then I'll have to launch eight, and there
will be destruction.
So just sit there and let me nuke two of your cities.
And then say thank you.
Something like that.
So anyway, so there's nothing theoretically wrong
with the idea that this is a Nash equilibrium for me
to make a threat that I wouldn't want to carry out.
But there is a refinement of Nash equilibrium,
which is called, of course, sub-game perfect Nash
equilibrium.
Sub-game perfect is a special case.
So you could have Nash equilibria
that are not sub-game perfect, and they're still
perfectly good Nash equilibrium.
They still fit the definition.
Nash equilibria.
But sub-game perfect Nash equilibria
are Nash equilibria with an extra property,
with an extra shrink.
All right?
What you can think about it is with sub-game perfection
requires Nash play in every sub-game of a game.
All right?
Now, if you want to check for sub-game perfection,
step one is you apply backwards induction as far as you can.
Remember, we already talked about backwards induction.
All right, so if you've got a game of perfect information,
then whatever result you get from backwards induction
is sub-game perfect.
All right?
All right, now a standard example
of this, which is often then applied.
This is the so-called entry game,
which comes out of industrial organization.
And here's the idea.
All right, so suppose that we have a game where
there's an incumbent firm that's already around making profits,
and then there's a new firm, the entry, the entrant.
All right, now the entrant can either go in or out.
And of course, if the entrant goes out,
then the entrant is going to make no profits.
And then the firm that remains there
gets to be a monopoly, where it has always been,
and gets high profits, say, 10.
All right, but if you go in, the same way we're here,
the entrant's going first here.
The entrant's going first, incumbent's going second.
If you go in, that incumbent can do two things.
It can either do what we call accommodate,
where it goes and shares the market nicely with you.
And then maybe you each get, say, profits of three and three,
something like that.
It's going to be less than the monopoly profits before,
because there's competition.
So at least there's some kind of competition.
It's no longer going to be the monopoly outcome.
On the other hand, though, it could also
do what we call fight.
All right, so it could fight.
It could say, well, you went and treaded on my territory,
and now it is all out war.
And now I'm going to go and give the product away,
and we're both going to lose a ton of money.
We'll each have, say, a loss of 10.
So we'll each get the negative of the monopoly profits.
All right, now, if you go and think, so if you're getting,
in terms of Nash equilibrium, there's actually two.
So one of them is where you do in and accommodate.
So the entrant goes in, incumbent accommodates.
You both get three, three.
And then the entrant doesn't want
to switch, because the entrant would go from profits of three
to what if he switched?
No, he would go from three over.
So if the entrant were to switch, he'd get zero.
If the entrant switched, then he just
wouldn't be in the market at all and get nothing.
And then the incumbent doesn't want
to switch, because if he switched,
he would go from three to negative 10.
So we have one equilibrium in accommodate.
That one's fine.
But we also have another one, which
is that the entrant stays out.
And then the incumbent plays fight if the entrant enters,
which he doesn't.
So threatening to both, so fighting
if the entrant doesn't go in costs you nothing.
All it's saying is, if you did enter, good thing for you
that you didn't.
Good thing for both of us you didn't.
I would have fought.
And then there would have been a big trade war,
and we both would have lost money.
OK.
All right.
So we have two Nash equilibria.
Nash equilibria.
So these are both perfectly good Nash equilibria.
But only one of them is sub-gay perfect.
Only one of them is sub-gay perfect,
and of course it is this one here.
Because this one here requires us
to believe that the incumbent would do something
in this scenario that is bad for him.
So here, this is saying that if you ever did enter,
then I would fight, even though fighting
yields profits of 13 less than accommodating.
So again, this is very much like that situation
where I threatened to fail and he student leaves early.
Where if you really believed that I would do it,
then it would change your behavior.
And then the situation would never come up.
But that is a hard to believe scenario.
Excuse me, actually.
Why the second outcome?
And why the new entry form stays out
when it's also a Nash equilibrium?
Let's see.
So what was I going to say?
Also, so here's the thing.
So if we're in out fight, then if the entrant were to go in,
he would go from getting 0 to getting negative 10.
That's worse for him.
And on the other hand, for the incumbent,
since he is actually getting 10, if he were to switch over,
if he were to switch over to accommodate,
he would still have 10.
Because remember, with Nash equilibrium,
we're always thinking about what would
happen if you change without changing
what the other person does.
So right now, we're in out fight.
The incumbent is getting 10.
And if the incumbent were to go and switch to accommodate,
since this is, he's changing his strategy in a situation
that isn't even happening, he still gets 10.
So you think about this.
Actually, this is not a bad way.
So you know how it's very common for militaries
to have a big file drawer of contingency plans?
This is what we do if England attacks us, things like this.
So you know, it's very, you know, so militaries,
they're very common to have like a giant file,
or now probably there's computers,
you know, somewhere a computer.
There's a list of all the different weird things
that might happen.
And then there's a plan for it.
So yeah, so actually, the United States in the 1930s
did have a plan for what if we have to fight England, right?
And the idea of sub game perfection
is that if there are plans in those drawers
that you would never actually follow through on,
then they're not gonna change anyone's behavior.
But Nash equilibrium actually says,
well, maybe you go and you write it down.
And then if people believe that you would do it,
that would actually change their behavior.
All right.
Now, in games and in-brewing information,
then we can no longer do this,
we no longer just do backwards deduction.
Then we have to actually find the Nash equilibrium
in each of the sub games.
So, as we do more games,
we'll actually have more examples of things
that you can put at the end,
but it wouldn't have to be perfect information.
It could also be in any kind of Nash equilibrium
would also work at the end,
as long as each stage we are doing a Nash strategy.
All right, questions, questions?
I don't understand it well enough
to formulate a precise question.
I will tell you, well,
you always have the right to come back and ask again,
once you know enough to be able to clearly state
what you wanna say, then we'll just come back to it.
All right.
Now, yes.
So you just build those strategies
just to basically confirm to yourself
that the outcome is something that would be undesirable
and so you can never do it anyways?
Well, I mean, so, let's see, sure.
I mean, it certainly wasn't me that built it.
I mean, this is a standard example
of industrial organization, but it is motivated
by real world phenomenon where,
so if there is, currently there's one firm
that runs the markets,
they might actually explicitly threaten,
if you enter our market, we're going to go
and very aggressively change our prices
in order to go and find you,
or you might just be worried.
The incoming firm might say,
the last thing in our minds would be to go
and lose a pile of money to go and drive
any competitor into bankruptcy.
We would never, ever think of that.
That is all.
All right, so, and you know, the classic mafia threat
is to go into your stores, it's a really nice store here,
be ashamed if anything happened to it.
If it burned to the ground, that would be just terrible
and it would hurt me very deeply if it burned and burned.
All right, so, or like, you know,
nice legs you've got there, hate to see them broken.
All right, so these are all threats that you...
that you can make, which if you're in the mafia,
maybe you do.
Maybe people will believe that threat.
If I made these threats, you're not going to believe me.
It's so weird, actually.
Maybe you would.
But wow.
I'm afraid to break my legs.
Actually, he threatened, and you said he would never do it.
But use some imagination if you shouldn't.
You can come up with some very scary things.
A classic scary thing for a kid at summer camp to do himself
isn't even to hurt another person.
So go and put out a cigarette on yourself.
And then how do people treat you after that?
According to every movie and TV show about this kind of thing.
But it's believable, right?
If you saw a person put a cigarette out on himself,
how would you treat that person afterwards?
Yes, stay away.
And what if he said, loan me a pen now.
Or are you going to say, no, no, no.
Yes, sir.
Here you go.
He burns himself with cigarettes.
So as to what you're thinking, well,
these are all interesting questions.
There's some game theory that is underneath here.
You might think someone who would inflict such pain
on himself, God knows what he would do to someone
other than himself.
If you'll burn yourself, what would you do to a stranger?
I don't want to find out.
So yes, whatever you say, sir.
So now let's go over a few games,
and then we'll switch over to some of the most popular games
in all game theory, and ones which I will also say
have some relevance to the real world, probably
a lot of relevance to the real world.
So let's start with the prisoner's dilemma,
one that you've probably seen, I guess,
media like five times in classes, prisoner's dilemma.
So as you know, the apostrophe is after the S,
indicating that it's a dilemma of a plurality
of plural prisoners.
It's not a dilemma of a single prisoner.
It's a dilemma of a group of prisoners.
So a standard representation is something like this.
So you've got two people who can either cooperate
with each other or don't.
They can either cooperate with each other or don't.
And then, of course, if they both cooperate with each other,
they both get a good payoff.
If neither cooperates with each other,
they both get a bad payoff.
But then if one cooperates and one doesn't,
the non-cooperator gets the best payoff,
and the person that did cooperate
gets the worst payoff.
So it would be something like 0, 6, and 6, 0.
So this is the classic setup of the prisoner's dilemma here.
So notice that here, both are better off than there.
OK, all right, so if you end up here, you say, gee,
why couldn't we have been there?
And yet, these two diagonal ones are
what are generally called the temptation payoffs.
These are ones that give a temptation to each player
to not cooperate.
Now, this is a game that is standardly
solved by strict dominance.
I think we talked about it a bit already.
So player one is better off cooperating when?
This is only, we only play the game once,
you never see the person again.
It's all assumed.
So when is player one better off not cooperating?
Always.
When is player two better off not cooperating?
Always, yes.
So if it is always better for both of them to not cooperate,
then the game theoretic prediction is,
there will never be cooperation.
And we'll end up there, even though there
is that payoff right there, right in front of us.
But we don't go there.
And why don't we go there?
Because we don't act.
There is no we here.
Instead, there are two individuals
each getting to act separately.
So wouldn't society be better off at 5-5?
Or at least the sub-society.
Wouldn't these two guys be better off at 5-5?
Of course.
But if each chooses individually,
there isn't any way for society to take an action.
And so instead, you get this bad result.
So of course, the classic case of the prisoner's lemma
involves actual prisoners.
So you probably heard the story.
So there's two people arrested for a crime.
And then they are usually in the story.
We say we put them in separate rooms.
And then the prosecutor goes to each one and says,
look, you can either go and admit that you can go and,
what's the right word?
You go and rat out your accomplice.
And if you do this, you'll get a reduced sentence.
And I'm offering the same deal over in the other room
right now.
So I just thought you ought to know.
And the prediction is that both people
will rat, will rat, leading to the non-cooperative result.
So there actually is a murder mystery called Murder
at the Mergin, written by under the pseudonym Marshall
Jevons.
It's actually Ken Elzinga at UVA, who's the author.
But anyway, so he has a murder mystery
where two innocent men both confess to the crime.
And then the economist comes along and says, well,
of course they both confessed to the crime.
There was a prisoner's dilemma.
And then he goes and really solves the crime.
There's something contrived about the murder mystery
because then it leaves you wondering, well,
why does anyone ever go and use this method of interrogation
if it always leads to confessions from everybody,
no matter whether they're innocent or guilty?
It's kind of a dumb system.
In the real world, there's something more to it,
namely you would want each person, when they confess,
to give details, facts, that they could only
know if, in fact, they were guilty.
So this is an important proviso if you're
using the strategy in the real world.
Otherwise, you might get innocent confessions.
A sub-point on the game theory of torture.
So Roman philosopher Cicero has a very interesting discussion
of torture.
So in Roman times, torture is very commonly
used to get confessions out of people.
And what about the objection that people
will admit to anything under torture?
Cicero knows this one.
And he says, yes, well, only the dumb kind of torture
involves torturing someone until they say, I did it.
He says that the good kind of torture,
the kind of torture that Cicero says
is the admirable torture, involves inflicting pain
until someone admits facts they couldn't
know unless they were guilty.
All right, and that ends the set.
So there's some logic to that, anyway.
Yes, there is, of course, a downside.
You might have to kill an innocent person in order
to get this.
All right, so.
I'm always puzzled by these interrogations,
the scenarios in fiction, where someone's getting tortured,
and then they have an answer, and they just
don't make up something.
So I'd always be there just making up answers,
just to hope that Jack Bauer saves me in time,
or something like that.
Like, yeah, the bombs in Idaho, in Boise, in the McDonald's,
on Main Street.
And if that doesn't work, I'm like, oh, I messed up.
OK.
Anyway, when I was being tortured, I got confused.
All right, so there is the puzzle
of why people under duress don't make up, well,
aren't that are liars, and don't just make up,
and especially want to make up a very time-intensive scenario
in order to, where they have to put in a lot of work
in order to verify what you're saying.
Say, look, my contact can only be
met in three months and a day.
You have to be at the North Pole to do it.
And until then, you're like, sorry,
that's where it's all raised.
Any case.
All right, so this is the prisoner's lemma.
That is the standard case involving the legal system.
But it's got a lot of other applications.
So very often, we'll bring it up when
we're talking about public goods and externalities.
So with a public good, what is it?
It's in the interest of any one person to say,
let somebody else take care of the problem.
I'm not going to worry about it.
But of course, if everybody says that,
then the problem doesn't get taken care of.
You get a very bad result. It's often used for collusion.
So if you think about it, from a social point of view,
is it good that we have the literal prisoner's lemma?
If there's two people involved in a horrible crime,
is it actually a good thing that we have a system
to make them confess?
Sure, it's a great thing.
So that's one where we should really
be thinking about there being a third actor here.
Or like everyone else, all the people
who don't want to get murdered would be the third actor.
And they would actually be benefiting greatly
from a system where people in murder plots
tend to go to that equilibrium.
But anyway, for collusion, this is a standard story
about oligopoly, for example.
So in oligopoly, of course, all the firms
that are in the industry would like to go and,
if they would all cooperate, all reduce production.
It's like in OPEC, if we all go and cut back oil production
by 20%, then based upon what we know
about the elasticity of oil demand,
this would increase total revenue in the oil industry.
And then we'd all be better off.
So often used for collusion as well,
even though there, of course, as we know,
the deadweight costs of collusion are there.
But from the point of view of the firms,
why is the firms don't go and cooperate
with each other more?
And prisoner's lemma's a standard story
because right after you make the collusive agreement,
then the first thing you want to do
is call up all your customers and say,
look, tomorrow there's going to be an announcement
that the price of increased,
but for my very special customers,
my favorite customer in the world, John,
that doesn't apply to you.
You keep getting the good old rates.
And after you've called all of your customers
to tell them that their rates aren't going up,
then you start calling all of your competitor's
best customers and say, I've heard a rumor
that your rates are going to go up.
And I would just like you to know
that you do have plenty of other options
for your petroleum needs.
And then you do that.
But of course, if everybody does that,
then nothing much happens.
If you go and read about the history
of cartels in the United States
before the antitrust laws,
it's very colorful and gets a lot,
a lot of it does involve a lot of empty promises
to go and reduce production.
And then the promises,
the empty promises are broken very quickly.
All right, so collusion.
People often looked at voting like this.
Is that only we could go and get,
wouldn't it be better if everybody voted?
That one's a little bit odd because we'll,
what if it just kept the result the same?
There wouldn't just be more people
have to take time off during their busy day
to get the same result.
But things like if there's a small interest group
that is well organized
and they're taking advantage of the public,
and then the public's getting ripped off,
if only the members of the public would all go and vote,
then you'd get a good result.
So often used there.
This is often used to understand revolution.
So like in North Korea right now,
like what fraction of the population would be better off
if they could just eliminate the government
and surrender North Korea to South Korea?
80%.
Yeah, yeah, very, very high percentage
would be better off if they could just go
and peacefully surrender to South Korea.
And just say, take us over now, please.
All right, so that's all we ask is to take control.
All right, but who wants to be the first person
to stick his neck out in North Korea?
Well, there's a lot of people
that have possibly stuck their necks out.
It's hard to understand what's really going on,
but the people that are accused
of sticking their necks out are dead.
So like the uncle of the current dictator
was merrily executed.
There's some rumors that he was torn apart by wild dogs
in front of the whole Politburo.
You read a lot of people saying, no,
that probably wasn't really true.
It was probably just a machine gun
with an anti-aircraft weapon.
All right.
And yet the Politburo didn't have to see it.
All right, so things like that.
There is a story which I think is confirmed
that in the middle of the Iran-Iraq war,
one member of Saddam Hussein's cabinet said,
the Iranians are very upset
with a beloved comrade, Saddam Hussein,
so perhaps it would be easier for us to negotiate peace
if he would just temporarily, officially,
just as a formality,
just step down from the leadership position.
And supposedly Saddam Hussein just took the guy,
went into the other room,
took out his pistol and killed him and then came back.
Anyone else like that idea?
All right.
So the first guy who stuck his neck out ended up dead.
So, and do you want to be so?
And most people don't want to be that person.
So what good is this better world
that you think you're gonna bring out
if all that happens is you end up dead
because you suggest it?
All right, so Gordon Talek put a lot of work
into thinking about revolution in these terms.
So another example.
All right, questions?
All right, so there's a huge experimental literature
on the prisoner's dilemma.
I believe more experimental work has been done
on the prisoner's dilemma
than any other thing in game theory.
That's fair, I don't think anything else has been studied.
All right, so some results.
The extreme prediction is very rarely borne out.
So people do cooperate
even when cooperation is strictly dominant,
even when there's no repetition,
even when you preserve anonymity.
So we still see some level of cooperation
even in extreme scenarios.
All right, so if this story sounds unconvincing to you,
the problem is not with the logic.
The problem is that human beings don't follow that logic.
Again, you can think about what's going on.
One theory, of course, is just that we have the payouts wrong
and we shouldn't think about dollars that you're paid,
the dollars that you receive
as being the only part of the payoff.
So the payoff could also include your sense of guilt,
your sense of betraying another human being.
So your conscience could be there,
which goes and changes the game.
So that's one possibility.
And other possibilities, people don't understand the game.
They're confused, right?
That's totally possible, right?
So if you put this game on a final exam for undergraduates,
how many would mess it up?
Mason, a third would be an optimistically low percentage
messing it up, right?
And then, of course, there may be people
who just don't believe, who even when this is the game,
they don't really believe it's that game
because normally when it seems to be that game, it isn't.
So in the real world, if someone tells you it's that game,
you should be like, wait a second.
No one will ever know.
How can you be so sure?
Think about all the times you were a kid
and another kid says, no one will ever catch us,
and then you get caught, right?
So life experience has taught us to be suspicious
when someone tells us you can't get caught.
So and then even when we go and put you
in a carefully arranged experiment
where really there's no way you're gonna be caught,
you might still be nervous and say,
nah, it's too good to be true, something like that.
All right, all right, but the prisoner's dilemma
does correctly predict that people leave money on the table
and there are a bunch of standard ways to reduce cooperation.
So having it only be played one time,
that reduces cooperation.
We're gonna be getting to repeat a game soon.
Having less anonymity or having more anonymity
reduces cooperation.
Having more people usually reduces cooperation.
And then just getting more experience with the game
usually reduces cooperation.
So the notice there's a difference,
what's the difference between a repeated play
and getting experience playing the game?
You play multiple times with people one time.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
So if you play a bunch of times
and each time it's a totally new person,
that's giving you experience
without giving you actual repetition.
Because the other person still doesn't know
what you did in the past,
so they can't change the behavior
to respond to what you did.
Whereas on the other hand, you could also have,
no, you actually can't have repetition without experience.
Because those always go hand in hand,
you can get more experience without actual repetition
in the sense that you are interacting
with another person at the same time,
which as common sense tells us,
and as we're going to see,
often will change the way people play.
All right, now furthermore,
one of my common complaints about experimental results
is that they'll often say things like,
no experiment has ever found something
without giving you a really good idea
about the range of experiments that have ever been tried.
And often actually the range is very narrow
just for practical reasons,
like nobody has enough money,
or it's hard to go and convince someone
this is a good use of money.
So as far as I know,
no one has ever played the Prisoner's Limit
as a full-time job for a year.
My belief, I have no data to support this
because it's never been done,
but my belief is that if you turn it into a full-time job
and there's a large number of people playing,
eventually cooperation would just die.
Right, and people would just not cooperate.
People might even go on autopilot,
and they might just show up in the day
and just say, here's my order for all day.
Never cooperate with anybody,
and then walk out of the room.
Right, I can easily see that happening
if this became your primary source of income.
Of course, if it were a small number of people,
I can also see people starting to watch each other like hawks
and everyone saying, you better show me what you're doing
before you turn in, before you say what was happening,
and I have to see it.
Or you could also do the thing where you say,
all right, so did you cooperate or not?
And then everyone looks at your face
and looks for signs of whether or not
you're being honest.
There are many games that are based around
the idea of telling whether or not someone is lying
for an unobservable action.
So there's a game called Mafia,
or also called Are You a Werewolf,
where people, where there's one or two traitors in the group
and then everyone looks around at the faces.
Where are the traitors here?
Where are they?
Are you the traitor?
And of course, people normally say,
no, no, I'm not the traitor.
But then sometimes a person who denied it was the traitor.
Okay, all right, so other questions
about the prisoner's dilemma?
Yes?
I'm assuming that there are versions
or maybe explanations of this,
because this, of course, is like a theoretical construct,
but in a literal prisoner's dilemma,
saying snitches get stitches and stuff like that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You do see real life cooperation.
Yeah, of course, that's a clear case of repeated play.
Right, right.
Yeah.
Although, there's also a standard thing in the Mafia,
this is actually both real life and fiction,
saying, back in the old days, there was honor,
but now everybody snitches.
Right, and there's also a story about how,
as the sentences have gotten higher,
and as the deals get sweeter.
So if it's five years, then a lot of people do that,
sue God, your family gets taken care of,
and then it's a good, nice life.
But if it's 25 years, that's where people start going
and saying, yeah, well, you know,
Merita has a wonderful code,
so it's lovely, it's aesthetically pleasing,
but I don't wanna be in prison for 25 years for it.
All right.
Okay.
All right, and then, you know, in the prisoner's dilemma,
there is this very strong common sense idea
the whole problem is that people
don't get to talk to each other.
But, you know, with like the actual theory,
in terms of the logic, the only problem
is just that you move simultaneously.
So, you know, so that,
or rather that you don't move,
rather that you don't move,
you don't get to move as a group.
So that it is all, whatever the other person has done
is always in your interest to go and stab them in the back.
All right, now, again, experimentally,
there are actual experiments where you say,
all right, we're gonna play this game at first,
let's open up our wallets or now our phones
and share photos of our family.
And this actually raises cooperation.
So myandaroef became a part of OSP.org
where she adopts things
and she combines them with these things and gets it started.
And additionally, join us in creating
new methods for it.
I, I feel like everybody's really got
a lot of work to do today,
just trying to help the community in charge.
Boy, you guys do great stuff.
Thank you very much.
of humanizing people, makes people feel worse
about treating them badly.
All right, so other questions?
Questions, all right.
So moving on to other games.
So now let's move on to the not as famous
but also pretty famous coordination game.
It's got a high profile in theory and policy discussion.
So here's a pretty standard representation.
So we can either move left or right.
Left or right.
Okay.
And if we both move left, then we both get an okay payoff.
We both move right, we both get a good payoff.
And if we do different things, then we both get nothing.
All right, so that's the structure of a coordination game.
If we do different things, then we get bad payoffs.
So we wanna do the same thing.
But some same things are better for both of us
than other same things.
So that's the idea.
All right, so the natural solution concept here
is pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
Where if you just take a look,
then obviously this one's gonna be
a pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
Right, this one is better than anything.
So of course that's going to be one.
But if you look at it, this one is a pure strategy
Nash equilibrium as well.
Because given that the other person is playing left,
you wanna switch over to right?
No, because then you both get zero.
Right, so you don't wanna do that.
All right, now the most obvious case of this
is literally which side of the road to drive on.
So presumably based upon human biology,
how around the world it's normal
for people to be right-handed.
So presumably there actually is one better side of the road
that's safer for human beings in general.
But if your country's riding on the left side of the road,
suppose that it's the right side of the road.
If everyone else in your country's driving
on the left side of the road,
do you wanna be the pioneer who says,
I'm gonna start driving on the other side of the road?
Probably, you probably don't.
Have you ever seen the pictures from Sweden
when that happens?
No, actually, yes.
There's, they did that in Sweden during the 1960s
and there's, even if you look it up on Wikipedia,
there's a funny picture of it.
Were there any deaths?
Yes, yeah, it was like a long transitory period
where they were training people up for it.
Do you remember hearing about that?
It was just like a top-down,
you know, hey, we're switching from the left to the right.
So for this period of time, watch out.
I don't understand.
All right, now this coordination,
the approved coordination underlies a large
and still hot policy area.
So this is often called the path dependence literature.
All right, all right, and the main idea here
is that it is possible for people to be locked
into a Pareto inferior equilibria,
or to be locked into a Pareto inferior equilibrium,
usually in the context of technology.
Usually in the context of technology.
The idea is that there could be a bunch of technologies,
some are going one to one to the best,
but if we start off with the wrong technology,
then people will just stay with that one
because nobody wants to be the only person
using some weird technology that nobody else uses.
Beta-max.
Yes, beta-max.
So the most famous example is,
which probably is barely,
you'll see, you guys have watched a videotape at some point,
have you like put a videocassette
into a machine at some point?
We had beta-max.
Yes, all right.
So anyway, back when I was a kid,
there was a great format war between VHS,
which won, and beta-max.
All right, for a very long time,
there were people saying that beta-max should have won,
it deserved to win, and was the superior technology.
And then there was a story saying
that the problem was path dependence.
VHS came on first, and then just locked in,
and then no one wanted to do something different.
This is a deeply factually wrong story
because beta-max came first.
VHS won anyway, right?
And then you're like, wow, that's kind of weird.
So it was worse, and it still won,
even though it came second.
It was worse and late, and it won.
There's actually a pretty,
while there were some clear advantages for beta-max,
so it gave you better picture quality, things like that,
but there also was a clear advantage for VHS,
which is you could fit an entire movie on one tape.
Now, clearly, every human being on Earth
values picture quality over having to get up
in the middle of a movie and switch tapes, right?
No, actually, there's a whole unwashed,
all the unwashed masses might sit there
and not even care about what the picture quality looks like,
but they don't want to have to get up out of their chair
and change the tape.
So that's another explanation,
was that VHS actually was the better technology
given the preferences of the philistines
that inhabit a narrow town,
or whatever story you want to tell.
You also remember the televisions back then were so bad,
I know it's unclear what that was a thing,
what VCR, what kind of VCR you had,
the televisions were terrible too.
Any case, so, but as you can see here,
it's possible to get locked in there.
Now, possibility is very different from proof,
and this is the thing to watch
whenever you're reading empirical applications
of this concept, because very often,
people who don't will go and start applying the model
before they know the facts, right?
I think we were gonna talk about some other example,
we'll talk about some other factual examples as we go on,
but there's two economists that are well known at GMU,
Margolis and Leibovitz, who have gone through
and debunked a bunch of very popular examples
of path dependence.
Probably the one they're most famous for
is the QWERTY keyboard.
So, now, so the anyway, so you know how,
if you just visualize typing Q,
Q-W-E-R-T-Y on a keyboard,
you're basically going to the second row
and just typing letters in order from left to right.
All right, now there's a standard story
about why keyboards look this way,
and the story goes back when we had regular typewriters
with physical keys.
Anyone ever typed on a regular physical typewriter
with keys?
Yes.
So you had to actually, the goal was to,
supposedly was to slow things down a bit,
be to avoid jamming keys.
All right, and then, supposedly,
there was an Admiral Dvorsak who went and came
with a new keyboard, which was actually better.
And it was supposedly even better
even with the problem of jamming of keys.
Anyway, so, and this story's been told repeatedly,
and then, of course, once you had computers
and computer keyboards, those keyboards don't jam
in the same way physical ones jam, right?
So then it would seem like it would make a lot of sense
to switch to a new and better keyboard configuration.
Like when you first learn to type,
do you ever ask someone why isn't it just alphabetical?
That's another possible way of doing it.
Anyway, according to Magrose Leibowitz,
the real story is that these early experiments
demonstrating the superiority of the Dvorsak keyboard
were actually done by Admiral Dvorsak himself.
And so we shouldn't put a lot of weight
in these experiments, given that the guy
is running and testing his own ideas.
There was one study that was his relative, actually.
But that was pretty much it, one study,
and it was the guy's relative.
Oh, his relative, and then, just through the game
of telephone, he's repeated over and over.
Now, here's the other interesting thing,
is that now it is actually very easy to go
and download new drivers so that you can transform
a QWERTY keyboard into any keyboard you want.
Anyone, has anyone done this?
I've tried it once with a Dvorsak keyboard.
And how'd it work out?
Well, you did it only once, I guess.
I didn't want it, like I tried for a few hours,
and I was like, I don't want to spend the time
to try and learn a new keyboard.
So, I mean, so, again, of course,
the earlier story was that nobody wants to switch
because no one wants to have to carry around
their own kind of physical typewriter wherever they go.
But now, and going, once it turned out,
you could carry around your own little keyboard,
that's not that bad.
And then finally, once you're in a world
where you can just go and download the driver
and transform any keyboard into it,
the fact that people aren't switching
suggests, again, it probably isn't that.
At least it's not nearly as strong in effect
as human-like heavy belief.
All right.
So, now, problems like this very naturally lead us
to another psychologically interesting,
the refinement of Nash equilibrium.
This one is not really formally modeled
because you really can't.
It really does come down to psychology.
But, however, a psychological idea discovered
by the great economist Thomas Schelling,
who just died very recently at his 90s.
So, you know, all economists are guaranteed
to live into their 90s.
So, all great ones.
All right.
Yes, yes.
Hmm, well, no true Scotsman.
Yeah, he was great.
All right, so anyway, Thomas Schelling
looked at problems like this and then he generalized them.
So, he came up with a very widely discussed example.
And here's the example.
All right, so suppose that tomorrow
you have to meet somebody in New York City.
You don't know the time or the place.
Where and when do you go?
Right, and he actually originally ran this
as an experiment where he had everyone in his class
write down what time you go to New York City
and write down where you go in New York City.
And I think over half the students
would have actually met each other.
All right, now what time was the standard time
for people to go and say?
Noon.
Yes, noon was the most popular one.
I think the second most popular one was midnight.
All right, so noon or midnight.
And then where?
Grand Central Station.
Yes, Grand Central Station, very popular one.
I think the other one was the top
of the Empire State Building.
So, there's a movie, Sleepless in Seattle,
where they meet at the top.
So, I think the movie might have actually changed it.
Anyway, so the point of this example
is that there's an infinity of pure strategy
in Nash Equilibria for time and place
to meet tomorrow in New York City.
So, all you wanna do is meet the other person.
You just wanna be wherever they are at the time
they're going to be there.
So, it's just like this game except
with infinite number of equilibria.
Right, and if you go to anything,
any place other than the ones on the diagonal,
then you get nothing.
And yet, somehow, in this incredibly,
in an infinite universe, most people succeeded.
Right, now, Schelling, I think, called this,
called the idea of this the focal point.
Right, and other people just called it the Schelling point.
I think not only Schelling actually named it after himself,
let's just say he wasn't that kind of a guy.
But, the idea is that some coordination equilibria
are more obvious than others.
Some coordination equilibria are more obvious than others.
And so, even though they're all equally good
in terms of the formal definition of Nash Equilibrium,
nevertheless, some are much more likely
to actually get played.
All right, now, just take a look at this game here.
What would you say is the Schelling point in that game?
Right, right.
I mean, imagine if I went and did an experiment
where you get paired up with another person,
and then the other person plays left.
Like, how angry would you be, this person?
You'd say, why on earth would you play left?
And the answer was, I only did it
because I thought you would play left.
Why would you think I would play left?
I don't know, you seem like a left kind of person.
I don't know, something like that.
So, one thing that can make an equilibrium vocal
is just being higher.
So, notice, these are two equally good Nash Equilibria.
And furthermore, they are both,
they are both, so if we move simultaneously,
these are both sub-game perfect.
There's both sub-game perfect.
So, there's nothing that is unbelievable about,
you know, given that you know someone else is playing left,
there's nothing hard to believe about them playing left, too.
All right, so, like, if you knew the other person
was gonna play left, or the other person said,
I'm gonna play left, would you then say, no, you won't.
Actually, like, given that the person is weird enough
to say they're playing left, I guess they will play left.
Which means, I guess I better play left.
So, it's sub-game perfect.
All right, anyway, so that's what it is.
Now, of course, so one thing that might make things,
that might make an equilibrium, you know, focal,
or a showing point, is just if it's a fair payoff.
But again, imagine that we're doing the meeting
in New York City, and you can eat,
and then, you know, like, you've got all these meeting ones,
but imagine that there's, you know, there's,
if you, as long as you meet, you get a payoff,
but the payoff, you know, play,
but like some payoffs are higher than others.
But imagine that some of the higher, you know,
there's some that have moderately higher payoffs,
but they're in strange locations at strange times.
So, imagine it could either be, like, 9.37 a.m.
at, you know, the Tenement Museum,
and that has a 5% higher payoff
than Grand Central Station at noon.
In that case, people might still play
Grand Central Station at noon,
just because of, like, you know, what is that one,
and would people even know where it is, and it's so weird.
So, that's a possibility.
Have you ever given someone directions to your house,
and you give them the longer directions
because they're simpler?
So, it might be that you would go and coordinate
on a simpler equilibrium that actually doesn't have
anywhere the payoffs aren't as good.
So, that's another possibility.
All right, now, in this game, you might think about
what would it take to actually make
that a reasonable prediction?
All right, so, you know, one thing is,
you know, if there were more than two players,
if there's two players, it seems very hard to believe
that wouldn't just be right, right.
But if there are 100 players,
and then there were gradual dispersion of the information
about which equilibrium actually is better,
so suppose that every turn we get a little bit more evidence
about which one is gonna be better.
So, there isn't one final, clear, unambiguous time
where you say, right, the payoffs are five, five, three, three.
Maybe at the beginning you say, I don't know,
I have a hunch that right, right will get better payoffs.
Just a hunch, who knows, I've been wrong before.
Right, and then, maybe suddenly,
then the first person might say, hmm,
that doesn't sound that good, maybe I'll play left anyway.
Right, and then, once that gets going,
you might get second left, so that's a possibility.
Let's see, so other ones that might do it.
Suppose the people believe that right was unlucky.
There's a culture where people believe that,
you know how sinister literally just means left-handed?
So, and there are cultures, well, you know,
so I think, when my wife was growing up in Romania,
they actually still held to the superstition
that left-handed people are actually evil,
there's something wrong with them,
and this has to be stopped,
and so they try to go and make you switch
to be right-handed.
So, in a culture where there was a strong
negative connotation associated with playing one way,
then that might actually change the equilibrium,
so people are doing the prayer of error thing,
that's possible.
Another one, so, one thing that would make it
more complicated is, suppose that actually
the payoffs are more like this, so.
And then suppose that 90% of people are,
let's see, are like player two,
and only 10% are like this,
but suppose that the player ones go first,
so suppose they go earlier,
so then they kind of lock it in.
Ah, oops, oops, I did something wrong here,
I was saying that to do, I meant to reverse that,
sorry, that's meant to reverse them,
so in that case, some people benefit from,
so player two's like this equilibrium,
player one's like this equilibrium,
but if the player ones go first, right?
Or, I suppose we just start off with this one,
and then some people wanna switch,
but then there's other people who say,
no, no, we're not switching,
we like it a lot the way it is.
That might lock you in.
So, for shelling points, seems like,
still a very fruitful idea,
but as far as I know, not that much has been done
besides what shelling did,
and everyone still talks about how great it was,
but the actual empirical work on it,
I haven't seen much,
so still seems like someone should do it.
Could be.
So what do you do to work, what work?
Well, how about we go and we actually do
a whole lot of psychological research
on what makes things shelling points?
Right, and we could go and do a bunch of experiments
on which manipulations will actually switch
when things are shelling points,
which ones don't work very well.
Yeah, I was just thinking about that.
Has there been much psychological type study on it?
Because no one's gonna pick 1237 as a time,
because it's not a round number or something.
Right, so I feel like it might be out there,
but I don't remember coming across it.
Psychologists generally don't,
there's some like game theory,
but game theory's not very big in psychology.
So, you need to have someone who would like game theory
and psychology and put it together,
and I know there's people out there
who fit that description,
but I at least haven't heard of much being done here.
Seems like there could be a lot more, yes?
On the notion that you said people give the longer loop,
et cetera, or something with 5% less utility,
are they acting in expectation?
Yeah, probably, yeah, so that's another story.
So maybe actually it really is better, right?
But on the other hand, there could just be,
again, just the pure coordination concern of,
if we go and agree to something that's confusing,
then actually we won't wind up doing the thing
that's confusing, and then it'll be worse
than if we just agreed on the simpler thing
that appears to be inferior.
All right, experimental evidence on this
is not too surprising, so as you might guess,
if you run this, if you do the original experiments,
so where it's three, three, five, five,
then almost everybody will play that,
and it's quite good work to get people to do three, three,
even though that's a perfectly good Nash equilibrium.
Now, let's see, I think, I don't know,
I think I might be on homework,
but it's worth thinking about it.
Now, imagine you do it sequentially.
So if you do this game sequentially,
then where it's like first left, left,
or excuse me, left, right, and then one player goes,
and the other player goes, so left, right, left, right,
right, and then put it down, so then we have zero, zero,
zero, zero, three, three, and five, five,
and as long as it's done sequentially,
then this is very easy to solve with backwards induction,
right, because if we're over this branch,
what's obviously gonna happen?
Well, what won't happen?
If the first player plays left,
what will the second player not do?
Right, so I'm gonna erase that,
and then here, if the first player plays right,
the second player is not gonna play left,
and then once you look at this,
then it's really just a choice,
do I wanna have the high payoff or the low payoff,
and so sure, I'll just play right,
so then it's pretty obvious, right.
Okay, questions about coordination games?
Everyone happy?
All right, then let's switch over to ultimatum games.
All right, so ultimatum game has also gotten
an enormous amount of attention,
yes, a hundred, I think it's fair to say,
hundreds of papers written on this game.
All right, so here's the standard setup.
So you have one player $10 to divide between himself
and another, excuse me, and another player,
and then player two can either accept
or reject the division,
and if player two accepts the division,
then whatever player one proposed happens.
If player two rejects, they both get nothing.
So that's the idea.
So if we were to go and just put it along in normal form,
then we have player one,
and player one has continuous choice,
we'll just call it T,
so T is the amount that he offers to the other player,
right, and then player two has accept or reject,
and if he accepts, then...
It accepts, then he's going to, then player one gets 10 minus t,
player two gets t, and average x, they both get zero.
All right.
So, let's see here.
All right.
Now, the solution concept that people normally use
for this is set-mean perfection.
So, player one can look ahead and say, well, I'll play, you know,
so player two might say, look, I'm not going
to accept anything less than 50-50.
But that sounds a lot like me threatening to fail anyone
who leaves the class early.
Right? Because player one can say, oh, yeah,
here's what I'm going to give you, 499.
How do you like that?
And then player number two has the choice
of either having 499 or nothing.
Right? And in terms of set-mean perfection,
it seems like he would rather have 499.
So, he'll take that offer, which means that saying that I have
to receive five is not going to be a set-mean perfect Nash
Equilibrium.
Now, is $5 and $5 just a regular Nash Equilibrium?
And the answer is sure, because if player one believes
that player two will reject anything less than five,
what does he want to offer player two?
Five. And if player two has convinced player one
that he will accept that he will reject anything less than five,
does he have any reason to offer less?
Or, you know, to indicate a greater level of pliability?
No. No, so, well, fine.
All right.
Now, so, I was doing this.
So, in terms of Nash Equilibrium,
any division, every division works, but in terms
of sub-game perfection, then it seems like the only one
that works is player one offering a penny to player two,
and player two saying a penny is better
than nothing, so I accept that.
So, the logic sounds, seems very compelling,
but there's never been an experiment
that's shown this to be true.
Except, I think there were some with,
someone with diagnosed autistics,
who actually do play Nash Equilibrium.
So, people who are highly autistic or aspy,
I don't remember what it was, but they actually, so,
they actually will accept a penny rather than nothing,
and I think they also will, at least at first, offer a penny,
and then be confused when people turn it down.
Saying, like, why would you do that?
Because I'm angry.
Why would I be angry when I played the only logical,
most logical strategy in the game?
So, it didn't seem like the only logical one to be played.
So, I think that's a good point.
It didn't seem like the only logical one to be.
Well, then you're illogical.
Then the puzzle is no longer there, is it?
You're playing against an illogical person,
and therefore you should not expect them
to play in the logical way.
But anyway, so experimentally no one does this.
The most common thing to do isn't even split
in the ultimate game.
The most common strategy is just to offer 50-50,
and when you don't do this, when you offer less,
it is fairly common for people to turn down 40% or 30%.
There was a student in my program who went to Indonesia
and then, I think, supposedly went and ran the game
for people where it was like a month's salary
that they were playing for, and even there found
that even splits were very common.
She insisted that the anonymity was clearly preserved,
although I really do have to wonder,
if you go to a remote village,
how could you ever really protect anonymity?
If it's a month's, you were playing for a month's wages,
aren't people gonna notice if you somehow seem
to have more beer money than usual,
or something like that?
But anyway, finding even there was when you were playing
for a large amount of money, nevertheless,
it is common for them to turn down uneven splits.
Once in a while, people even turn down something
that people turn down 50-50.
It's like, well, I thought I should get 60-40,
or I should get 60%.
Why?
Well, why should I even get 50%?
All right, now, is this motivated purely by spite?
This is another question that has consumed many minds,
and there is another, even more boring game
that people play in order to see whether it is
actually motivated purely by spite.
This is called the Dictator Game.
It's just like the Ultimatum Game,
except the player two must always accept.
So, the Dictator Game, player one gets the money,
he splits it up any way he wants, and the game ends.
All right, so it's a fairly dull game.
So, in the Dictator Game, even splits
are still pretty common.
I think they are less than half the time, though.
So, the frequency does go down,
but indicating that a lot of people do even splits,
even when there's nothing that the other person
can do to them, even when it's anonymous,
there's no repetition, anything else.
So, there's some kind of guilt people feel
playing the, just keeping all the money
for themselves in the game.
Now, as we're going to talk about later on,
there is something very weird about this result,
because when you think about it,
we're always playing the Dictator Game.
Right now, you have some money in your pocket,
and how much of it have you kept for yourselves
so far during this lecture?
Is anyone donating money to anyone else in this class?
Yes, yeah, so, so far, everyone has actually played
the extreme prediction of the Dictator Game
of keeping all their money for themselves.
So, there's something about the Dictator Game,
which, you know, we're just treating it like a game,
changing its behavior.
Which, you know, so I am a big fan of games,
the idea that people play things
that are labeled games differently
than what they do in real life makes perfect sense to me.
So, when I play video games,
I often nuke millions of people to death.
But I've never done this in real life,
and I wouldn't do it in real life.
But in a game, it's like, well, now you know what's coming.
You know, it's a game.
When my kids were five years old
and they were playing the game, like, this is too much,
I can't have kids, like, cackling with glee,
it's like, nuke them, three million dead, ha ha ha.
I feel bad about them doing what I do,
but I know, and then, you know,
then I was like, would they do it
if they knew they were real people?
I'm kind of worried here.
Well, if they never met them.
Yeah, so, anyway, so the idea that people
behave very differently in things
that are socially labeled games makes perfect sense to me.
And so, the fact that people in a Dictator Game
don't play in a very selfish way,
maybe that doesn't show very much, so,
at least it's an interesting thing to think about,
whether it's just the very fact we're calling it a game
actually goes and changes it, and possibly,
it's actually the games are more valid
than the experiments indicate.
And the experiments, we go and we call it a game,
and then people think, well, it's a game,
so what does one do in a game?
And whereas in real life, you maybe probably
don't think of life as being a game.
Some people do, but it's all a game.
It's all a play, it's all theater.
But, all right.
Anyway, so that is another question
that I think has not been nearly well explored enough.
To what extent does the very labeling
of something as a game change the way people play
versus making it seem like it's real life?
All right, so, Gary Becker, every now and then,
would say something like, look, economics isn't about
what people do in games, it's about actual behavior.
But wait a second, isn't what people do in games
about actual behavior, especially if they're doing it for money?
So that doesn't seem like a fully satisfying escape hatch.
All right, so why don't we go and take our 10-minute break now,
and then we will switch over to our original 2-leaf next week.
I still have some more for Jonathan Murphy.
When he won the Oliver trabalho Press Conference,
the overall, third year at Stanford,
we were at Danny Levy International Film School,
and we've been toured by Bruce Jung,
No, it's an X-Mix outline.
You should have it printed.
I think I have it.
Yeah.
So, this is, I printed this from you, so you should have it.
Oh, because I said it?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Is it better to have a little bit more margin?
I actually, this is like my clean copy that I, and then I have these, the marked up copies,
so that I have the...
Alright, anyone else?
I explained it.
Alright, let's resume.
Alright, so now we're moving into week five.
Alright, so please, please, by now, we're moving into week five.
So, although remember that in terms of the homework, you know, this is still week four,
so don't worry, lectures are not designed to be perfectly in sync with the weeks,
so it's just a rough division.
Alright, now, now we're moving into repeated games.
Now, you probably heard a lot about it already.
So, how does it change a game if you play it more than once?
Alright, so, of course, it is very common that we have the same kind of interaction
with the same people over and over again.
So, you see your coworkers day after day after day, you see your friends, your family, fellow students.
So, these are all cases where you're having the same kind of interaction with other people.
So, even if it's strategic interaction, it's still strategic interaction,
which is affected by the fact that you know you'll be doing the same thing again.
So, if players condition their behavior in one game on what happened in a previous game, what happens?
And the general answer is more equilibria may be sustainable.
So, it's a very weak claim. More may.
More equilibria may be sustainable.
Alright, so there's two main cases that we're going to consider.
The first one is the case of finite repetition, and the second one is of infinite repetition.
So, we've got the case of finite repetition, and then there's the case of infinite repetition.
Now, games that probabilistically end, but don't have any fixed upper bound on the number of turns,
count as infinitely repeated for all purposes that I'm going to tell you.
So, in other words, if there's a game where 90% of the time you get to play another turn,
and every time you play there's another 90% chance you get to play another turn,
that one counts as infinite, even though on average that game will only last 10 turns.
So, in other words, you think about it as potentially infinite, could go on forever,
so that counts as infinite.
So, when you think about it that way, you realize that the space of infinitely repeated games
is actually much bigger than it sounds at first.
At first, like, wait, how many things have happened in an infinite number of times so far?
As far as I know, nothing has ever happened in an infinite number of times.
I guess this takes you into cosmology and so on,
but it doesn't seem like things have happened in an infinite number of times.
My friend, philosophy Michael Humer, has a whole book called Approaching Infinity on the Philosophy of Infinity.
But anyway, it doesn't seem like it.
So, things very rarely happen in an infinite number of times,
but it's common that things could happen another time.
In fact, normally, like, couldn't it happen one more time?
Right, maybe you say, well, that's the last chance,
but couldn't it just be one more time, just like when there's a child who wants to stay up for another minute?
Couldn't I just stay up for one more minute?
No, but every time they ask, like, there's a chance they'll give in.
There's always a chance.
So, there's a chance I could stay up the whole night, maybe one in a hundred trillion.
But still, every time I try, I saw there's always a chance that I get another minute.
Okay.
Alright, so if the game's probabilistically end,
but they don't have a fixed upper bound to the number of games,
then they count as infinitely repeated.
Alright, now, let's think about a case where two players first play a prisoner's limit game.
Let's see. Yeah, right there.
Alright, so, then they play a coordination game.
And let's just stick with the same payoffs, because that makes life easy.
Alright.
Now, notice, so we play, as I said, so we play a prisoner's limit, then we play a coordination game.
Is this finite or infinite?
Finite.
Finite. It is a game which is composed of two games, and two is less than infinity.
Alright, so it's just two games, and we snap them together into one big game.
Okay.
Now, are the original equilibria still possible?
And the answer is yes, always.
So, whenever you do repetition, it always remains theoretically possible that what happens is,
whatever was the equilibrium of the games taken separately, this happens again.
So, we have one equilibrium where both play don't cooperate, and then both play left.
Or they both play don't cooperate, and they both play right.
So, those are always possibilities where we just take the equilibria in one game,
and the equilibrium in the other game, and we just say those things happen again.
And that's always possible.
But, there is a Pareto superior outcome that is now possible just because we've snapped together two games.
Alright, and this is going to seem really weird to you.
Based upon past experience, people find this very strange.
But, I swear to you, this is totally valid in terms of the logic of game theory.
Alright, and here is what I propose.
Suppose that each player plays left in the second game, if either player failed to play cooperate in the first game.
Right, and otherwise, they both play, and otherwise they both play right.
So, in other words, here's what I'm proposing.
So, imagine you're playing this game with me.
And I say, alright, this is what should happen.
Alright, so, if either of us ever plays don't cooperate, then we both play left.
But, if as long as we both, or as soon as, wait, did I say don't, or did I say,
if either of us ever fails to cooperate, then we both play left.
But, as long as both of us cooperate in turn one, then we both play right in turn two.
Alright, now, is this a Nash equilibrium?
Right, actually it is.
Because, think about this.
Now, you may be saying, oh, well this guy is a dummy.
You know what I'm going to do?
I'm going to say, yeah, wonderful idea.
And then I'm going to go and play don't cooperate in turn one.
Alright, now, as long as you stick to my plan, what do you get?
So, you get five in turn one, and you get five in turn two for a total of ten.
We're not doing any discounting yet, although we will do discounting as we proceed.
Anyway, so you just figure there's no discounting.
So, then we both get ten.
Sounds good.
Now, you may be thinking, ha, sucker, I'm going to go and play don't cooperate in turn one.
And then what are you going to do about it?
Well, let's find out what happens.
So, I play don't cooperate in turn one, then I get six.
And now, based upon what we said, we're both going to play left.
Now, you may say, well, I'm not going to go along with that and play left.
I'm going to play right.
So, but here's the problem.
Given that I'm playing left in turn two, what do you get when you play right in turn two?
Zero.
So, if you go and deviate, instead of getting ten, you get six.
And you say, fine, fine, I'll go and stick with left in turn one and turn two.
Then, instead of getting ten from doing it my way, you get six plus three, you get nine doing it your way.
And you have actually hurt yourself.
Right now, you may think there's something weird here.
And you know, so the only weird thing here is Nash equilibrium itself.
Well, so that may be weird.
The idea here is, remember, in Nash equilibrium, all you can do, or when you're testing Nash equilibrium,
the only question you get to ask is, holding constant with what the other person does,
can I do better if I do something different?
So, given that you know that I'm going to play left, if anyone failed to play cooperate in turn one,
then your best thing, given what I'm doing in turn two, is to play left.
And that ruins all the benefit of stabbing me in the back in turn one.
Right, and that's the amazing thing.
And notice, this is only a two-term game.
This is not a fancy infinite game or anything like that.
All I've done is I've taken two games, snapped them together,
and I have shown that there is a new equilibrium which is greater or superior to what we're able to do if the games are separate.
Remember, if the games are separate, then the only Nash equilibrium is to play don't in that game.
And then we have two over here.
But now that I have suggested conditioning behavior in turn two, what happened in turn one,
we've actually expanded the set of sustainable equilibrium.
And now it's possible to have us cooperate in turn one,
and then this weird threat of playing left in turn two leads us to go and both play right.
It leads us to not deviate in turn one, and then we both do that in the second turn.
Now, here's the thing that's really odd.
It's like, well, but why is it that you would go and carry out this punishment in turn two?
And the answer is, we're doing it together in turn two.
We're punishing ourselves in turn two.
There's collective punishment in turn two.
And given that we expect collective punishment to happen, what can either one of us do to avert that collective punishment?
Well, what can we do in turn two in order to prevent the collective punishment from hitting us both?
Both go right.
But can one person go to the is it possible for one person to both go right?
No. One person only controls his own actions.
So as long as you believe that I'm going to do what I originally said,
then you actually don't want to go and deviate from this.
So, again, if you think about the way collective punishment works, we all suffer for the sins of the one.
One person goes and messes up.
One person cheats on the exam, so I fail the whole class.
Right? We're not doing that, but imagine that.
So if this is happening, what can one person do in order to avert this disaster?
Well, how about don't cheat in the first place?
But once it's happening, then there's no way to avert it any longer.
One person can't do it.
So each person then has to live with the consequences that have occurred.
And that's the idea.
Now, of course, you may say, but the person who gets stabbed in the back really suffers.
So the person who gets stabbed in the back gets zero in turn one,
and gets three in turn two, so they go from getting ten to three.
But remember, in Nash equilibrium, are we still going to be worrying about whether the other person will suffer?
No, we're worrying about whether we will suffer.
Do I have an incentive to do something different from what was proposed?
And remember, am I saying this is the only equilibrium?
This weird thing that I just told you, is that the only equilibrium?
Not at all.
It's just a new one, it's an extra one that we didn't have before which could happen.
It's so weird that that feels like, you think that I came up with this one on my own?
No, someone told it to me.
When I was in your shoes, the rest of us said, this is something else that could happen.
I'm like, what? That's really weird.
Anyway, now that we know this, if you ever find yourself in this situation, you know what to do.
You go and say, all right, here's what I propose.
We both go our way in turn one.
And then if either person fails to do that, then in turn two we both lay left.
And then neither of us will want to do anything different from what I just said,
given that we expect that both of us will do that.
And if the other person doesn't seem convinced or seems like, yeah, yeah, great idea,
if they agree too quickly, say, no, no, no, you think that I'm a sucker, but I'm not a sucker.
I've worked this through.
You won't want to do something different.
And if they say, you won't really play left in turn two, you won't want to do it.
to say well that's not Nash equilibrium anymore as soon
as you say that.
Nash equilibrium is only saying I won't want
to play left in turn two.
It's not saying that you won't want to do it.
All right.
All right now what if we reverse the order of the two games?
So we play the coordination game first
and then the first person on the second.
All right so then what?
Well in that second turn is there any way,
is there any threat you can hang over my head then?
No because the second turn is only one equilibrium
so there isn't some other equilibrium that we could go
to punish ourselves for having done something bad.
So we reverse it so we do coordination first
and then we do person or slummer.
Then we don't have any extra equilibrium.
Right and the way to think about it is that in games
with finite and repeated games you need
to have the last turn needs to have multiple equilibrium
in order for there to be any threat, any kind of threat
in the last turn.
And then you know there could be a threat in the second
to last turn but then there needs
to be multiple equilibrium there.
So once you understand the idea of Nash equilibria then you can
set up punishments by taking advantage
of multiple equilibria.
And why do people go along with punishments?
Because since they're multiple equilibria whatever people think
is going to happen is stable.
Even if what you think is going to happen is bad for both
of you.
And why do you do what's bad for both of you?
Well what happens if one person unilaterally does something
different?
Then you go from bad to worse.
So that's fine.
You know you say look if you go and betray me I'm going to put us
in a situation where you have to choose between bad and worse.
And it's like well then I'll do bad.
Yes but if you were proper to me then it would have been a choice
between good and bad.
And then worse wouldn't be on the table at all.
Wouldn't you rather end up in a situation where we're choosing
between good and worse rather than good and bad,
rather than bad and worse?
I guess that makes sense.
It would be nice to not have to be in that bad situation.
All right.
So to repeat that in general when you have repetition you may
get more equilibrium.
There's no guarantee but it's possible.
And it's possible even when you only snap together two games.
Yes.
Yes.
I'm still having trouble.
I'm sorry I'm still having trouble.
No problem.
Almost everyone's probably having trouble
because it's really weird.
Okay so let's say we play the two games backwards.
So we do coordination first and then repetition first.
And then the presentation on the second.
Right. Can we just say like can we do the same thing?
Like can we do the same thing?
We just say okay let's coordinate like you know to play
five-five like to be right-right in the coordination game.
And if we don't, if someone like doesn't, you know someone
of the two like doesn't coordinate, right,
we're just going to punish ourselves
like you know by playing one-one.
Like you know.
Well yes so that sounds really good but here's the problem.
Since this game comes last what is everybody going
to incentive to always do?
Play one-one.
Yeah. So a threat to do something
that you're always going to do is not a threat.
So you know what I'm going to do
if you get me mad I'm going to keep breathing.
You always keep breathing so that's not a threat.
Right. Or I'm going to say you know if you've heard
of there's the old saying meetings will continue
until morale improves.
All right.
So if you always beat me then say you know what I'm going
to do if you aren't nice to me I'm going to beat you.
You beat me always.
So there's not a threat anymore because you know
like you're threatening to do.
So the whole idea of a threat is there has to be a difference
between the treatment if you do what I want and the treatment
if you don't do what I want.
But here since there's only one equilibrium and it's the last
turn that's the only thing that's going to happen.
In terms of pure game theory of course again
in the real world it may be more complicated.
But if we're just going and solving for applying the concept
of Nash equilibrium to the game then if that one comes second
then that's the only possible outcome
and then there isn't any threat you can give in the first turn.
But isn't that there's like you know there's like an incentive
for two players to play like you know like to both cooperate.
Like you know because that's going to.
In turn two?
Yeah in turn two like you know.
Well remember, remember so like suppose we're playing
so suppose we're playing with the two of us are playing
and I say oh yeah there's totally an incentive for us
to cooperate in turn two.
You're so right.
And then we get to turn two and then I go
and don't cooperate with you.
And then I get a higher payout because I didn't cooperate.
Right.
So and then you say well you're getting the punishment
for failing or for being bad in turn one.
I'm like no I'm not.
I'm actually getting more because like you know I just did
what was best for me and too bad for you.
All right.
All right.
Thanks.
Yeah so you know a general rule with game theory is
that if the game is simple, as long as it's a simple game
like these, if the equilibrium sounds weird to you it's probably
because you're solving it using psychology rather
than using game theory.
Right. So you know it really is true.
So like you know people's intuitions
about what would happen generally are born
on experimentally.
But it's not because the game theory is wrong.
You know because the logic is wrong.
It's because we, it's because people are not playing according
to logic game theory.
Or like I say you could just say
that their payoffs are not just the monetary payoffs.
There's other things going on.
Right. But still if you want to understand the logic
of the game theory and then realize human psychology doesn't
work that way.
So that's or I get it.
You know usually the best thing
to say is human psychology doesn't work quite that way.
Sometimes it's far away from it.
Sometimes it's close.
There's the, there are situations
where people play very close to the game theoretic model.
Sometimes they're very far and we need to, and we need to go
and unravel it but still understanding the game theory
helps because it lets you realize
that there's something weird about it.
Whereas like if you only knew psychology
and you saw people cooperating in the process of Islam,
then you'd probably be very tempted to say well of course
because people are worried
that the other person won't cooperate with them.
So it's a one term game.
How can that be the reason?
So, so again while the psychology will correctly tell
you that cooperation will actually be common.
It won't, you know like if you just try to go and say well
of course everyone's self-interested
as psychology tells us and then,
and then see psychology tells people cooperate.
And that's wrong.
But you know, like you know
like even if you're getting the right conclusion you're getting
for the wrong reasons and you don't understand what's
that human beings are doing.
Okay. Alright so questions about finitely repeated games.
Alright.
Yes.
Okay so, so again.
But if I believe that you would want to maximize in that second term, then second game, right?
Well, it's more than that.
You have to believe that you're going to maximize and I have to believe that you don't believe
that I'm going to do left.
Right.
But that's possible.
Yes, yes.
So it's that.
So again, remember, whenever we do Nash Equilibrium, we're just saying, if you believe that I'm
going to do what I say I'm going to do, do you want to do something different from what
you're going to do?
Right.
Right?
But yes, you can apply higher level scrutiny and say, I don't believe that either of us
is going to do what he said he was going to do.
In which case, yes, then you might get back to that same one where people don't cooperate
in term one and then they play right in term two.
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
Okay.
All right.
So even in finally repeated games, the set of Nash Equilibrium expands and you may, if
you've ever had a game theory class before at an undergraduate level, it's likely that
you actually heard that finite repetition doesn't matter and only infinite repetition matters.
That's wrong too.
Right.
So finite repetition can matter.
Totally.
And the not opinion, black letter proof, totally clear.
All right.
Again, remember, that's a weak claim.
It just says can.
You know, can a person jump ten feet?
Yes, they can.
It doesn't happen very often.
All right.
But anyway, so finite and repeated games, set of Nash Equilibria, we can do that.
Which means it either stays the same or you get more.
Right.
But it does expand less than you would think.
And here is the classic proof.
Imagine we play the prisoner's lemma a hundred times in a row.
Two people, we know who we are.
We like each term.
We see what happens.
I know whether you betrayed me or not.
All right.
And the question is, is it possible to stay in cooperation by threatening retaliation,
by saying if you don't cooperate with me, I'm going to not cooperate with you.
All right.
And in terms of the pure logic of game theory, the answer is no.
You cannot threaten non-cooperation.
And that's really weird.
Well, why not?
Well, here's the thing.
So if we both understand what's going on, then in the very last term, what will we both do?
Not cooperate.
Not cooperate.
Now, we're in the second to last turn, and you're trying to persuade me to cooperate.
What can you threaten?
You could say, if you don't cooperate with me, I won't cooperate with you in the last turn.
But the obvious response to that is, you weren't going to cooperate with me anyway.
So what kind of a threat is that?
Of course, the strategic thing is to say, oh, yeah, yeah, of course, no, I would never betray you.
All right.
And just hope they don't understand what's going on.
All right.
So in turn 100, you don't cooperate, which means that in turn 99, you cannot threaten to fail to cooperate later on
because you know you're not going to cooperate later on, which means that in turn 98,
you can't threaten to not cooperate in turn 99 or 100.
Turn 97, you can't credibly threaten that you're not going to cooperate in 98, 99, or 100.
And so we get unraveling.
We're all the way back in turn 1.
If someone says, if you betray me, then I won't cooperate with you in turn 2.
So, yeah, well, you weren't going to cooperate in turn 2 anyway because by the logic of this,
you wouldn't cooperate in 100, 99, 98, 97, so all the way back, never cooperate.
Okay.
So the idea is that since both players defect in the last turn no matter what,
threatening to defect if your opponent fails to cooperate in the second to last game isn't any deterrent at all,
so he will fail to cooperate then, and so on.
And if we push the logic back all the way, then there's no cooperation ever.
All right.
So how does this example differ from the previous case where we do a prisoner's limit followed by coordination game?
The answer is that here, although we only have two games, not 100,
but here in the second game there's two equilibria.
So we can threaten to go and put us into an inferior equilibria in order to get some punishments.
But in this prisoner's limit one, each game only has one equilibria,
and so there doesn't seem like there's anything you can really threaten.
So with two equilibria, we can threaten a funny kind of revenge.
I'm going to send us to the bad equilibria.
It's like, well, why?
Well, like, won't we want to get out?
No, because it's an equilibria.
You know, like, once you're in an equilibria, you don't want to get out of it.
It's the best thing.
Like, at least one person does not want to unilaterally try to get out of it
because then you're even worse off.
Okay.
But if the game is dominant solvable, then there is a second equilibrium out there,
and then there's no threat.
Now, of course, what happens experimentally?
Based upon that rule that your psychology gives you the correct answer, not the game theory?
Yes.
So what do all normal human beings expect will happen if you repeat a prisoner's limit 100 times?
You get a lot of cooperation, and that's what really happens.
And when does the cooperation start breaking down?
Somewhere in the 90s.
So, like, 98, 97, maybe 93 if you're the really paranoid person.
So that's what really happens.
Okay.
So you get more cooperation than you would in a one-shot game,
and in fact you get a lot of cooperation.
All right.
Yes.
So is an appropriate way to kind of think of this as a variation of the centipede game?
The centipede game is very similar.
Yeah, same idea.
Now, there are actually formal models that try to understand why you might get cooperation
if I repeat a prisoner's limit.
So there's even the Nobel Prize winner Reinhard Zeltmann.
Part of what he got, the main thing was actually called the chain store paradox,
and the idea of his model, which can be applied very easily to a prisoner's limit,
is just to say, suppose there's a small probability that your opponent does not have that payoff.
Suppose there's a small probability your opponent doesn't like betraying people.
All right.
Or you could just say, well, there's a small probability the opponent is confused about the game.
That also is another way of interpreting it.
What happens then?
And what Zeltmann proves is that if you have a lot of repetition,
a very small degree of doubt about whether about payoffs
or about whether the other person understands the game can lead to very high levels of cooperation.
And intuitively, if the game is going to go on for 100 turns
and there's a small chance the person will cooperate with you for a long time,
do you want to go and mess it up by immediately betraying him?
No.
You want to say, yeah, maybe there's like a 2% chance this person doesn't understand the game,
so why don't I just play nice and let the game proceed and proceed and proceed,
and then towards the end, then I'll stab him in the back.
And of course, if both sides can have the same shadow of a doubt, the same suspicion,
maybe the other person doesn't understand the game.
And what Zeltmann proves is that as the number of finite repetitions increases,
the amount of doubt you need in order to sustain cooperation for most of the game becomes very small.
So there could be like a 1% chance the other person doesn't understand the game or just has a conscience.
So if there's a 1% chance of either of those things, then even though in fact neither person has a conscience,
that little bit of doubt can lead to cooperation almost to the end.
Now, they still betray in the very last turn or a little bit earlier,
depending upon the exact values of the variables.
But anyway, that's your initial result.
And if you think about, if you happen to be in the real world in this situation,
I think you would be crazy to go and betray the other person in the first turn.
I mean, we say, what if it's like a PhD in economics, a game theorist?
Then I would still be crazy to go and betray the person in turn one.
I mean, even if it is, so like Gordon Tullock, he famously was in a repeated prisoner slave tournament,
and his strategy was never cooperate.
And he came in almost last, I think, in terms of how well his algorithm did.
This is the one where tit for tat, he had won, you may have heard him tell it.
I think in the original line of Axelrod said, and there's one economist who said never cooperate,
and that was Tullock, actually.
And Tullock did terribly in terms of the tournament.
So, if you ever find yourself in this situation, what makes sense to do?
Even if the other person is Gordon Tullock, still, if I were playing against Gordon Tullock,
I would just cooperate, and then look at me and insult my intelligence and say,
I thought you were a PhD in economics, Brian, and you're playing a moronic strategy.
I'm like, well, that's just how I am, Gordon, I do moronic strategies.
And he's like, you sure do.
And then I'd play a couple more turns, and then I think even Tullock would start to say,
this guy's really confused, a mush head.
And even Tullock might say, I don't want to ruin a good thing here.
Fine, I'll cooperate.
Now, after like five times of him not cooperating with me, then I just give up on him.
But I just say, no, I'm just like a nice guy, I don't want to play this cutthroat way of going,
I can't sleep at night thinking about him.
Just play up, play up, play up how you're just a kind, decent person.
And also act in a way that suggests maybe he is.
And then, of course, I'm around turn 93, and stab Gordon in the back.
Ha! That's what you get, Gordon.
Maybe.
So that's what I would advise in the real world.
You can think about what you would do in that situation.
Certainly if you're playing against a non-economist,
the idea that you want to immediately start betraying this person for a game that's going to last for 100 turns
sounds very foolish to me.
And you say, well, maybe he's just pretending to not understand the game.
Yeah, but maybe he really doesn't understand it, or maybe his payoffs are not based upon money alone.
Is it possible there's a human being like that somewhere on Earth?
But even if you're both pretending?
Yes, but you don't know that you're pretending.
That's how Zeltin's proof works.
There's got to be some genuine doubt.
Because otherwise, if you can read each other's minds, and your telepathy says,
boy, the other person doesn't realize that I'm totally selfish.
Oh, wait, now he does.
So you're both reading each other's minds, and then it gives away, and then it ruins it.
Which is an interesting example of how better information can actually lead to a worse result.
It's totally possible.
But it's really, if I know you're pretending, but you don't know I know.
That's also enough doubt to make it work.
That's enough doubt for both of us to go along and say,
well, it was one of us saying, I don't know if he's pretending.
And the other one saying, well, like he doesn't know.
So, yes, that would be enough.
So for one, there could be a genuine chance, and the other one, it could just be wishful thinking.
And that could still sustain it.
Okay, so, questions about that?
Again, if not 100 turns, imagine a million turns.
Imagine you're stuck in an afterlife with a person.
And are you really going to say, well, he won't cooperate and turn a million,
so he won't cooperate and turn a million minus one, so he won't cooperate and turn a million minus two,
so I'm never going to cooperate for a million years stuck in here with this person.
It's a case where, look, try something else.
See what happens, at least.
All right.
Yes?
I assume if you did straight prisoner's dilemmas, but then you stuck a coordination game on the very end, on the last one,
then you can get some cooperation going.
Maybe.
So, again, that depends upon the values.
So, yeah, there's the problem.
Let's see.
So would that actually work?
So let's see.
So let's see.
So, yeah, so I think actually tacking one on could work, because then in the very last turn,
then you might say, okay, I will cooperate there so that we have the good equilibrium in that one.
And then in the second to last one, you may say, well, now there's the threat to not cooperate in the very last one.
So, yeah, that actually might be one game with a very modest payoff might be enough to move the entire system enormously.
Again, it does depend upon the size of the payoffs and everything else.
But, yeah, that one thing at the very end could be enough to alter the entire game.
You have the package of bread, I guess, right, that I will defect if you don't cooperate?
Yes.
So we'll both go, like, we'll play left-left if there was ever any failure of cooperation.
Now, again, in the real world, there's also the problem sometimes people just write down the wrong strategy.
They meant to cooperate, they don't.
We won't talk about it in mathematical terms.
but there's a formal game theory, a concept called trembling hands perfection.
The idea that your hand might tremble when you're playing,
and then you accidentally play the wrong thing.
And in the real world, this is a serious issue, right?
How many times have you accidentally done something that you didn't mean to do?
Think about like with a friend, you must open your mouth and you said something,
that after you said it, like that sounded like a terrible thing to say,
but I still want to be your friend.
And if you were playing the strategy of anytime a friend ever hurts my feelings,
I'm never their friend again, then you probably have no friends anymore.
Right?
Right? Because the odds that you'll accidentally say something that in hindsight
was an insensitive, boorish thing to say, rises to one.
Right?
Or either that or there's also, there's something I always want to tell people is look,
sure I could avoid ever hurting anyone's feelings, but then I'd also be boring.
So, again, I won't want my friends to make never hurting my feelings their priority.
I want them to be considering the entertainment value of what they're saying,
as well as my feelings.
And so, and there's a trade-off where if you're more careful,
then you hurt fewer feelings, but you're also less fun.
So, I'd rather go with the more fun option.
Right? And just say, yeah, well, like, you know, like,
well, I should like one thing, come on, man.
Like, you know, we know each other so long, I know what you meant.
All right? So, we'll do that.
All right.
But, you know, in general, when you have, when you have punishment strategies,
where like you cross me once and then I will get, die a revenge on you forever,
those are the real world, and again, in a game theory problem,
those can be great strategies, but in the real world, they're a bad idea
because people accidentally do things.
People accidentally step on your shoes.
You know, people accidentally go and scratch you, or drool on you.
These things happen all the time.
And sometimes they meant to do it, and other times it's just an accident.
And, yeah, you know, like, they could have taken more precautions,
but then we lose other great things.
You know, yes, someone could just always talk to you ten feet away,
and then they'll never accidentally spit on you, but, you know,
then there's other problems with that.
Okay. All right.
So, questions, questions.
All right. So, now, delving straight into infinite and repeated games.
All right. So, of course, few games literally last forever.
In fact, so far, no games have lasted forever.
But many games always have a chance to continue.
Even if you're 101 years old, is there a chance you'll make it till tomorrow?
Of course.
One of the funnest articles on Wikipedia is the list of the longest,
of the oldest living human beings.
And I think there's actually a script in there that every day updates,
either you're dead or you're another day older.
And then, you know, and then anytime someone dies, everyone below moves up.
All right.
So, and, you know, Matt and I, like, by doing the, you know,
you think, like, the oldest person in the world.
Like, yeah, he's going to be dead by tomorrow.
Usually not.
Usually the oldest person in the world today is still the oldest person in the world tomorrow.
He's even older than he was yesterday.
But then, every now and then, that person dies.
And then, the next, and then there's another person who's way younger.
All right. So, anyway, I love articles like this.
Right. All right.
So, obviously, anyway, so many games always have a chance to continue.
You can be the oldest person in the world, and yet maybe you'll be around tomorrow
to get revenge on me for going and insulting you.
Or, you know, like, I don't know, you can imagine there's, like, Twitter wars
between the oldest people in the world saying, you know,
I'm going to be number one soon.
Nothing you can do about it.
He's on his last legs, ha.
And then say, oh, yeah.
I don't believe this actually happened.
I mean, you know, if you were number one or number two, you might say,
I think we get a lot more publicity for our remarkable achievements and longevity
if we just faked a public dispute.
There's a great word in professional wrestling for this.
It's called kayfabe.
This is where two people actually have no problem with each other personally
pretend to be mortal enemies to get attention.
And it works.
Okay. All right.
So, anyway, as long as there is a chance that a game continues,
game theorists call them infinitely repeated, and the theorems that we're going to talk about
apply to all those situations.
So, with infinite repetition, this unraveling logic no longer applies
because we can't go to the last turn and say no one cooperated in the last turn
because there is no last turn because it's infinite.
All right. So, there's no highest number, right?
Anyone disagree?
And if so, give me the highest number and I will tell you a higher number than that.
For any number, I know a higher number.
All right. One plus whatever you say.
All right. That's what infinity is all about.
Okay. So, if there's always a higher one, then there is no last turn,
therefore, there's no unraveling.
And, again, just think about the logic of unraveling.
There's a string sticking out at the end,
and then you start pulling it, and then it ruins the shirt.
But if it's an infinite shirt, you can't go to the end of the shirt.
And so it can't unravel.
And, again, see Michael Hume's approach to infinity
if you want to read about a bunch of weird puzzles involving infinity.
All right. I guess we don't have time, but there's some really great ones.
All right. I don't even care about infinity,
but the book was so good, I cared while I was reading the book.
That's enough. One book about infinity, I don't need anymore.
All right. So, anyway.
So, with infinite repetition, you can always threaten to punish someone later on,
because it's always later on,
and now the intuition of retaliation is always available.
There's always a way I can threaten.
Even if we don't know for sure that the game will continue,
you can still say you don't know that it won't continue,
so maybe what comes around goes around.
All right. And you say, well, prove that you'll get revenge.
That's not necessary.
I'm just going to keep you awake at night, worrying that maybe revenge will happen.
If revenge is bad enough, a small chance could be enough to scare you.
So, a similar example is the infinitely repeated prisoner's lemma.
Go back to that case. All right.
Suppose we make the most extreme possible threat,
which has a special naming game theory.
It is called a trigger strategy.
A trigger strategy, this is what means is the most extreme conceivable threat
that I would ever want to do.
All right. And I believe that it comes from the idea of,
I have my finger on the trigger, and I will kill you,
or launch my entire nuclear arsenal at you, if you have crossed me.
All right. So, the idea of the trigger strategy in the prisoner's lemma
is if you fail to cooperate once, if you ever play double,
I will never, ever cooperate again for all eternity.
And since it's an infinitely repeated game, it really does mean all eternity,
although it might just be probabilistic eternity, right?
It might just be, you know, eternity until eternity ends,
but there's always a chance it keeps going on, so that's enough.
All right.
So, now once we're talking about affinities,
we need to have discount factors in order to make, in order to get finite numbers,
so we will impose a discount factor.
All right. So, suppose that we discount the future.
We'll apply a discount factor beta.
So, we've already used beta before as a discount factor.
So, remember, a high beta means that we are patient or impatient.
High beta means which one?
Patient, yes.
So, we multiply our future payouts by beta.
If it's one period in the future, by beta squared, if it's two periods in the future.
So, if beta's one, then we care about the future as much as the present.
And the smaller it gets, the less we care about the future.
So, if it's.9, then we care about the future,
if.90% as much as the present, one turnout.
If it's.7, 70% as much, and so on.
Okay. All right.
So, now also, another interpretation is that
we don't discount the future, but the game ends with probability beta every turn.
Equally fine. All right.
So, is this Nash equilibrium?
And now we just go back to, let's see,
what grade do you do infinite sums?
I think I did it in ninth grade.
All right. So, ninth grade, year of infinite sums,
maybe tenth grade, maybe a little earlier.
Anyway, so, infinite sums, remember those.
Or actually, you probably did infinite sums in macro last semester, right?
Did you do infinite sums in macro?
A little bit? No?
Did you do infinite sums in macro this semester?
Okay. All right.
So, what do you get if you cooperate?
If you cooperate, you get five for eternity.
So, you get sigma from t equals zero to infinity of beta raised to the t times five.
All right. And then, if you remember the formula for infinite sums,
that will be equal to five over one minus beta.
All right. And if you're wondering, like, where does that come from,
this is actually one of the very few proofs about infinity that I remember.
So, it goes like this.
So, if we have five plus five times beta plus five times beta squared, so on,
and what does that equal to?
So, what does that equal?
Right. Well, here's what you can do.
So, let's multiply this whole series by beta, and then we'll have five beta plus five beta squared plus,
let's call it, it should be zero, it should be equal to x.
That thing equals beta times x.
All right. And now, we just take this thing here and subtract it from this thing.
Right. So, take this whole second equation, subtract it from the first equation,
and then we have five equals what?
So, five equals one minus beta times x, and then we just divide through by one minus beta,
and we have x equals five over one minus beta.
All right. So, that's a proof about infinity.
All right. So, we have all these terms cancel, cancel, cancel, all the way out to infinity.
All right. So, all right.
Okay. So, anyway, that's what we get if we always cooperate.
Now, what happens if we defect? So, we defect, but then we're playing trigger strategy.
So, that means that when we defect for one term, we get six instead of five.
So, that's good. All right.
But, on the other hand, after that, what do we get forever?
One. Right. Because all cooperation is in it, all cooperation is ended.
So, now, if we don't cooperate, we're going to get six plus the infinite sum from t equals one to infinity of just beta raised to t.
We can say beta raised to t times one, same thing. All right.
And that's going to be equal to six plus beta over one minus beta. All right.
So, now, to find out whether trigger strategies in this infinite repeat depression dilemma are in fact a Nash equilibrium,
we just need to see whether we get a higher payoff by defecting than we do by cooperating.
So, if we cooperate, as we've seen, we get this. And if we don't cooperate, we get that.
If we defect, we get that. So, therefore, we just need to solve for five over one minus beta.
Find out when is that greater than or equal to six plus beta over one minus beta. Right.
And we can then get a critical value of beta.
Beta star is the critical value of beta equals one-fifth.
So, and we need to have beta greater than or equal to one-fifth in order for there to be cooperation.
So, as long as beta is greater than or equal to one-fifth, then cooperating forever with the help of trigger strategies is a Nash equilibrium.
Is it the only Nash equilibrium? No.
There's a Nash equilibrium where we never cooperate. That one's fine, too.
But we got a new one. Because of infinite repetition,
we now have a new and much socially improved equilibrium where we cooperate for all eternity instead of never cooperating for all eternity.
Now, notice, if we didn't have discounting, then repeated claims are no brainer because there would be the finite gain from cheating and the infinite punishment from retaliation.
And is it ever worth giving up a finite thing for an infinite thing? Of course not.
So, that's the basis, of course, for Pascal's nature, although there's other problems with that argument.
But if you really knew for sure that you're giving up a finite thing to get an infinite thing,
well then, who would be so dumb as to say, I like finite things more?
Because the infinite thing is infinitely more than that thing.
So, are the recolibri sustainable? And of course, you might not cooperate at all.
And then, of course, there are weaker punishments that you can impose.
There are weaker punishments that you can impose. You might say, I'm only going to punish for one period.
And then return to cooperation.
In general, the weaker the punishment, the higher beta has to be to give you cooperation.
So, if you just give someone a slap on the wrist, then you need to be more patient in order for that weaker punishment to commence with cooperation.
And one interesting application, so suppose we have two people in this game.
And suppose one of them, so we have this critical value of 1 5th.
Suppose that one of them has a beta of, say, 0.9 and the other one has a beta of 0.19.
So, one person is way above the critical beta, the like of 0.9, and the other one is slightly below.
So, that's, you know, that's 0.2, you know, that one is slightly below 0.19.
Can these people cooperate?
What do you think?
Let's see, in order for cooperation to last, what fraction of the people must do it?
All of them.
So, you know, so this is the case, you have to look at the weakest link.
You have to look at the person who is most likely to betray, and if that person betrays, then the deal is not working, you don't have an ash equilibrium.
Right?
You know, just like if you've got five friends and you all say, all right, we're not going to tell the teacher what we did.
And then the teacher says, well, I'm going to have to call all of your parents.
And you look around and you see your friend who's the easiest nut to crack, the one who's most likely to cave in.
Right? And so if you want your cooperation to work, you need to have the person most likely to rat you out, not rat you out.
All right, questions? Questions about this?
Yeah, Nathan.
Why does the infinite sum on the second one go to beta over 1 minus 1 instead of 1 over 1?
So, let's see.
So, that is a great question.
So, the answer is that that's because we're starting at t equals 1 rather than t equals 0.
Oh, that makes sense.
Because you get one turn of the high payoff and then for turns 1 through infinity, then you get the low payoff.
Okay.
Right?
And if you want to convince yourself, you can actually just go and do it like this.
Because, here, let's see.
What should I erase?
I'll erase this.
You never go beta to the 0, so you never have a 1 term ever getting to your mind.
Yeah, exactly.
So, if we were trying to figure out the value of 6 plus beta plus beta squared, so on, equals x.
And then if we wanted to go and multiply through, then let's see, what do we do?
So, and then we could go and multiply through by beta.
So, yeah, so multiply through by beta, then we have, let's see, what do we have here?
No 6.
So.
No 6.
Yes.
No 6.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's right.
So, alpha 6, of course, and then we have 6 plus, and then that thing.
Yes, that's right.
And then, and then we can multiply that through, we can multiply through by beta, and then
you'll end up with beta squared plus beta cubed, so on, equals beta x.
And then we go and subtract through all of the terms from infinity on cancel, and then
we're clear.
Okay.
Now, there's something called the Foucault Theorem.
This is a very weird case in the history of economic thought, because normally when there's
a famous idea, there are two, there's at least one, and usually more people claiming that
they came up with it.
All right, so, so there are often fights over who really came up with an idea, but normally
there's at least one person who says that was my idea, and then there's sometimes other
people.
What's the Foucault Theorem, though, is an idea where it became well known, but people
could not actually assign authorship to it.
So, it is unclear who actually came up with the original Foucault Theorem, but it became
well known before or without any clear authorship.
And what the Foucault Theorem says is that if cooperation is sustainable at all, there
will normally be an infinite number of equilibria.
And essentially, as you vary the punishments, then that just changes what the equilibrium
is.
So, but as long as we've got anything sustainable, then we can make the punishments a little
bit laxer, and that would change the equilibrium, and a little bit laxer, and that would change
the equilibrium.
And then if it's a continuous world, then everything in between gives rise to an equilibrium,
and so on.
Equilibrium.
Okay.
All right, so Foucault Theorem tells us that if repetition matters, if we're getting new
equilibria, then normally we're getting an infinite number of new equilibria.
Right?
And then what actually happens in a world where there's an infinity of equilibria?
Well, it's very much like a coordination game where you, at least one place to start is
with Thomas Schelling and Foucault points.
So, in the trigger strategy, that sounds pretty Foucault, right?
Trigger strategy sounds like it's very believable, and if you think about human beings that you
know, how many people have lost a friend over one stupid incident?
Like, you didn't, you forgot my mom's birthday.
You'll never forgive that person.
Right?
So, I know so many people who have lost friends over a very small incident, and they seem
to be doing something like trigger strategies.
There's a list of rules.
If a rule is ever broken, the relationship is terminated for all time.
And, like, but it's such a small rule.
It doesn't matter.
Any rule, any rule over small, that's it.
Relationship's over.
Maximum punishment.
All right, so, that has a lot of appeal to people.
So, especially in Eastern Europe, in my experience.
Among Eastern Europeans that I know, there's a lot of purging going on over offenses so
small, it's hard, they're hard even to explain to other people, but they will assure you,
you don't understand.
It's simply not done.
What was done, like, how about forgiving?
That's not done either.
So, all right, I'm not going to cross you then, but I also don't understand your rules,
so I'm, it's a confusing situation.
All right.
Ah, yes.
I have also adjudicated conflicts between Eastern Europeans and non-Eastern Europeans,
where I've just told the non-Eastern Europeans, look, just apologize.
It's the only way this can improve.
But, I understand what you're saying, but just apologize.
It's the only way.
There's no other path forward.
All right, all right, I don't like this idea.
I don't like it either.
I'm not telling you to apologize, I'm saying that it's either that or the end.
All right, that can happen.
So, trigger strategy, that's one thing that's very focal, and again, you can easily see
that being very psychologically easy for people to believe.
I mean, just think about little kids, how they talk, and listen to little kids.
I will never play with you again if you do that.
So, it must cover deep within kids, even very small kids.
children who are not thinking a lot about strategy, it's one of the very first threats
that occurs to them. I will never play with you again, I will never talk to you again,
that's it. But there's some other psychologically plausible ones. So how about eye for an eye?
If you do something bad to me, I do the same thing, not worse. I don't do two eyes, I don't
kill you for an eye. Take one eye and then we're back to peace. So that sounds pretty
vocal too. Or how about you kill one person in my family so I kill one person in your
family? Doesn't sound very fair, but it has a certain psychological appeal, doesn't it?
So if you heard people say, if you heard, like you're watching a movie about, you know,
about a clan conflict and someone said it, you wouldn't say, where'd they get that idea
from? And some of you might say, well, it's barbaric, but also super appealing. It's like
one life for a life. And then you say, but it's two different people. The person you're
killing had nothing to do with it. Well, you should have read all day arguing about who's
responsible for what. But the rule is, one life for a life. So you can do it that way.
And then there's other much nicer ones. So I think I already mentioned tit for tat as
a strategy. This is a strategy where someone doesn't cooperate with you once and actually
in the most famous experiment, it was actually in a fight in a repeated prisoner's lemma.
In a repeated prisoner's lemma, tit for tat said, if you don't cooperate with me, then
I don't cooperate with you next turn. And then after that, and then I just do whatever
you did to me. So that also has some appeal. So saying, if you cross me, I get my small
revenge. And then as long as you go back to cooperating, I go back to cooperating. So
that also has some appeal. Let's see. Some other shelling points. How about just imposing
a customary punishment? So in our culture, if you go and cut off a person's hand, you
owe them three pieces of gold. That could be another way of doing it. All right, so
cut off a hand, pay three pieces of gold, and then we got peace again. So you could
do it that way. Let's see. What are some other ones? Here's one that actually we use a lot.
How about if you hurt me and then you say you're sorry and appear to mean it, then things
go back to normal? This is one that's very commonly used. Someone steps on your foot.
Actually, once I was driving Gordon Tal to lunch, and he picked up my car door and sort
of flung it at the door of the person right now, of the adjacent car. And the owner happened
to be right there and see it and started yelling at him. And Gordon was like, well, I don't
know what you want me to do. Does the person want money or what? And then whoever was with
it, just as Gordon, I think she just wants an apology. And then he went, I don't know.
And the other person didn't say apology except for anything, but just, all right. But anyway,
then we drove off and nothing more happened as far as I know. So apologizing works. Of
course, there's also some rules about how many times you can apologize for the same
thing before the apology seems to be taken very seriously. Or maybe the apologies have
to become increasingly abject and pathetic. So finally, you have to do the full on your
hands and knees. I'm worthless. All right, so that's one. These are all different possible
focal points to think about. All right. So what happens, so just like with coordination
games, focal points probably matter a lot, but they're very hard to formally model. A
lot of this is culturally specific. So some cultures, apologies are super important. Others,
apology is almost just adding a further insult. He thought he could just say, I'm sorry, that
would be good enough. That makes me even madder. So there's people like that. And so in all
this, thinking about focal points matters a lot. All right, so questions? All right.
Now let's think about another application of repetition. Self-have reputation. A very
common story that economists have about why people appear to be losing money on purpose
is to safeguard their reputation. So like why is it that Costco lets you return anything
with no good explanation about why you're returning it? You go and you buy a product
and then you open it up and more or less ruin it. And then you give it back to them, but
like the things, the cord hanging out of the box and all ripped and like who would ever
want this thing again? And then they say, and why are you returning it? I don't like
it. And then they give you your money back. All right, so why does this happen? All right,
and economists' usual answer is reputation. Costco is concerned to protect its reputation.
So does it make sense? And the answer is yes. So this logic of repeated play allows reputation
to matter. And it matters even if there's some one-shot interaction as long as people
know about the interaction. All right, so imagine you've got a store around that decides
whether to cheat or not to be a customer. And then there's a whole series of customers
only by once. So imagine that there, in other words, think that there could be a hotel where
every person who sleeps in the hotel only sleeps there once. So the individual never
has any repeat business with the hotel, but they do repeat their experiences to other
people. They do talk about it. So other people do find out about what happened. All right,
so let's set up the payoffs to be something like this. Suppose the store can either cheat
or don't cheat. And then customers have the choice of either buying or don't buy. And
then, of course, if the customers don't buy, then there's no transactions, and nobody makes
any money, and nobody gets any benefits. And if the store cheats, then it gets a good payoff
because it gives you a crummy product for a high price or for a normal price. And you're
worse off because you would have been better off if it's not buying, and so it's a bad
deal. But then if the store were not to cheat, it would get some profit, and you would get
some surplus. All right, so if there's only one turn, then using weak dominance, it always
makes sense for the store to cheat. If there's only one turn, there's no repetition, then
the store always does better by cheating. It either gets 10 instead of 5 or 0 instead
of 0, so why not cheat all the time? And then, of course, the customers know the store's
always cheating. What do customers always want to do?
Go and buy.
Go and buy. All right. But suppose the customers know if the store has ever cheated in the
past. So they know how you treat other customers, and that allows them to play buy if nobody's
ever cheated in the past, and then don't buy otherwise. Right now, the incentives are different.
So now the store is only going to want to cheat if the infinite sum of the payoff from
cheating exceeds the infinite payoff of the sum for not cheating. So again, here, we've
set it up so that the cooperative payoff is that. So if you don't cheat, you get 5 over
1 minus beta. And if you do cheat, then you get 10 in the one turn, and then you get the
infinite sum from t equals infinity to 1 of beta raised to the t times 0. That, of course,
is just 0. So then we have a really easy problem to solve. And again, here we have beta needs
to be greater than or equal to 0.5.
All right. So this is a really simple model of reputation. The logic is very clear. And
again, remember, we don't need the customers to actually be repeatedly interacting with
the store. All we need is that there is a series of interactions and that people find
out what's happened in the past.
Now, the applications of the reputational models like this are endless. And we have
maybe the entire economics of progression's greatest expert on reputation right here at
George Mason, Dan Klein. He has a whole book called Reputation, which brings together a
whole lot of work on the subject. Dan actually tries to be the change that he wants to see
in the world. So he often will email people reputational emails saying this product deserves
a good reputation or this product deserves a bad reputation. And so he and she are trying
to make the reputation mechanism work more effectively.
All right. It's got an enormous number of applications. So for starters, reputation
is the main market alternative to regulation of product quality and things like that. So
of course, it's very common for economists to go and start blathering on about the importance
of a legal system. Has anyone here ever sued anyone? Ever? Ever anyone ever been sued?
No? Have you ever used the reputation of a product to decide whether to buy it or not?
All the time. Right? So in the real world, the threat of lawsuits is actually pretty
relevant. And again, if you just think of what's involved in suing somebody and all
the work and how would it be and would I win and what would I even get if I did win, that's
a pain in the neck. So when people act like the threat to go and sue your restaurant is
the main thing that protects the insurance quality, that's just stupid.
Clearly, what primarily matters is repeat business, not just yours, although that matters,
but word of mouth and what you say. And now, of course, word of the elf. So word of mouth
is no longer just from person to person. It is from person to the entire internet.
All right. So there's so many ways that you can go and apply reputation. Here I will repeat
one of my all-time favorite convincing somebody stories. So when I was in graduate school,
I was emailing with my Econ One teacher, Bill Dickens, a lot. And one of our many topics
of disagreement was me saying, you don't need regulation for all these things. Reputation
works as well. And him saying, reputation, I mean, that might work to some degree, but
you can't really rely on it that much. You need regulation to actually get things working.
And then around 2000, he just spontaneously said, remember how we were arguing about reputation?
You were right, because I wouldn't have believed that all this e-commerce could even have happened,
but it did. All right. I'm like, wow. I got an admission that I was right without having
to make any effort, without reminding him. I can like do now admit that you were wrong.
It's a spontaneous confession. I was like, wow, like how this happens just a few times
in a lifetime. But when it does, once a young, I remember arguing with my dad about legalizing
drugs in high school. And then like 20 years later, he said, you know, Brian, I think you
might be right about legalizing drugs. I'm like, wow. My dad, first of all, remembers
what I said, and then has changed his mind. It's so out of character, not just for him,
but for any human being. All right. So, yeah. Anyway, so I mean, the reputation, of course,
has been important in the market economy forever, but the internet has made it much more obvious
that it's really important, because now there are much better aggregation mechanisms. I
mean, I will say that 20 years ago, if you wanted to find out like what's the best kind
of nail clipper, I really don't know how you would have done that back then. You would
go and ask people, what are great nail clippers? I'm like, I don't even remember what nail
clipper I use. I don't know. Whereas now you can go to Amazon and you can find 5,000 reviews.
These nail clippers are awesome. Then you get them, and they are awesome. These are
fantastic nail clippers. I don't even remember what they are, but I know how to get more
of them if I ever want to get more fantastic nail clippers. All right.
Right. Now, of course, so ease of detection, how does that affect reputational incentives?
So pretty obviously, if it is easier to find out what the quality of the product is, that
does help with the reputational incentives. Although even if there's a thick market, if
even 1% of people are going and sharing what they've learned, that can be enough to deliver
a whole lot of evidence. Now, in the real world, of course, there's
always the concern that the sellers themselves went and written fake reviews or the sock
puppetry, or you made your friends or family write a bunch of reviews. That's why I often
just get straight to the negative reviews and say, what do the negative reviews say?
Right. And if they start saying things like the mail, the post office damaged the box,
all right, well, I'm not going to count that. Or again, things like, I mean, sometimes they're
like, stubbed my toe the day after I bought it, like really dumb complaints. All right.
So, or if the complaints are just completely random, then that's why, all right, so this
is just what you'd expect in a world of crazy people and complainers.
So and as you may know, there's actually double side review systems. So on eBay, sellers can
review customers, which normally, like Airbnb, that's more important. Someone trashes your
place, then you go and say, this person's a terrible tenant, you don't want to have
them. I know that my dad runs a big eBay, well, a medium-sized eBay business in the
market for used antique auto parts. And there is a person, a customer, that is known to
be horrible. And he, like, he basically can do everything he can for him and still give
you a one-star review. So he has been, you know, like, word has gotten around, and now
no one wants to do business with him, so he can't buy anything from you and then write
an angry review of you. And then I think he does try to come up with fake identities,
but people pretty familiar with that. It's Joe again, trying to slip his way back into
the system, buy stuff, complain, and then he has one-star reviews. So there are, as
I mentioned in the first week's class, just people with very strange motives and hate
in their hearts. Well, they're hard to understand, but they're out there. So, you know, even
the best firms do not have 100% good reviews. So that's where you like, is it like 98, 99,
97, or that remaining percent, it can just be chalked up to some, there's no pleasing
some people. But, you know, if it's down into like the 70s, then you're like, hmm, this
is concerning. I'm still waiting to find any kind of auto shop in the Fairfax area where
the Yelp reviews are like much above three. So like there, even Yelp has not actually
pinpointed any actually good place that has come, you know, there are good places, but
you have to drive 20 miles. So I don't feel like, I don't feel, I'm not that dissatisfied,
but I would like to find a actually good place somewhere around here. If you know, you can
let us all know, actually. You can be Deck Klein and go and share. All right. Now, something
that is very rarely considered, but I think it is, and it's actually really important
when you think about it, is reputation isn't just about quality, it's also about prices.
Customers want to have reputations for the kinds of prices they have because normally
by the time you get to a store, you probably at that point have very, have highly inelastic
demands. Right. So once you have already made the trip to a store, if it turns out that
milk is 50% more than you were expecting, you probably aren't going to say, fine, I'm
leaving, I'm going to go buy the milk at another store. Instead, you are likely to go and pay
the high price once you're there and then say, I don't want to come back here. Right.
At least you're going to reconsider which store you want to be shopping at. And you
can see this very clearly in franchises. So for example, 7-Eleven actually has rules about
how high the prices can be. I know this because there was one guy in my graduate class who
had actually worked the night shift at a 7-Eleven and he and his friends, to pass the time,
decided to play the game of charge the customer the highest price you can say in the straight
face. So people would come up with products and then they would just make up prices to
be funny, high prices. And they would just, you know, a pack of gum. It would be $1.95.
Right. And normally people would just pay whatever you ask. And then there was a little
problem though. At the end of the month, they actually had more revenue than was theoretically
possible given what they had sold. Right. And they told their boss, expecting to get
some pat on the back, and instead their boss got very nervous and said, corporatism, you're
going to be very unhappy. I don't care how you make the problem go away, make it go away.
And so then for a few days, then there were some amazing sales. Like, you know, it's 20
cents for a pack of gum. So they made the extra revenue disappear that way. But, you
know, why is it that 7-Eleven would have an objection to a store going and charging high
prices? Because that one 7-Eleven with those high prices wasn't just hurting that 7-Eleven's
reputation, they were hurting the name of 7-Eleven. They were making people feel like
you got ripped off of 7-Eleven. 7-Eleven's all over the country. And of course there's
a lot of those 7-Eleven's. So wherever you're going, there's a concern that whatever you
do reflects poorly on anything that you do that makes 7-Eleven look bad and looks bad
for all 7-Eleven's, including high prices. Right. Now, probably actually before this,
but Milton Friedman in the 1950s set up the standard among economists that we don't care
about introspection. And if you go to 7-Eleven, this is in the methodology positive economics.
And if you read the arguments, there's, again, I would say extremely unconvincing. It's like
you should never believe anything anybody says. Why not? They could be lying. All right.
I guess they could be. They might be unperceptive about their own goals. It's possible. But
how, why does this mean that we should never believe what they say and put no weight on
it rather than just exercise some caution? Right. And Spurling, now, he doesn't have
any actual story about why we should be so dismissive of what people say or of introspection
in general. So actually this is not just about anything about, about, about statements, it's
about introspection in general. But anyway, so I am a big fan of introspection, but I
will say that introspection does give us a bad estimate of our own demand elasticities
when we're shopping because we tend to just go and do the thought experiment, now that
I'm here at the store, if the store doubled prices, how much less would I buy? And that,
of course, gives you an idea that your own demand is highly inelastic. Whereas the right
thought experiment would be to include the reputational incentives and think about if
in general the store had prices twice as high, how much in the long run would I buy from
the store? So this does not show that introspection is wrong, but it shows that if you want to
get an understanding of long run, later long run demand, product demand elasticity, you
shouldn't think about what you would do if you're already at the store. Instead, you
should think about how it would affect your long run behavior. So in each case, introspection
can be very accurate, but you just need to be very careful in thinking about what question
are you answering. So I would say that introspection about your demand elasticity is probably great,
but you need to, you need to say, well is it demand elasticity given them already there
or is it very short run demand elasticity or am I thinking about how my behavior would
change over the long run where I might change which store I shop at, which will give you
a very different result. All right, so questions about this? All right. Okay. Now, intuitively,
we usually think about reputational incentives as leading to more efficient outcomes, leading
to greater superior outcomes, or if you remember week one, leading to power hicks, cost benefits
and superior outcomes. But it is also pretty easy to construct scenarios where reputation
leads to much worse incentives and much worse outcomes. So for example, suppose that you
are an outlaw and so you're robbing people. So does the fact that you are getting a reputation
as being a mean person, is that bad for you? No. You might actually want to be known as
the really...
cruel outlaw. Right? So if you know the movie The Princess Bride, there's the classic line
where like once the dread pirate robber starts sparing people, then it's nothing but work,
work, work all the time. No. So you want to be the person who murders anyone who resists,
except you let one person live to tell the tale. Right? There's a true story of, let's
see, the Bulgarian king went and tried invading the, let's see, it was actually the Byzantine
Empire, this was before the Ottomans, but anyway, so it failed, and then what the Ottoman,
or rather the Byzantine emperor, went and he took all the prisoners and he blinded 99%
of them. The remaining 1%, he blinded them in one eye, and then he let them walk home
in groups of 100 of 99 totally blind men led by half-blinded men, and they went back, and
supposedly the Bulgarians never messed with the Byzantines again. Alright, so why that
rather than just kill all of them? It seemed pretty clear the Byzantine emperor thought
he could actually get a reputation, a stronger reputation for brutality by sparing their
lives after mutilating them than just killing them. So he killed them all, then it's like
who knows what really happened. Maybe they all just died in battle, whatever. Maybe he
let them go, maybe they all have nice lives down in Byzantium now, but this way the word
spread and even now I'm telling you what that emperor did. Alright, so an outlaw might want
to get a reputation for ferocity, a dictator might want a reputation for brutality. One
of Genghis Khan's main strategies was saying surrender or die, and anyone who didn't immediately
surrender he would then go and put the full force of his military on them, defeat them,
and then murder the entire city, kill all the people, the animals, burn the whole city
to the ground, but then make sure the people found out about it. Go and invite other people.
Before you say what you want to, when you're answered to Genghis Khan, why don't you come
and visit. We'll give you a little tour of previous other heroes who stood up for their
rights against Genghis Khan, and then you can decide whether you want to join their
ranks or not. So, now how can the standard intuition that normally reputation leads to
better outcomes be rationalized? So the best story that I have is it's all about free entry
and exit. So if people can very cheaply decide whether they want to be part of, whether they
want to do business with you or not, then you want to have a reputation for being good.
But if there are very high costs of entry or exit, then someone might take advantage
of the fact that you are stuck with them to try to develop a reputation for brutality.
And of course this doesn't go as the Austrians would say. It is subjective cost that matters
here, not objective cost. So the subjective cost of, say, getting rid of your kid who
steals from you to feed his drug habit could be extremely high, which explains why it's
very common for drug addicts to rob their own families. Why rob your own family? They
love you, therefore they won't retaliate. And so they aren't worried about this. So
they're not worried about getting a bad reputation, at least they're not very worried, because
you don't feel comfortable abandoning them. Whereas if you start robbing your friends,
you'll lose your friends. And if you start robbing strangers, they'll call the police
on you. So we'll continue with this next week. And remember, next week homework three is
due.
And everybody has week five, and if you want week three to four, you're missing that. I've
got it.
