We're going over why taxes are bad at the logic efficiency,
which is no way a libertarian point.
Instead, it's a simple neoclassical point
about how taxes work.
Can you hit the door back there?
So just refresh your memory.
Imagine we've got shirts that are the marginal cost
equals to $18.
And you are willing to pay $20.
You're willing to pay just one unit.
So one unit, one shirt.
You are at no limit to pay $20.
All right.
That's the supply.
And then, if there is no tax, then the price will be $18.
And you value $20.
And therefore, you buy.
Yes.
And how much consumer surplus do you get?
$2.
$2.
And how much revenue does the government raise
when there are no taxes?
$0.
And then what if the government raises a tax of one penny?
The price goes up to what?
Perfectly elastic supply.
$18.01.
Do you still buy when you're on space 20?
Yes.
How much surplus do you get?
$1.91.
$1.91.
$1.96.
How much revenue does the government raise?
A penny.
A penny.
All right.
Go up to $1.99 tax.
Do you still buy?
Yes.
How much surplus do you get?
A penny.
How much revenue does the government get?
$1.99.
And then the government raises the tax to $2.01.
Do you still buy?
No.
No.
And then how much surplus do you get when you don't do anything?
$0.
And how much revenue does the government raise
when you don't buy anything?
Nothing.
Nothing.
And that's deadweight cost.
That is the key insight, which, of course,
applies for pricing, applies to monopoly pricing,
applies to taxation.
In anything you think of that leads there
to be a reduction in one person's surplus
without a corresponding increase in anyone else's surplus,
that is our deadweight cost.
And again, the classic version of this, of course,
is for monopoly.
You've got a person running a cost.
There's the demand curve.
There's her monopoly price.
And there's your deadweight loss.
But notice, we could get exactly the same result
if we had perfect competition at a tax.
Exactly the same idea.
Because the tax means that rather than the assuming
like here, when the firm goes and raises the price,
on these units, you get less surplus.
The firm gets more.
But on those units, the surplus simply vanishes,
and the monopolist doesn't get any.
And the same would go if there were tax.
Now we have a special name for this kind of inefficiency.
It's called allocative inefficiency.
And at least for allocative inefficiency
on the free market, when people finally
got around to actually estimating the size,
because of course, we could go and draw triangles for decades
without ever coming up with a number.
And we're economists capable of doing this.
Talk about a problem without ever measuring it.
Yes, well, before there's any decent computers,
it's even easier to understand why people didn't do it.
It's like, well, let's talk about what
we feel count-competent to talk about, and not do what's hard.
So anyway, so you look really puzzled.
No, no, I don't have my glasses on.
I'm sorry.
I can see that.
Deadweight loss triangle.
All right, so anyway, there was an economist, Harberger,
who finally in the 60s, I believe,
started coming up with estimates.
And he came up with an estimate for all of the monopoly
deadweight loss triangles in the entire economy equal to 0.1%
of GDP.
And super low number.
But again, if you think about it just geometrically,
it's more plausible than it seems,
because remember, we're only losing that
on the marginal units.
And the marginal units aren't valued very much.
So we only lose the marginal units.
The marginal units aren't valued very much.
And therefore, it's not so surprising the loss is small.
And again, just remember the basic geometry of triangles.
Remember the area of a triangle is 1 half base height.
Base height.
So if, for example, this were a, if we just had a slope of 1,
then the area would just be 1 half base squared.
So another key thing about deadweight loss triangles
is that if you double the size of the price wedge,
you quadruple the size of the loss.
And if you increase the size of the wedge by a factor of 10,
then you increase the loss by a factor of 100.
So again, as long as you're only getting
a little bit above marginal cost,
you're getting a very tiny loss.
Whereas if you had, say, a prohibited tax,
taxes on the white-bottom market,
then you could actually exploit all of that
if you were going to try.
So anyway, you can move this really low number.
As you might guess, when you come up with a number,
literally no number.
A bunch of other people try to make the number bigger.
And there's a series of papers trying to make it bigger.
But it was hard.
And then finally, there was the Samuelson-Quip,
which I think I mentioned at the end of last class,
which is that anything is small if you divide it by GDP.
Which is a reasonably good joke.
Although Samuelson, above all people,
should know that's not true because he
lived through the Depression.
Is the Depression small if you divide it by GDP?
No.
No.
So it's not true that everything is small
if you divide it by GDP.
And again, remember, this is not saying deadweight loss
in the chewing gum industry is small if you divide it by GDP.
The whole chewing gum industry is small
if you divide it by GDP.
It's saying that you take all the losses of all the monopoly
in the entire economy and then divide it by GDP.
That's small.
And that's a pretty interesting result.
All right, now, there is another source of inefficiency
that is discussed.
Maybe 5% is much.
And yet the empirical estimates say that it's many times bigger.
Why on earth would it be that we would
talk a lot about a small problem and hardly ever discuss
a big problem?
Robin Hanson might have an explanation.
Yes, discussion is not about the magnitude of problems.
The magnitude of the discussion is not
about the magnitude of the problem.
Instead, mostly the magnitude of the discussion
is about how much have people discussed in the past.
So if other people are complaining
about something a lot, then you want
to complain about something a lot.
If no one else cares, then it doesn't really
pay for you to care, normally.
So every now and then, you can be an intellectual entrepreneur
and say, all of you people are scum for ignoring
a much bigger problem.
Sometimes that works, but usually, you're
just talking to yourself.
People say, man, that guy is rude.
Calling us scum just for being obsessed with a minor problem.
Anyhow, the much larger source of inefficiency,
according to the empirical work that's been done,
is called productive inefficiency.
Also sometimes called x inefficiency.
That's a term that was briefly around the 60s and 70s.
When Ryan Murphy was here, I gave him
the question of what is the most underrated topic in economics,
and he said x inefficiency.
Good answer.
Anyway, so productive inefficiency
is what you get when you're producing
at above the minimum average cost for society.
So you're productively inefficient if and only
if the average cost of reducing the quantity
is above the actual minimum average cost.
These productive inefficiencies can easily
be large because they exist on all units produced.
Every unit produced at a higher than necessary cost
can lead to a very large problem.
So just to take a look, so suppose
that we have no allocated inefficiency,
so we're producing at marginal cost.
So here is, and we'll make a flat cost curve
so that average and marginal cost are the same.
Remember that?
Average cost is the key to productive inefficiency.
So here we've got average cost one,
and here we've got average cost two.
And then here we've got demand.
And then imagine that, say, that this guy is the brother-in-law
of the dictator.
So this guy is the brother-in-law of the dictator.
This guy is unrelated to the dictator.
And so the dictator says, you're not allowed to produce.
I won't give you a license.
So then this guy has the monopoly.
Now imagine this guy actually produces at marginal cost.
So he's producing right there.
So producing at average cost equals marginal cost.
There's no allocated inefficiency.
But we have all of that productive inefficiency.
And you may even remember the geometric name for that shape.
It's a trapezoid.
All right, a trapezoid.
So that is the dreaded productive inefficiency
trapezoid.
All right, anyone ever even heard
of the productive inefficiency trapezoid outside of this
class?
All right, so a couple people.
Good.
But anyway, which goes to my point
about how economists hardly ever talk about it,
even though empirical estimates say
it's bigger by a lot than allocated inefficiency.
All right, and that's the idea.
And again, the idea is so from each of these units,
we are having loss.
And again, notice the definition just says
all of the loss associated with the fact
that we don't have the lowest cost producer producing.
So sometimes people want to go and cut this up
into a rectangle and a triangle.
You could reclassify it all that way
if you wanted to, but this is more elegant.
So this is what people usually do.
This is what they'll do.
So you have all of that loss caused by cost being too high.
Now, imagine here that we had contestable monopoly.
So anyone's allowed to produce if they want to.
So with contestable monopoly, would there
be any productive inefficiency?
We talked about how productive.
Not how productive.
It might be less.
It might be some.
Well, so remember, basic idea of contestable monopoly.
Which firm takes over the markets?
Whoever produces the cheapest.
Yes, exactly.
Whoever produces the cheapest.
And where does that low cost producer
wind up producing in this simple model?
AC1.
Right below AC2.
So you go right below the cost of the second most
efficient producer.
So in that case, what we have is two things.
So we have no productive inefficiency
because it's the lowest cost producer producing.
We are now, society is producing at the minimum average cost.
We still have some allocated inefficiency over here.
So remember that with differences in cost
between the producers, the first most efficient producer
produces it just below the cost of the second most
efficient one.
From the point of view of consumers,
it doesn't change very much.
But from the point of view of society,
there's a big change, which is all of this stuff which
was waste before gets turned into profits for the most
efficient firm.
And then we still do have that thing there.
So that's there either way.
But then it becomes, instead of having
the whole trapezoid of productive inefficiency,
we have the small triangle of allocated inefficiency.
Now on the other hand, you can imagine
a inefficient monopoly producing there, but with a price cap.
Which is actually pretty common for government monopolies.
So there's a government monopoly where
they pick some crummy firm to be the only producer.
And then they say, well, we have to go and protect consumers.
So they're not allowed to make profits.
Or they'll have a great return regulation
or something like that.
Think about the post office.
Do you often hear about the post office
making enormous profits?
No.
But it's illegal to compete with the post office
for first class mail.
And the very fact that they zealously guard this monopoly
is kind of suspicious.
What does it sound like they think
would happen if anyone else could compete and deliver
first class mail?
Several people would enter.
Yeah, it sounds like they'd need to be entered.
Now, this does give the post office
a great piece of propaganda, which
is we are not hurting consumers because we have no profits.
How could you possibly say we are in any way
injuring you postal consumers when we don't make a dime?
And how good is that argument?
Well, first of all, persuasive.
Very persuasive.
How intellectually sound is that argument?
Not very.
It's terrible, right?
So imagine that you're stuck with a firm that
has such high costs that their costs are 10 times what
they would that of the most efficient producer.
So in that case, if you had competition,
then suppose that we have a bunch of firms.
We're all way up to AC10.
Suppose that's the post office.
And then if there were free competition,
price would be driven all the way down
to just below the second most efficient producer's costs.
And then as a result of that, consumers,
rather than getting them to pay that exploitation-less price,
where they don't mail, where they just ship with agents,
they sell at cost, but they're so terrible at their job
that their cost is super high and you get a bad deal.
Or you could go and pay a monopoly price
bought to a deficient producer.
And which one of these is better for consumers?
That one where the producer makes no profit,
or that one where they make a lot of profit?
The one where they make a lot of profit.
Because the key reason why zero something is wrong
is the fact that the producer is making a profit automatically
better for you.
Depends on what his costs are.
If he has low costs and he makes a modest profit,
far better for you than if he had enormous costs
and made no profit.
Make sense?
OK.
All right.
So anyway, in this world where we just
charge a price equal to cost, but it's inefficient,
but the producer's inefficient, then we
have a little bit of a law of productive inefficiency,
but with no allocator efficiency.
Or of course, you could have both.
So if you had, here's the lowest average cost,
and here's the average cost of the actual producer.
So if this was given to the brother-in-law of the dictator
and he wanted to make money, what he would do is,
I'm just going to look at his regular marginal revenue curve,
and then he went producing something like here.
And then we'd have that allocative inefficiency triangle
and that productive inefficiency trapezoid.
Then finally, we have that little rectangle of profit.
So the result of all of these restrictions on competition
is that to go and give this crummy producer
that small rectangle, you have to go and take away
this giant thing from consumers.
And again, some obvious examples of things like this.
Suppose that you ban Walmart to protect mom and pop stores.
And standard story, why is it that Walmart does so well
competing with mom and pop stores?
Because Walmart has lower costs, much lower costs.
It's not like you go to Walmart and say, my god,
they're making tons of profits because the prices are so high
here.
It's like, well, why did you ever
leave the wonderful mom and pop stores?
Instead, the problem is the mom and pop stores,
though they are often on the edge of bankruptcy,
have such high costs that they can be simultaneously
charging exorbitant prices and be on the edge of bankruptcy.
Anyone ever here tried to run a business that you should
identify with this?
Running a business is really hard.
And you can be saying, wow, my costs
are so enormous that I have trouble making money,
even if I do charge a high price, which is also
hard to get people to do that.
Now, this brings us to a very interesting difference
between government and market monopolies.
So in both government and market monopolies,
you've got opportunities for allocation and efficiency.
So whether it's a private monopoly
that wants to raise price above marginal cost
or a government monopoly that wants
to raise price above marginal cost,
either way you'll get allocated and efficiency.
But government monopolies have a strong tendency
to have the productive inefficiency trapezoid.
Strong tendency on multiple levels.
So one is, suppose they just pick the firm that
gets to be the monopoly at random.
What are the odds that they will pick the one that
has the lowest costs?
Really low.
There's an enormous number of firms out in the world.
And then you can add on some political economy.
And what kinds of firms are most likely to come crying
and saying, I need help?
Probably inefficient ones.
You may have heard, this is a good line, so remember it,
if you haven't heard it.
So in history text, folks will talk a lot
about the infant industry argument for protectionism.
And when you look at the actual world,
infant industries are rarely protected.
The ones that are much more often protected
are what economists call senile industries,
industries that are being driven to the wall, that
are big but in decline.
So it's the senile industries that are more likely to be
protected, and this makes sense in terms of public choice.
Because what kinds of industries are most likely
to have a whole bunch of people around to go and complain
and get favorable treatments?
Industries that don't exist yet?
How many people around in industries that don't exist yet
complain?
They don't exist yet?
There's maybe a few visionaries.
Wouldn't it be great if you would go and support
an industry that doesn't exist yet?
Pretty hard case to make.
But on the other hand, for an industry
that has employed 1% of the population,
that sounds like one that is ideally
suited to complain if, say, human-driven big rig trucks
are going to be out-competed by rivalrous trucks.
So key difference between private and public monopolies
is the tendency for very high costs.
And there's some really neat work
by Congress John Ben-Renin and some co-authors
where they look at management quality
of different kinds of companies.
And they reach a bunch of results which vary on.
You'd be very much expected by people at GMU,
but since they have no GMU associations,
they've gotten a lot more attention for them.
Of course, if you just want truth for bail,
it's better if people other than us
can be the vessels for the truth,
can be the messengers, because they'll
be believed, so one of the results
is that government firms are poorly managed.
Government firms are poorly managed.
And as we know, poorly managed house
makes you things like pay for performance
and keeping track of productivity
and making sure people show up on time
and actually do their job, really common sense things.
And as a result, government-owned firms
have higher costs.
Not too surprising.
And then another neat result is basically
the poorer the country, the worse the management generally
is.
And therefore, in poor third world countries,
those firms are generally very poorly managed
with horrible nepotism and just not keeping
track of what's happening.
But there is one great exception to the rule
that companies in third world are poorly managed.
There's a general category of firm that is well managed.
And they're basically managed at first world levels
in the third world.
Multinational corporations.
So to say it like you're doing a trailer for a movie,
here's multinational corporations.
But once again, coming back to productive inefficiency.
Multinationals have lower costs because they
are better managed.
And if they were allowed to, so I actually asked Ben Reed.
And so back of a napkin, what if multinationals simply
took over the entire world economy completely?
What are your results say would happen?
And he's like, global GDP rise is 50%.
All right.
And if you think about every country on Earth
that has tried to keep multinationals out
there's otherwise regarded them with suspicion.
So I guess they're going to come here and take your inputs
and turn them into a lot more outputs.
And then of course, competition leads to a bunch of other things.
Anyway, all right.
So questions about allocating reproductive efficiency?
I'll be there.
All right, so probably the person that talked about this the most
was actually Robert Bork in his book, The Antitrust Paradox,
years before he was nominated to Supreme Court.
So he has a lot of good stuff on that, all the outdated facts.
In general, productive inefficiency
just doesn't get much attention.
I mean, probably some of it is there's just a theory of,
well, how could it be that any firm is ever producing
at excessively high costs?
There's the obvious point, what if it's
illegal to produce at low costs?
What about that?
And then again, in the real world,
there's always disequilibria where, for at least a while,
firms probably might be doing things.
Yeah, you had a question?
I was wondering, what are the higher estimates of allocative
efficiency?
Yeah, so I think there was one paper that got up to 10%
by assuming that every single industry in the United States
was monopolized by one firm.
Oh.
Right, so.
Yeah, so it only got to 10% as you can do that way.
So you did, they had to make a very strict assumption.
All right, moving on then.
Everyone happy?
Everyone full of energy for microeconomics?
Everyone ready to ignore all signs of your biorhythms
and the time of day?
And all right.
Right, of course, biorhythms are not important.
This is not a biology class.
This is economics.
And the economy runs nonstop.
And so must we.
So continuing.
All right, so predation, entry, deterrence, and mixed strategies.
So predation means a lot of things to a lot of people.
Is Amazon predating on the entire economy right now?
Maybe.
I don't know.
What does the word even mean?
So what insight can game theory give us
into what predation might even mean or how much there is?
So here's a very simple model of predation.
And it just says, well, predation
is the same thing as what is sometimes
called limit pricing.
And this just says, suppose there's a bunch of producers
varying costs.
And the lowest priced producer just
prices just below the cost of the second most efficient
producer.
So imagine you've got a world like that.
So we can go and here's demand.
And then here's average cost firm 5, average cost firm 4,
average cost firm 3, average cost firm 2,
average cost firm 1.
And if the most efficient producer
goes just below those costs, then how many firms
can actually profitably survive in the industry?
One.
Just one.
And how did it occur?
He set prices so low that everyone else either died
or just was never even born.
He made the other firms wish they had never
been born by going and setting the price so low.
Now, this kind of thing probably happens a lot.
And a lot of the question is just, well,
are they even trying to do it?
So who cares whether they're trying to do it or not?
Lawyers care.
Juries care.
You are much more likely to get convicted
if there's a single memo that they can dig out
of your archives saying, let's destroy the competition.
Let's drive them into the ground forever.
Whereas you simply offer a great product
at a low price, which causes the very same destruction.
But there's no memo.
It's like, look, we don't want to hurt anybody.
We just want to give everybody a fantastic deal.
Yes, but that will automatically cause destruction
of your competitors.
Well, that's just a theory.
I don't know.
I don't want to hurt anybody.
I'm just trying to help people.
That's all I want to do.
So it matters a lot in the eyes of the law.
I didn't.
Why is it so important?
Well, that's a good question.
Does it matter if you destroyed all your competitors
because you were trying to do it,
or if it just happened inadvertently
as a result of offering a great product at low prices?
But predatory intent is a lot more
likely to cost you a lot of money.
So it's important for that reason.
And again, if this were a law in economics class,
we'd be going into this more.
So there is sort of an interesting question,
like why is it that we punish murder more harshly
than attempted murder?
So what's the deal?
Yeah, why not determine both equally?
What's the difference?
And the best story anyone in law economics
ever come up with is, well, if you punish murder,
attempted murder equally harshly,
then the attempted murderer has a clear incentive
to try to finish the job if he screws up
the first time around.
All right, so how many of you have witnessed murders
where they are like, uh-oh.
No, like there are actually maybe a few.
So maybe like hit men, for example.
I might be calculating that carefully.
That's even a little bit hard to believe.
So this is one model, which is something
you can call predation if you want to.
Should it be called predation or not,
I'll just leave that to your judgment.
Now, a more interesting model of predation
is something more like this.
There's an incumbent, and he has a conditional pricing strategy,
which he prices high if there's no entrance,
and low if there's an entrance.
And then the entrance size is whether to enter.
And you might remember we even talked about this situation
before.
So if you have a situation like this,
then we've got two Nash equilibrium.
So we've got our first Nash equilibrium,
the Nash equilibrium out fight, which
means that the entrant first goes and enters.
Or the entrant doesn't enter.
And then the incumbent would have gone and drastically cut
prices if the entrant had entered,
and therefore, neither wants to change its behavior.
Because if you know that the incumbent would have cut its
prices if you entered, you don't want to enter.
And if the entrant is staying out,
you don't want to change what you would do if he came in.
And then there's the inaccommodate one as well.
Inaccommodate, so that's where the entrant does go in,
and then the incumbent goes and actually reduces output
to accommodate the new entrant.
So that's where you actually cut back on your production
because it's new entrant, and you now
need to share the market.
And you may remember one of these two outcomes
is not sub-key perfect, because it
involves a threat to do something
you wouldn't want to do if you actually
had to carry it out.
Which one of these two is not sub-key perfect?
Out fight.
So you come in there, and you say, well, now that you're here,
I'm going to destroy us both.
It's like, hmm.
I mean, it's one thing to say, if you come in,
I'll destroy us both.
That's kind of scary.
Once you're in, now destroy us both.
Really?
You're really going to destroy us both?
Wouldn't you rather just cooperate with me?
Oh, don't want to.
Cooperating with an entrant is so humiliating.
It's a daffy duck.
Daffy duck is so humiliating.
I'd rather cooperate.
So anyway, this is a case where the incumbent
would be cutting off his nose to spite his face.
It doesn't make a lot of sense.
Now, there is a less formal literature on predation.
It's like an earlier one from the 50s and 60s and 70s,
which adds on and says, on top of all this,
not only is fighting a bad idea, but fighting is actually
especially bad for the incumbent.
Because normally, which firm has the bigger market share,
the incumbent or the entrant?
The incumbent normally has a bigger market share.
So if you go and slash prices down to a level
where you're losing money, and you have 90% of the market,
then you'll be losing nine times as much money as the entrant.
It sounds like it's like cutting your face nine times
to go and cut the entrant's face one time.
It doesn't sound very smart.
And actually, even that's not right.
Because suppose that if you didn't go and cut your price
response, you'd have 90%, and the entrant would have 5%,
and the entrant would have 10%.
So suppose you keep output the same, then the divide is 90-10.
But if the incumbent actually wants to fight,
he's got to go and do what with his output?
Increase it.
Increase it.
So then that might mean going up to 95% of the industry.
So then you're losing 19 times as much money
as the entrant, which again doesn't
sound like a very good deal.
So this is a vaguely related literature
to saying that actually, since the real world incumbents usually
are the market leader, they lose more money from predation
than the entrant would.
But anyway, the game theory point
is just that regardless of that, it's
cheaper to accommodate than to fight.
And so incumbents want to do that.
Now, all of this is, of course, forgetting about the first word
of the notes.
What is the first word?
Let's double check the first word of the notes.
Yes.
So after the colon, yes, repeating.
So all of these arguments are ignoring repeated play.
So what if this same game is infinitely repeated?
And the simple answer is, well, then predation might work.
So why can it work to go and destroy money?
Well, it's partially destroy both of us
if there's an infinitely repeated game.
So I go and I blow up all our profits for this period.
It's kind of like reputation.
Yeah, exactly.
Walmart has some of its people who try to unionize,
or shut down the whole store and just give up
all the profits on that whole store
to break the back of the union members
so that it has a reputation that it's worth its time.
Sounds pretty clever.
Want to try it?
All right, yes, so that's the idea.
It's like, look, you might actually
want to let one of your stores go down the drain
if this is going to wind up giving you
other benefits in the future.
So anyway, so it is possible that with infinite repetition,
then predation would be successful.
And that's when arguments like this become important.
That's when arguments like that become important,
because it's like, you're going to go and build a reputation
by losing 19 times as much money as the competition for a while.
That's a great plan.
That's probably a stupid plan.
It's the kind of thing where you might actually
lead competitors to say, wow, you lost so much money.
I don't think I'll ever try that dumb move again.
Now I really don't believe him anymore.
So it could easily lead to that reaction.
Now, there is a substantial literature on, especially
the 19th century economic history, which probably gets
more attention, because back then,
there was no legal reason not to admit you were doing predation.
And the general result of people who have looked at this,
as far as I know, I haven't looked closely,
but Don McGraw would actually know this quite well,
is that Rockefeller, for example,
so Rockefeller is actually, or the Citadel
is the most famous one for supposedly engaging predation.
The people that have looked at it most closely
came away saying, no, no, in an unengaged predation,
he did something that's almost the opposite of that,
which is he would go and buy competitors out
at above market rates.
So he did do that.
So going and just slashing the price of kerosene
for a long time to drive people out, that, no sign that he did
it.
But what he would do is go to firms and say, look,
I'll go and pay you double the value of your assets
to sell me.
And then, my memory is that we actually
have the smoking gun of Rockefeller,
then saying, we have to stop doing this,
because people are building new refineries simply
to be bought out at double the price of the refinery.
So he calls it blackmailing us, and then he
just gave up on that.
So not much historical sign of predation in this sense,
where you deliberately are losing money for a while
in order to scare people off.
And in the case of the union there,
you say, well, you just have to shut down one store,
and that can scare a ton of people.
But if you had to go and lose a ton of money for the whole,
all of Walmart for years, possibly,
then there's other considerations people want out.
Like, suppose there's a durable good,
and you're concerned that the price is only temporarily low.
What might you as a consumer do?
Yes, stock up.
So then you might have to expand your output massively
to deal with all the people who are stockpiling the good.
Imagine you were, say, going to try
doing predation in automobiles by cutting the price
to half the normal price.
How many people would want to just go and buy,
oh, let's go and buy cars for all of our kids right now.
Depending upon how much land you have.
If you're in New York City, you probably wouldn't do that.
But if you're out in the country, you've got a barn,
put them in there, put a car cover on them,
start them once a month, and it's a pretty good deal.
Now, a big question about this kind of predation
is, why couldn't everybody do it?
So why would it have to be limited, actually,
to incumbents?
Why couldn't entrants predict?
So you could have an entrant say, tell you what,
if you don't just flee from this industry right now,
I'm going to come in and I'm going to go and make us lose
a ton of money.
And that seems structurally very similar to, if you enter,
I'm going to make us both lose money.
And say, look, if you don't run away,
I am going to make us both lose money.
So it seems like a principle that could happen.
And this seems very odd to imagine, say,
like one small chicken shack threatening
to do this to Kentucky Fried Chicken or something like that.
You can imagine large-scale entry,
where, say, McDonald's might say,
we're going to open up our own line of chicken restaurants.
And there are some interesting cases of large-scale entry.
For example, Microsoft came along with the Xbox.
So it wasn't just like some small video game company
out of somebody's garage.
Microsoft said, we're going to go and enter
this console video game industry on a massive scale.
That's what they did.
And so Amazon, remember what Amazon used to sell only?
Books.
They only sold books.
But there's one of the biggest booksellers.
And now they start selling, we'll also sell reflecting
flashers.
And we'll make you attach some to your car
so you don't need them at night.
We'll also do that.
So that's possible as well.
So anyway, so why can't entrants bring it against incumbents,
just like incumbents bring it against entrants?
And when you start thinking about this,
then remember that mixed strategy concept
that we had before?
Maybe you could actually have every possible kind
of prediction.
You could have incumbents bringing it against entrants,
entrants bringing it against incumbents.
You would have cases where they both go in,
thinking that the other one would be scared off.
And you can also have a case where everyone is so scared
that they're going to lose money that they don't go in the industry
at all.
So anyway, the idea in these cases
is that in addition to the pure strategy
Nash equilibrium with one brigading
and the other one staying away, you've
also got the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
of every possible combination happening
with some probability.
Intuitively, what has to happen is
that the potential for monopoly profits,
if you get to be the monopoly, have
to balance out the expected losses
from this destructive competition.
You've heard this phrase, destructive competition
at some point?
Destructive competition.
Of course, you could just use this
for as a synonym for competition.
All competition is destructive as far as I'm concerned.
But normally, when outsiders, observers describe it,
this is where firms that have substantial fixed costs
wind up driving prices down to marginal cost
and then they lose money.
All right.
So anyway, say that the mixed strategy story
does make more sense.
So again, there's no way you can credibly commit to be in no
matter what.
So the bigger the conditional benefit of being monopoly
is, the harder firms will compete
to get to be that person.
Which you can probably see a lot of this on the internet.
So remember in the early days, there
were a bunch of firms that actually really did
seem to be losing a ton of money.
Strangely, no one complained about it.
Again, if there's ever a case where you just say,
predation smoking gun, wouldn't be a whole industry
where most of the firms were losing money?
And again, you might say, well, maybe that'd be a hard time.
No.
They show up and start losing money immediately,
and they lose money for years.
It seems a lot like predation.
Now, in practice, fortunately, the law just
turned a blind eye to this.
And anyway, why would the law turn a blind eye to this?
Well, how do laws get enforced in the real world normally?
AUDIENCE MEMBER 5 In the courts.
Well, but how does something even get to the courts?
Someone has to complain.
Someone has to complain.
And if there's an industry that's changing real rapidly,
by the time you get to the courts,
the whole industry may change anyway.
So that's a lot of what I saw during the early days
of the internet, is firms that just went in and lost
a ton of money, and then actually most of them
just went bankrupt.
So I guess.
So you listed six reasons in the past six minutes
of why predation isn't a good idea.
And you gave an example of Rockefeller
doing the exact opposite.
So if he wasn't doing it, and it's a bad idea to do it,
then who was first spreading the rumor that he was doing it?
I don't know at first, but Ida Charbel
was a very big spreader of these rumors, which
is an interesting case.
So you may actually remember the name Ida Charbel
from the US history class.
You probably were told that her dad was driven to bankruptcy
by Rockefeller, which doesn't prove
that what she was saying was wrong.
But normally, you would just sort of
mention a possible conflict of interest
for a historical source of that kind.
So the other thing is, it sounds really good.
So do you know who believes in predation with all his heart?
My dad.
My dad believes that the whole economy
is run based on predation.
And he had one of the arguments here.
His general model of the whole economy
is that every industry by its own
is run in a caricature of a monopoly,
except his own industry was ultra-competitive.
And what was my dad's own industry?
Defense contracting.
Oh, no.
You might just say, it's funny, but you're right.
Not only my dad was lying to me, so what he saw with his own
eyes was that they were struggling to get every scrap
of business, and it was tough.
At that end, he did not actually see very much in the
way of coordination between rival companies.
Instead, he saw this dog-eat-dog competition to
get the government contracts.
And that's what he knows.
And I'd say, look, we're going to generalize about anything
that you do.
And he says, well, how about we start with something he's
actually seen firsthand.
I do know that he has said things like, look, you know,
oh, yeah, there was a Staples, and then an Office Depot was
going up.
And then I'm like, oh, well, things are
going to get cheaper.
No, they won't.
Brian, you know what's going to happen?
Tell me.
Well, the Staples and the Office Depot people are
meeting in the back room, fixing all the prices.
You think they would have just agreed that Office Depot
wouldn't be able to second store so close to Staples.
That would be a much simpler way of organizing the
collusion, is saying, we have stores here, we have stores
here, we don't encroach upon you, you don't
encroach upon us.
It would be much simpler to verify than keeping the prices
high.
I think maybe he's right now.
I don't know.
It's possible.
It's possible.
So anyway, the bigger the potential benefit of becoming
a monopoly, the greater the incentive to fight to get that
monopoly status.
And of course, who benefits from the fighting as long as
it's going on?
It's consumers.
And at least in the case of the internet, it seems like
we're sort of waiting.
Well, when is this period when they finally make up all
their losses going to happen?
It's been a while.
Maybe they just greatly overestimated how successful
they were going to be.
Which is the interesting question.
Questions?
Questions?
So now let's move on to the beloved Bertrand and
Cornell models.
So all these arguments so far have implicitly relied on what
is called Bertrand competition.
I'm sure you've heard of this, Bertrand.
How do you really say it?
Is that OK?
Bertrand?
Good enough?
And also sometimes also relying upon constant marginal
cost pricing just to simplify things.
So again, the way all these models work is first, we're
going to propose prices.
And then all customers buy from a firm that's lowest
price, and then if they're equal prices, they're
antipriced.
It's a pretty simple story, right?
And then in equilibrium in all these Bertrand type models,
the most productively efficient firm takes the
entire market, and they charge a price just below the cost of
the second most efficient firm.
So right there.
That's the standard Bertrand equilibrium.
And then you can get to priceable marginal cost if you
have at least two firms that produce in the most
productively efficient way.
Also, you need to have no fixed costs, as we've seen
last week.
No fixed costs mess this up, because if you have fixed
costs and you price a marginal cost, what is
happening to you?
You are losing money.
Right?
You are losing money.
All right.
Now, one really interesting thing about Bertrand
competition is that it completely undermines any
textbook or teacher that you ever had who said that unless
you have perfect competition, the market is inefficient.
How many people ever had a teacher who said, you need
perfect competition for efficiency?
The best people are clearly centers of
students who base them.
I heard this dozens, hundreds of times, I think.
And I've also read a textbook that says that.
I read the right textbooks and probably got rejected.
I would have rather that it stayed there, but was correct.
Anyway.
So there's this perfectly competitive benchmark saying
that what you need for markets to work well is to have lots
of firms, or maybe an infinite number of firms.
And what the Bertrand model says is that you can get the
perfectly competitive outcome with two firms.
So two equals infinity.
Two and infinity give you the same result, which is a pretty
amazing result.
How much money do you divide this?
Infinite amount of money, or $2?
Same thing.
And it turns out, same thing.
Now, this result is so extreme that a lot of economists who
like the theoretical elegance of Bertrand recoil in horror
and say, no, no, no.
It can't be that two firms is fine.
Again, in the modern economy, there are a bunch of
industries where there's really only one firm, and yet
people seem super happy.
Like, as I say, what is the firm that most
directly competes with Amazon?
It's hard even to figure out what that firm is.
And yet, who doesn't like Amazon?
AUDIENCE MEMBER 1.
Allison Jones.
Yes, Alex Jones.
All right.
One person is like, does he still buy stuff from Amazon?
Yes.
Yes.
God, I hate them.
But their deals are so good, so convenient.
They have everything under one roof.
It's the best store ever.
That's why I hate them.
All right.
So there we go.
Oh, well, you like Netflix.
How many people sit around saying, god, I hate Netflix.
They're just terrible in every way.
If you would explain what Netflix was to me when I was
in junior high, I just would have, what?
What are you talking about?
This is just an absurd science fiction scenario.
I have lived to see many absurd science fiction
scenarios come to pass.
Not like the really good ones.
Like Immortality.
Yes, Youthful Immortality.
That one would have been good.
And Fashionable Travel.
That one would be really fun.
Still, you get what you get.
All right.
Because this result is so extreme,
even people who would like the theoretical elegance
normally go and switch over to another French model,
the Corneau model.
OK.
So what did Corneau do?
Corneau assumed that firms don't set prices,
they set quantities.
Which normally sounds kind of weird for most purposes,
but you need to picture someone, say, producing oil.
If you're producing oil, you're probably not
going to say, hey, you know what,
I'm going to undercut the world price of oil.
Instead, you'll just go and dump all the oil
you have at whatever are the prices.
So that's the idea, anyway, is that firms
go and set quantities instead of prices.
And then the price independently adjusts through the market.
So based upon all of the independent quantity decisions,
the market sets the price.
So in terms of math, we go and define capital Q
is equal to the sum of all the Q's.
So that symbol, that means for all.
So the summation for all little qi.
So any one little q is the production of one firm.
And then capital Q is the summation of all little q's.
And then just for convenience, because lots of other people
do it, let's assume linear demand.
So price equal to A minus B times capital Q.
So notice that capital Q is important,
because it's saying the market price is
determined by total production.
And then just to not torture you,
let's say marginal cost equals 0.
When I was in your shoe, we had to redo all the math
with cost.
And it doesn't change anything other
than torture of the students.
But it could fill up many hours of your life.
So of course, you're still free to go and redo
the whole model with cost.
But I don't recommend it.
So I'm not going to do it or anything.
All right, so if we've got Bertrand.
If every firm is a marginal cost of 0,
then what does Bertrand competition
predict will occur for any number of firms greater than 1?
Yeah, zero price.
It'll be free.
Because the marginal cost is 0, and price gets driven down to 0.
And remember, as long as the two most efficient firms are tied,
then they will compete directly all the way down
to the marginal cost, because each one is going to produce
what we would like.
If they differ in cost, you produce just below the cost
of the second most efficient producer.
But if it's a tie, then you have to go and compete all the way
down to marginal cost.
Makes sense, all right?
So anyway, Bertrand competition predicts
since marginal cost is equal 0, equal 0, price equals 0.
What does Cournot predict?
Something else.
Cournot says every individual firm
is going to maximize market price times its own quantity,
which is the same as maximizing profits when there are no costs.
No costs, and you just maximize revenue.
That's the same as profit.
So maximizing P times Q little i, and that is going to be,
and then we'll look at the notes.
I have marginal cost, but marginal cost is 0,
so forget about it.
So that's going to be equal to this thing.
So A minus B times your own production, Q i,
plus the summation of the production of all firms
other than your own.
So for all i, so for all firms j not equal to i,
times the production from j, plus that, plus that,
and then multiply that by your own production.
So this says, so here we've done is
we've gone and put in the market demand curve.
And here for Q, notice, that thing equals Q.
Your production plus the production of all other firms
equals total production.
So your production is Q i, and you
control your own production.
And then everybody else, plus the summation of all the Q j's
not equal to i, so do you control the production
of any other firm?
No.
No.
No, right?
And then, of course, we multiply it by your own production.
What do we get?
Well, so we get the result that in equilibrium,
they're going to set A minus 2B times their own production,
minus B times the summation of all j not equal to i,
firm j equals 0.
And this gives us the optimal response of firm i
to every other firm.
Optimal response of one firm to every other firm.
Now, how can we actually solve the model?
Well, since all the firms are exactly the same,
intuitively, what would you expect
would occur in equilibrium?
If everyone is the same, you expect
they will all do the blank thing.
Do the same thing.
Yes, that is a reasonable guess, and that works out.
So what we usually do here is look
for what's called the symmetric Nash equilibrium, where
all firms do exactly the same thing.
And then all we do is, at this point,
so notice we've already differentiated,
so we've already got every firm optimizing.
So now it's OK to go and do a substitution.
You can't do the substitution before the optimization,
or else you are implicitly assuming
that you control other people's production.
Does make sense?
But once you've already done it, then we can say,
well, what has to happen at equilibrium?
Now it's cool.
And then what we're going to get is,
so that's going to be the same q, that's going to be the same q.
So we're going to get A minus B times n plus 1 times q equals
0.
So notice, here we've got two B's,
and here we have n minus 1 B's.
Because there's n firms, then how many firms
are there other than yourself?
n minus 1.
So there's a B in front of that, so we have two B's, and then
plus n minus 1 B's.
That turns out that sums to n plus 1 B's.
So A minus B times n plus 1 q equals 0.
And then we get the result that an individual q at equilibrium
will be A over B n plus 1.
And if every individual firm is that, then in equilibrium,
the Marcus production will be q times n plus q equals
A n over B n plus 1.
OK.
Now, there's a lot of people who get to that result,
and they are extremely excited.
Extremely excited, because now we
have math showing that the Bertrand conclusion's wrong.
Not really.
We have math showing the Bertrand conclusion
could be wrong.
But math alone will not resolve anything.
Not in any case.
But what's going on?
So you can go and take a look at this equation,
and it says the nice continuous result
that people are looking for saying that the bigger the n,
the better the market outcome is.
So better for consumers and more efficient overall.
Because if we go and just set n equal to 1, then what do we get?
Then we have A over 2B.
And you might even remember that that is precisely
what a monopolist does when there's no cost.
So q is equal to A over 2B.
And you can even go and take a look at what happens here.
So if you go ahead and do that, then we'll
have price is going to be equal to A minus B times A over 2B.
And then these cancel.
And price will be equal to A over 2.
And remember that marginal revenue curve being just half
of that curve?
Yeah, so nice.
So that's just what people are looking for.
And then as n goes up, quantity goes up.
So market quantity.
So for n equals 2, then we're going to get 2 thirds.
We got 2 thirds.
The other thing is, just remember,
so if we have perfect competition,
then price equals 0.
So if price equals 0, then what is quantity?
Price equals 0, then quantity is we're
going to have B times q equals A. And q equals A over B.
So A over B.
OK, so there we are.
All right.
So.
Is that right?
Yes.
Yes.
That's fine.
That's pretty sure.
Yeah, yeah.
That's fine.
So this says that as the predictor.
So the competitive result would be that.
So anyway, so with perfect competition,
then market output would just be A over B.
And then with monopoly, it's going to be A over 2.
And then as we go on, let's see.
It's getting slightly nervous.
Can I hand that?
That looks good.
All right.
I think everything's fine.
So during break, I will just ruminate just to make sure
that this should be fine.
All right.
So basically, as n goes up, then the amount of.
Let's see.
Yeah, of course it's 45.
Yeah, yeah.
Confirmed.
All right.
So then as n goes to infinity, what happens to A n over B n
plus 1?
Goes to A.
Yeah, it goes to A over B, which is just what I'm telling you.
So that's good.
And, oh, yeah, yeah.
I'm just getting nervous because I'm
mixing up price and quantity.
That's why I was getting a little nervous.
OK.
Everything I told you turns out to be fine.
OK.
So anyway, so n is 2.
Then we get quantity is going to be 2 thirds of the.
Is that what it is?
It will be 2 thirds of the over the event of quantity.
And then we get n up to 10, then we're
producing 10 11ths of the event of quantity itself.
So this then leads to the result that people like,
which is that the bigger n, the better.
So questions about that?
Now, how much of this has ever been verified by Miracle.io?
Not very.
Not very.
And again, especially if you are willing to remember,
there's firms like Amazon that seem
to be producing a ton of quantity.
And people seem really happy with them.
So that could be a case where one firm is producing
an enormous amount of output, for example.
OK.
Anyway.
All right.
So now, anyway, so what's interesting about the Cornell
model is this.
Is there any collusion happening in the Cornell model?
Yeah, the firms are not cooperating
with each other at all.
No firm is ever wondering whether other firms will
retaliate.
There's no predation going on.
There's nothing like that happening in Cornell.
And yet, they still kind of act like they're colluding,
which is odd.
It seems like an odd result.
But anyway, so Q rises as, or Q falls as n falls,
even though each firm is the only thing of itself.
And they're not planning for the future,
they're not making any effort to collude or anything else.
And that is the Cornell result.
So questions about that?
All right.
Now, how many people heard of this stuff
about Cornell at some point?
So 2 thirds.
All right, now I'm going to tell you that actually this whole
Cornell model is itself based upon further trickery.
And if you think about it a little bit more,
it winds up being very much like we're trying.
All right, how so?
Well, suppose that we go and we have these Cornell firms.
And then we go to them and say, hey, firms, would any of you
like to split into two smaller firms?
Would any of you like to split into two smaller firms?
Now, for a firm to decide, and remember,
they're not colluding, they're only
doing exactly whatever is best for themselves,
they are going to be happy to go and split into two firms
if 2 times the profit with n plus 1 firms
is going to be greater than 1 times the profit with n firms.
You see this?
So basically, if one firm splits into two,
then the number of firms goes from n to what?
n plus 1.
And this pi is the profit function.
So basically, if you go, so in the Cornell model,
as n goes up, what happens to profits for each firm?
Yeah, it goes down.
But the right question for an individual firm to ask itself
is not what will happen to the profits of the industry
overall.
Who cares about that?
It's what will happen to my total profits
if I go and take my firm and split it into two.
And the answer is you go and multiply 2 times
the reduced profits for a firm.
And then you can see, well, is that
going to be more than the profits I'll have from one firm
with one fewer firm in the industry?
And on the homework, you get to go and solve this.
But the punchline is that this equation is always
satisfied for n greater than 1.
So if you're a monopoly, you don't
want to split into two firms and then compete with each other.
That's dumb.
But if there's duopoly, each firm wants to go,
I need one firm that I want to split into two.
And so two endogenously becomes three.
Three endogenously becomes four.
And as long as we stick to these assumptions,
there, the sky's the limit.
And the kernel model, the n naturally turns into infinity.
And when n goes to infinity, what happens to production?
It goes to the permittivity of the level.
And then do you get a different production than Bertrand?
No.
You get exactly the same thing all over again.
All right, now you say there's something tricky going on here.
Well, there's nothing tricky given
that we're assuming that either there's no cost at all
or there's constant marginal costs.
So there's constant marginal costs.
This goes through as well.
So if you've got constant marginal costs,
then firms will definitely want to split.
But of course, if there's constant marginal costs,
why not split?
There's no barrier to splitting if you've
got constant marginal costs, right?
Yes.
What it means to have constant marginal costs
is that you can split into two firms.
And each firm will be just as good separately
one bigger firm would have been.
So if you're going to go and assume
constant marginal cost and then use
that assumption to say you're getting a bad market result,
it seems that what is good for the goose is good for the gander,
and you should be able to say, well,
if that's your cost assumption,
then there will never be a finite number of firms,
and then the market will be fine.
Any questions about that?
So this was one of maybe my favorite thing that was ever proven to me in PhD micro.
Is the whole Cornell model rests upon sheer sleight of hand.
I'm just not asking people to think about,
wait, why is n n?
Why isn't n n plus one?
Now, of course, a good answer to why not have n or why not split,
is that we don't have constant marginal costs or
least constant average costs, instead we have fixed costs.
So that's a good reason not to split your firm into two smaller firms.
Now, there is a literature that explores what happens to
Cornell when you've got fixed costs for each firm.
Now, when you do that, then you no longer get the split to infinity result,
as you might guess, because every time you split,
then you have to add on another fixed cost.
Then if you split too much,
then you're going to have an incredible cost.
So, if every firm is producing one unit with a million dollar fixed costs,
that's going to be a really bad idea.
Now, in the model,
in the revised Cornell model when you got fixed costs,
then there's another strange result.
This strange result says that actually,
there are too many firms that will happen from a social point of view.
Again, why? Essentially, when a firm splits,
they are creating a deadweight cost.
They are creating one additional fixed cost that society didn't require.
Then, it should not be too surprising then,
that if you get a bigger share of
the profit by doing something with a deadweight cost, some firms do it.
As a result, you wind up getting some social waste.
In fact, in a first best sense,
the best thing would obviously just be to have only one firm,
and then you only pay the fixed cost once, and there's no waste.
So basically, if your costs look like,
the total costs are equal to say,
K plus E times your quantity.
That's what your total cost function looks like.
Then, the best deal for one firm,
and then the socially cheapest way of
producing everything is that one firm produce everything,
because then you only pay the K once.
Then, if there's constant marginal costs,
then there's no reason not to just have one firm do everything.
So anyway, so in a first best sense,
the most efficient thing is just for one firm to produce,
and then charge marginal cost,
or maybe one firm produce and charge average cost.
That would be a second most efficient thing,
or second best efficient thing.
All right. But anyway, if you just say,
let's just assume that firms enter until profits are zero,
which is like a standard free entry condition.
Guys remember free entry?
Okay. If you do that,
then you actually get precisely the opposite of the normal I.O.
claim, namely that the problem with the market is there's too many firms,
and there's this inefficient ways of duplication.
So once again, when you complicate the model,
you get something that's not obvious,
but it's not what people want to hear.
That's again like what so many generations,
like at least like two generations of I.O. economists want to hear,
is just N is better.
You have more N, better markets.
That's the best in the world.
Questions about that? Does everyone feel clear on that?
All right. So biorhythms are not leading you to not ask a question
despite the non-obviousness of it.
All right. Now, last interesting scenario you can imagine,
is suppose that you've got a firm,
or you've got an industry where you've got a bunch of firms that are
producing with fixed cost and a constant marginal cost.
And you are, so again, we seem to be stuck in this bad equilibrium,
where there's too many firms and we're burning up all these fixed costs.
All right. So in this situation,
they're done, you know, applied by the model,
if we're allowed for one of these firms,
one of these excessively small firms to go and say,
hey people, I'm going to expand my output a lot,
and I'm not going to go and sell it with everybody else.
I'm going to just go and have charge my own price.
Right. In that case, you would again have a result a lot like
the festival markets results where one firm just expands,
takes over the whole market, and then again,
you get to at least the second best division result.
So, again, I want to like,
it's all kind of weird,
like why are we just hearing this now?
So normally, what people are doing is,
they're just assuming that you can't do a bunch of things that the model implies you would want to do.
Right. And why do that? Well, if you were to explicitly go and say,
I'm assuming you can't do any of the following things,
it would seem like a pretty ad hoc model, right?
So, imagine that you're doing Cournot,
and also assume firms aren't allowed to split.
I've never seen a textbook bother to say that,
because like, wait, why did you just say I'm going to assume that?
Are you assuming that because they would want to split?
Yeah. Well, why don't you come up with a model where it's internally consistent,
you don't just have to tack on an ad hoc assumption
to get the pessimistic result you're looking for?
Well, we've been looking for that model for a really long time,
but it's very hard to find.
Okay. Questions? Everyone happy?
We're full of enthusiasm for the material.
All right. So, we got two weeks until the midterm.
Everyone's aware of that.
So, we're still ahead of schedule, so that's good.
Let's move on to week six.
All right. And now, we're going to talk more about Bertrand and Cournot.
All right. So, review from five minutes ago.
All right. So, we're supposed to be at least two firms
that can produce a minimum marginal cost.
Then, we got the one shopper Tron game,
and also, of course, all finitely repeated Bertrand games have a simple solution.
And that simple solution is price equals marginal cost for all.
Price equals marginal cost for all.
So, that's where we get.
And I said, you get it for one shot games,
and you also get it for any game with finite repetition,
by that same backwards induction argument that we already had.
Because if in the last turn,
you know that neither firm will pollute at all,
then in the second last turn,
you can't say, I will betray you in the last turn,
if you arrive on property in the last turn,
you don't cooperate with me now,
which means you can't threaten anything in the second term,
which means you can't threaten anything in the third term,
and so on, and then you have no cooperation.
All right. Now, in the infinitely repeated Bertrand game,
then more equilibrium can happen.
Then, more equilibrium are possible.
All right. So, let's just start with a really simple case.
Suppose we have Bertrand competitors,
and we get to a perfectly collusive outcome,
where we switch from the perfectly competitive outcome
to the full-blown monopoly outcome.
Imagine we do that.
Okay. So, and simplest way of doing this is for
every firm to go and produce one-eighth of the monopoly output.
All right. So, it was one-eighth of the monopoly output.
And then again, if you want to go and find out
the best-case scenario for the viability collusion,
you want to think in terms of trigger strategies.
What are trigger strategies?
Intuitively?
Punish.
Yes. The harshest punishment that you can muster.
And you do the very mean,
and the very angriest response,
which again, like is interesting theoretically.
Although, he said also if you take
that Shelling's focal point seriously,
the trigger strategy seem to be one of
the ways that people deal with betrayal.
Not the only way by any means,
but it is one fairly common reaction actually,
to clear-cut betrayal is,
that's it, I will never have anything to do with you again.
Don't dark, never darken my door again.
We are done.
Right. So, that does happen.
And if you go and read human history,
you will see there are wars of annihilation,
where what happens to the other side?
Kill them all.
All right. So, it's not so common in modern worlds,
but nevertheless, this is,
the trigger strategies are definitely in
the repertoire of psychologically plausible behavior for
human beings. And you may even know some people like this.
It's not bad as long as they are infallible.
For people who combine trigger strategies with normal human error,
then this often leads them to lose all their friends,
one by one, or maybe many at a time,
and then finally be totally alone.
When I'm sitting around writing, but writing
autobiographies about everyone has betrayed me.
Everyone's betrayed me.
There's one, one of my favorite economists who I will not name.
He redesigned biography.
Basically, every chapter ends with,
and then, someone I thought was my dear friend stabbed me in the back.
The next chapter, another friend stabbed me in the back.
You're like, again, either you're a very unlucky person,
or you're doing something to really provoke people.
What you call betrayal is them just trying to survive,
or maybe you just have a very uncharitable view of other people's behavior.
So, they went and asked to stop for a donut,
and you're saying it's the ultimate betrayal.
Not to be revealed, but he is telling the truth.
That might do something for you.
All right. So, you're doing trigger strategies,
and therefore, one defection leads to the permanent end of collusion of any kind.
All right. So, in this case, collusion will be sustainable as long as a one-inch share
of the monopoly profits forever is worth more than
100 percent of the monopoly profits for once, followed by zero percent.
Again, why that?
Well, what happens in the Patron model if you cut your price by a penny,
compared to everybody else?
You get the entire market.
So, you get approximately 100 percent.
Technically, it's almost 100 percent.
In a continuous world, it would actually be literally 100 percent
because of funny properties of continuity.
Remember funny properties of continuity,
where you can go down by an infinitesimal percent,
and then there's actually no visible change in the previous amount of the story.
I'm not too much. All right.
So, formally, the condition is this.
So, you're comparing a one-inch share for periods t equals zero to infinity,
of the discounted value of monopoly profits forever.
You want to see if that is better than getting all the monopoly profits once.
So, which would you rather have?
A one-inch share of monopoly profits forever,
or 100 percent of the monopoly profits once?
Again, you don't show other periods because you're getting
zero profits forever with your strategies.
Make sense? Because that's the whole idea.
Find the betrayal. After the betrayal,
there was no- the cartel is dead forever.
The cartel will never rise again.
And this is, of course,
a really easy infinite sum.
It's going to let us- all the good stuff cancels.
And it leads us with beta must be greater than or equal to n minus one over n.
So, of course, if beta is- so,
if there's only one firm,
then beta is zero,
and this says that a monopolist never betrays himself.
All right. So, if there's only one firm,
then beta just has to be greater than or equal to zero.
And so, this would be like saying,
well, I could go and cheat myself.
Like, when would- when are you so impatient that you want to cheat yourself?
No, you're never so impatient that you want to cheat yourself.
That would be stupid. All right.
But if you have n is two,
then the critical value of beta is a half.
And if n is 10,
the critical value of beta is 0.9.
And so on. All right.
So, the more firms there are,
the more patient every firm has to be in order to sustain collusion.
Now, some fun things about this.
Suppose that there are 10 firms that are colluding,
and that nine of them have beta of a beta of one,
and then one of them has a beta of 0.5.
Do we just go and average- and average their betas,
and then find out the collusion works?
No. No. Well, why not?
Because the- only the ninth- tenth firm is going to-
Yes. Yes. So, you know,
like how- how many firms have to cooperate for 10 firms to all cooperate?
Ten. So, if there is one weak link,
there is one impatient, greedy,
grasping firm that destroys the entire cartel with trigger strategies.
All right. And so, really what we're looking for is the minimum beta.
We're looking for the minimum beta.
We need to have the beta,
and so we- so, you know, if they all have the same beta,
that doesn't make any difference.
But if there are different betas,
then we need to find what firm is the- is the least patient,
and they set a limit on whether collusion can work or not,
which is kind of an interesting result.
Okay. So, questions about that?
Everyone happy? Everyone happy about that?
Good. So, why don't we go and take our break,
and then when we come back,
we'll do some of the least pleasant math we've ever done in this class.
But, you know, that- that can be optimistic or pessimistic.
All right. So, solving for collusion with- solving for
transcollusion with trigger strategies is super easy.
Barely any math at all.
Almost everything cancels out. What about Pernot?
Pernot is a giant pain in the neck,
but we will work through it just- just to see
how models like this work.
Okay. All right. So, in Cournot,
the worst thing we've threatened to do is just to go back to the Cournot outcome.
And here's the interesting thing.
Remember, so, the uncooperative Bertrand outcome gives every firm how much profit?
Zero. Zero. The uncooperative Cournot equilibrium,
on the other- the other hand, gives firms some profits.
So, the punishment just isn't as bad in Cournot.
However, the temptation isn't as bad either.
Because the Bertrand, if you cut your price,
or if you- if you deviate just a little bit,
you get all the profits.
In Cournot- so, if you cut your price just a little bit,
you get all the profit. In Cournot,
you produce a little bit more output,
you get all the profits.
No, you just get a little bit more profits.
So, with Cournot, both the- both- both the pun-
the punishment isn't as bad, but then the temptation isn't as bad.
So, what is going to happen? All right.
So, well, so we got- we'll write it out in terms of math.
So, here we've got,
as long as you cooperate,
then we've got the same thing as before.
So, as long as you cooperate,
you're going to get one nth share of monopoly profits.
So, t equals zero to infinity,
theta is t, pi t, or pi n.
And that's got to be greater than or equal to what?
Well, here we've actually got two pieces now,
because we're not going to have zero profits if we cheat.
All right. So, we're not going to be punished with zero profits.
So, we're going to have what is called pi v,
that is called our defection profits for one turn.
So, one turn, we get to have the fun of doing whatever is best for ourselves,
ignoring the- ignoring the other effects.
So, we do whatever is best for ourselves.
But then afterwards, we have, again,
due to trigger strategies, destroyed our current job for all time.
And so, then they were back to just regular old Cornell profits.
So, then for real F,
the infinite sum from t equals one to- one to infinity,
a beta raised to t times the pi c,
which are the Cornell profits.
Okay. All right.
Now, using the functional forms from last week's notes,
also known as the 20 minutes ago,
we do that, then pi m is going to be equals a squared over four b.
All right. And pi c will be equal to a squared over b times n plus one squared.
All right. That should just be obvious to everyone at immediate glance, right?
We're going to work that out.
It's a joke. All right.
So, yeah. I mean, I'm just telling you the answer.
So, we don't have to work it out.
It's not obvious to anyone I've ever heard of.
But anyway, those are the answers.
You might remember this if you had like a very algebraic intermediate class,
they might really make you learn the exact problems from Monopoly.
Don't worry about that. But how do you calculate pi d?
Now, pi d is doing pi m,
pi c, at least we know how those models work, right?
So, it's just a matter of torturing yourself and working through all the details.
But how do you figure out pi d?
Right. And here is the answer.
So, we know that the Calusa level output is going to be a over 2b.
Right. So, that's what a Monopoly does.
All right. So, suppose all firms other than yourself do their part.
And then, what do all firms other than yourself produce?
Well, suppose that there are three firms,
and therefore, two other than yourself.
So, each of you are supposed to do a third of that.
So, the other two firms will produce how much of that?
Of those three firms? Two thirds of that.
Suppose that there are 10 firms,
you're one of them, then what do all the other firms do?
Nine tenths of that. So, the amount of output produced by
everybody other than yourself will be equal to n minus 1 over n times that.
That's the Monopoly output.
So, that's the Monopoly level output.
So, n minus 1 over n times the Monopoly output is what everybody other than yourself does.
And then, once we know that,
then we just maximize around that.
Then we just take that for granted and figure out what our best response to that is.
And the answer to that,
so you're going to want to go and maximize a minus b
times your own quantity plus the quantity of everybody other than yourself.
Which before we show that as a summation for all j not equal to i.
But now, we'll go and plug that thing in.
So, then we'll have n minus 1 over n times a over 2b,
close bracket, close parenthesis times qi.
And that's what you're going to want,
this is what you want to maximize now.
So, again, this is just the usual thing that any quarter note for maximizes.
But now, we know by our assumption that what the other firms are going to do is
produce n minus 1 over n of the Monopoly outputs.
Feel good about this? Feel good?
All right, that's the idea. All right.
So, differentiate and simplify and then you'll get qi is going to be equal to
a times n plus 1 all over 4bn.
And then, now, is where the fun begins.
the real algebraic suffering begins,
then q is going to be equal to that thing plus that thing.
And if we go and do all of the algebraic manipulation
to find out, so what, qi plus that equals a times 3n minus 1
all over 4bn.
Now, that's obvious to you that maybe you should be a mathematician.
Because if you're just looking, of course,
a times 3 minus 1, all right.
And then from that, we go back to the demand function,
and we find out p.
And so p for the demand function is just
going to be a times n plus 1 over 4n.
And then we just go and multiply these things.
We're going to multiply pq, p times the market price
is little q, to find out what your defection problems would be.
And it comes out to that thing in the notes, a squared times n
plus 1 squared all over 16bn squared.
And then for collusion, now we can plug everything in.
So collusion will be sustainable if this thing here, right,
if we go and plug that in for pi m,
and we go and we plug that thing that I told you in for pi d,
and we go and put this in for pi c.
So we plug in every single profit function
to find out the profits.
And then we get that giant mess in part j,
which I will not read, because it's a book.
And if you look at that, you may get into a panic,
because it appears to be a fourth degree equation, right.
And who here knows how to solve a fourth degree equation?
Yes.
There is a book that explains it.
The formula is about two pages long.
I'm not reading it.
All right, so economists never solve fourth degree equations.
I have seen economists go and change a model just
to make sure they wouldn't need to have a fourth degree
equation solved, because they'd go, well, why not?
Of course, maybe the world does require you
to solve fourth degree equations.
I think this is a case where you really
do have to give a sociological slash economic theory of people
saying, look, people in my professional subculture
don't solve fourth degree equations.
It's not done.
So if I go and do it, I'm not going to get published.
And then I will not get desirable material possessions
and status.
So I'm not going to change the model
to make sure that it doesn't work out
into a fourth degree model.
This is true for theory.
In empirics, on the other hand, there
are some cases where you're required
to do a fourth degree equation.
20 years ago, there was a paper saying that experience
goes and follows a quartic.
And ever since, technically common papers
put in experience, experience squared, experience cubed,
experience to the fourth power as control variables.
And if you ever wondered, when someone
says I'm going to put in a quartic in experience, why?
Because of this paper 20 years ago said that you should do it,
and now everybody does it.
Of course, it's much easier to go and do that in an OLS
or something than it is to go and get
the formula for getting an analytical solution to an
equation.
But in any case, if you look at this
and think you've got a fourth degree equation,
you are wrong, actually, because we're not solving for n.
We're solving for beta.
So phew, we don't actually need the equation for a fourth
degree equation.
We can just go and use our regular simple math
that we already know, and then we can memorize.
And we get this value of beta, which I will say
is totally counterintuitive.
But if you put in some numbers, then you'll
see the numbers make sense.
If I have n is 2, then beta is 1 by 3.
That's the first value.
So that is Carnot collusion for you.
Now, after doing all this math, it's
worth pointing out that all the math ignores a bunch
of super important things.
And why would the math ignore super important things?
Well, because first of all, the math
is not empirical in the first place.
So it isn't really designed to go and assess
what's important in the real world.
And then secondly, the important things
might actually not require a lot of mathematical ability
to discuss.
And so if you think that possibly economists sometimes
put in extra math just to signal how smart they are in papers,
anyone here holds this cynical and despicable theory?
That I have heard famous economists admit in public,
or the Ashenfelter would sometimes say,
and now this is the part where I added in some needless
complexity to get published.
So I suppose you could be lying about deliberately putting
in some useless math into a paper.
But you seem totally honest to me.
So the main thing that all of this ignores
is new entry, which almost any empirical discussion
of collusion will say is incredibly important.
Because it's one thing just to get
unanimity, which is hard in the first place.
So if there's five firms in the industry,
you have to get all five of them to agree to the collusion, which
is hard enough.
So I always give my students the challenge of,
you guys can all collude in the amount of work
that you do, since this class is great and on a curve.
You can all do less work, have more fun,
and then get the same grade distribution
as you would have otherwise.
I've never seen even a hint that students are successfully
colluding.
Once I did teach a class with only four students in it,
and then I was like, maybe I should not
taunt them in this way, because maybe they would.
All I can say is when I looked at the exams,
at least one student didn't collude.
One student had a score that exceeded that
of the other three.
Maybe they colluded, and he drank them.
But in any case, there's the general problem
of getting unanimity among all firms,
because if all firms but one fail to cooperate,
then it's very hard to make it work.
But on top of it, even if you get all existing firms
in the industry, there's a problem of new entry.
Because if you do manage to get profits up and usually high,
the normal thing for other outside firms
to want to do is say, look, there's high profits.
I want to try.
Again, in principle, you could go and predate on them
as soon as they show up.
But then you need to have a really effective cartel,
a cartel that not only includes everyone,
but where someone snaps his fingers, and then new entry.
Let's all unite against them now.
And then, OK, they're gone.
All right, now go back and resume our regularly scheduled
collusion.
You could try that, but in the real world, not too likely.
If you go in, so very often, the most interesting,
plain ways to learn about collusion
is to go and read the history, economic history
before antitrust.
Because back in those days, there
would be very little dispute about what the facts are.
Today, if you want to collude, you need to do it secretly.
And if people are doing it secretly,
then there can always be some people saying,
it happened in secret, and other people saying,
no, it didn't happen at all.
But in the 19th century, you can often go and see
people in the newspaper saying, we're
trying to go and reduce leather production to raise prices.
And you can see what happened.
And all the problems that you hear about in a good econ
class are very evident in 19th century cartels, where, yes,
first of all, there's the trouble of getting
all the firms in the industry in.
And then there's the trouble of new entry.
And one that's one particularly interesting kind of new entry
is that very often, you would go and buy someone out,
and then they would just start, take the money you gave them,
and build a new firm, and then start competing with you.
Usually, there would be an early version of a non-compete clause
where they would promise to not enter
the industry for five years.
But again, in the real world, it would often
take three or four years just to get the cartel working
and functional.
And then a guy says, well, one year from today,
I'm opening the doors for my new firm.
So they had a great deal of trouble.
So questions about collusion?
Anyone wondering about collusion?
And moving on.
So public goods and game theory.
So I assume everyone here has heard about public goods
and externalities at some point.
All right, good.
So there's a lot of treatments that emphasize non-rivalry,
although actually, non-rivalry intrinsically
has absolutely nothing at all to do with this.
You can have a totally private good with non-rivalry,
as long as you don't have perfect competition.
So right here in this Cournot model we talked about,
we got zero marginal cost.
So is there non-rivalry?
You could produce one more unit without actually going
and taking away from anybody else.
And there are many firms that we think of as private
where actually they're clearly non-rival.
So go to a movie theater during the matinee, a bunch of MTCs,
so non-rival.
In fact, the more you think about it,
the harder it is to find rivalry.
Because suppose you go to a restaurant
and you order some food.
You might see the food's rival.
It's like, well, wait a second.
What was going to happen to that food if you didn't order it?
A lot of times it was just going to get thrown out
at the end of the day.
So maybe the food was rival too.
Awesome.
You look puzzled.
Very often a restaurant will make 100 meals.
And then if 90 people show up, what
do they do with the other 10 meals?
They throw them away.
So then if person 91 comes up, the marginal cost
of getting that food is basically zero.
So anyway, a lot of treatments talk about non-rivalry.
But really, non-excludability is what
makes these cases special and interesting.
And again, with non-excludability,
there is this basic logic of selfishness,
which is by definition of this non-rivalry,
that there's no, or assuming non-excludability,
there's no feasible way to exclude non-payers.
And then if there's no way to exclude non-payers
and people are selfish, what will the selfish people do?
Yes.
So wait, can I get the benefit whether or not I pay?
Yes.
And I'm selfish?
Yes.
Then I guess I won't pay.
I'll just keep the money.
And again, imagine that you actually pass a hat.
And you invite people, put in money
to contribute to however much you want.
And the selfish people all put in zero.
And then you go to a producer and say,
would you produce this public good in exchange
for the contents of this hat?
And then he says, show me what's in the hat.
Sorry, there's nothing in the hat.
All right, so that's the end of it.
There's no one to pay for it.
Well, selfish producers are not going to provide it.
So this does lead us to standard diagrams
for externalities of public goods.
So positive and negative externalities are really easy.
There's actually two ways you can do it,
but I'm going to show you the easiest way of all I do.
So this is just quantity, price, supply to mend.
And then the idea of a positive externality
is that there's some additional benefits that go to bystanders,
people who don't have to pay to get them.
And so we can just add a social benefits curve
on top, which includes the benefits to the paying
customers plus all the benefits to the bystanders.
All the benefits to the bystanders.
And then, since people in markets are selfish,
where do they produce given all these bystanders around
who enjoy what they do for free?
Intersection of supply and demand.
Intersection of supply and demand, yes.
So wait, so you're telling me there's a bunch of bystanders
and they don't pay us anything, but there's a lot of them.
How many?
Trillion.
I think I'll still produce at the intersection of supply
and demand.
So they don't do anything for me,
so why should I do anything for them?
But the efficient outcome, the Calgary's efficient outcome
is going to be the intersection of supply and social benefits
because for these marginal units here,
the social benefits are actually greater.
Why then are markets ignoring them?
Because they're bystanders.
Because they're people who are sitting,
enjoying these monocultural benefits, not contributing.
And again, why would they?
Why would they contribute when whatever they're going to get,
they get for free?
And if they were to go and offer some money,
they wouldn't get any more because it's just one person.
So that case leads to positive externalities.
Then the deadweight costs or the deadweight losses
will be shown here, where again, basically we're
losing all of this value where social benefits exceed
the social costs.
So supply shows social costs, social benefits
show social benefits, so all of these units don't happen.
All of these units on the other end do happen.
So even though there's an externality,
there's no efficiency loss there.
Then it's just the bystanders get to enjoy themselves.
And the burden is borne by the producers and the pet
customers.
So that's positive externalities.
And then we've got the corresponding case
of the negative externalities.
So again, here we got supply, here we got demand.
And now we've got social benefits below the demand curve.
And these are cases where there's bystanders who
are suffering, bystanders who are suffering,
who find it unpleasant in some way.
So and then again, what does the market do?
Market goes to the intersection of which two curves?
Supply and demand.
Supply and demand, because that's
what the pet customers care about.
You say, look, but there's a bunch of freeloaders
who are suffering.
Wait, what are freeloaders again?
The people who don't pay you any money,
don't do anything for you?
I'm in business to make money, so those people
are irrelevant as far as I'm concerned.
So in that case, what you produce here, again,
the efficient thing is at the intersection of social benefits
and supply.
And again, the problem now is that we're
losing a bunch of units where the social value is down here,
but the social cost is up there.
And so then we have those deadweight losses.
So that's the negative externality.
All right, now, where do public goods
and the corresponding category of public bads come in?
So here I'm going to tell you something
weird that you may have never heard before.
And that is there's two actual ways
that economists use the concept of public goods and public
bads.
There's the textbook version, and then there's
what they really do.
So in the textbook, you might remember
is something's a public good, and it's not
a solutable and non-rival.
But when you actually hear the things that economists
describe as public goods, often they are totally rival,
and they're often also least partly solutable.
So then why are they called the public goods?
That's kind of odd.
But anyway, so I have a pet theory that explains,
well, at least I think it explains generally
when do economists stop talking about positive externalities
and start talking about public goods.
And my pet theory is that people switch over just when,
like in the case of positive externalities,
they switch over when the social benefits are huge compared
to actual market event.
So basically, in practice, economists
treat public goods as an extreme kind of positive externalities.
It would be something like this, where this is supply,
and then demand is basically down there,
and then social benefits are up here.
So this is when economists actually generally switch over
to public goods.
So basically, demand is really low.
It doesn't need to literally be there.
But if there's very little market demand,
so that the intersection of supply and demand
would be somewhere around zero, but there's still
some potential social benefits, then they switch over
and call it a public good.
So like the Swiss military during World War II.
So is that rival?
Sure.
So there's a legal facility.
If you go and put more defenses in one area of Switzerland,
there's other places that are going to be less dependent.
And then even for excludability, there's
something, some kinds of defense that you
can do where we'll actually defend some people rather
than others.
But the main thing is just that there's almost no demand.
There's almost no market demand.
If you went past the hat, you'd be
like a Swiss hat with a feather in it, for contributions,
it would probably be very little compared
to the social benefits of not being
dominated by the Nazis.
And then similarly, if you'll buy this
as what public goods are, then I'd
say public goods are really just in practice.
So this is a description of how economists really use the word
or really use the phrase rather than what the textbook says.
And maybe the textbook just doesn't accurately
explain what economists switch from between the terms.
But anyway, so that's a case where you've got supply.
And the public bad is the case where
you've got substantial demand, but where
the social benefits are basically around zero.
So you can think of public bads as the bad.
Public bads are things where if you could just
wave a wand to make the thing impossible,
it would actually be socially beneficial.
Like for example, you could say murder for hire
is a public bad.
Do you want to leave some murder for hire around?
Which is very different from, say, pollution.
For pollution, if you say, let's go and wave a wand
and make it impossible for anyone to pollute.
Notice that's different from waving a wand
and getting rid of the pollution.
That's always good.
If you wave a wand, which prevents anyone
from using a polluting technology.
Suppose we were to do this today.
We wave a wand and anyone who tries
to use a polluting technology dies on the spot.
Now, what would happen to society
within a matter of months if we did this without any warning?
First person that goes to the bathroom dies.
Yes.
Yeah, well, that too.
Suppose those like fossil fuels.
Suppose we ban any use of fossil fuels.
Well, within a few months, most of us would just be dead.
If you had a lot of warning, maybe
we'd develop some alternative technologies.
But without any warning, this would
destroy the entire transportation system,
the entire crop harvesting system,
the entire, like really the whole agricultural system,
all depends upon fossil fuels.
So if you would go and ban the pollutants without warning,
it would just kill most of the people on Earth.
On the other hand, if you just ban murder for hire,
what's the downside of that?
You just stop it, prevent it.
No one can do it anymore.
Or you could stop murder.
If we stop murder, then we won't be
able to threaten to execute anyone for murder anymore.
Well, at least we won't need to, because there
will be no more murder.
So you think of the regular negative externalities
are things where there's a good with a negative side effect,
but still it is worthwhile having the good exist
to some degree.
And the public bads are ones where they're so worthless
that if you could simply prevent their existence,
not preventing the existence of the bad things,
that's trivial, but prevent the existence of the thing that
is a bad thing, then with public bads,
actually, it would be totally worthwhile if you could do it.
So questions about this?
So again, I am well aware that this is not,
but it's in textbooks.
I'm just claiming that if you listen carefully
when economists stop just saying positive or negative
externalities and switch to public goods and public bads,
usually they switch when it's an extreme case,
where for public goods, they think
there'll be almost no market demand,
and for public bads, where they think
there's no social value.
So of course, maybe some of you like textbooks,
and then you would exchange what the textbooks say.
And then this will all be clear.
Now, just some things to notice about this.
So one is, suppose you've got a monopoly.
What would happen if it were like,
would it be better or worse if the monopoly also
had a negative externality?
Yes, better.
Why?
Because they'd be producing less of the goods.
Yes, yes.
So intuitively, people think of a polluting monopolist
as being worse than something that's only a monopoly.
monopoly or only polluting. But if you understand what the model says, the model says that monopoly
does the bad thing of producing too little and polluters do the bad thing of producing
too much. So if you combine both problems, it is theoretically possible that they exactly
cancel out and a polluting monopolist is actually great.
And again, this is the kind of thing that is so baffling to most people that, so remember
when you're like, two years ago I told my son, I was prepping my son for the APE contest,
I told him this on vacation and they got it wrong, but then it was on the test and they
got it right. Yes, all right. So it's like, you're in a hotel for five minutes waiting
and I say, well, why don't I go and tell you about the interaction of monopoly and externalities
like most families discuss on vacation. All right, yeah, so you've got that.
And let's see, so it has this one, one interesting case.
Oh yeah, and then another one is, suppose that you have both a positive and a negative
externality. Does this mean you have two problems to fix?
Yeah, again, they could just totally cancel out. Right, so actually if you start off with
a negative externality, then a positive externality turns up, the two things can actually balance
each other out and again, there is in fact no problem. It all depends upon the magnitudes.
All right, so questions, questions about this? All right, and yeah, so also with Weill, so
now normal people when they hear about externalities, so go back to econ one.
All right, there's a certain kind of student who is miserable for most of econ one because
the econ teacher keeps telling them, you know something that you care about, you're wrong.
You don't think of something you think is a problem, it's actually fine.
You don't think of something you think is fine, it's actually a problem.
All right, and they hear a lot of this stuff and they keep getting more and more frustrated.
Then finally in week 12, they bring up externalities and then the student says, ah, finally.
This is the theory that explains why everything that I always thought before this class is
actually true after all. All right, and I can ignore everything that I learned in the
first 12 weeks. All right, and actually that is not what externalities are all about.
Externalities are not a general excuse for whatever people believe beforehand.
It's actually a very specific theory which does change the stuff in the previous 12 weeks,
but often in counterintuitive ways such as polluting monopolists are better than non-polluting
monopolists, things like that. All right, now one of the things that people
generally believe before studying economics is that there is something that markets are
doing that is bad that the proper response is to do what?
Well, a normal human being seems a firm polluting and they say that should be banned.
No, economists say taxed. Normal human beings say banned. Normal human beings say banned.
So banned, right? And again, this is a, of course, in a case that extreme, then the ban
may actually make sense. Although in the real world, of course, there would probably be
so much black market activity and so on that even then, you know, you can't really, like,
banning it is not really even possible. Of course, you can legally say that murder for
hire is banned, but in practice, it still goes on because we don't spend the resources
and we probably couldn't spend enough resources to get rid of it. You could reduce it, but
to get rid of it entirely is pretty tough. All right, but anyway, so, but for more moderate
things, just think of it like bad pollution. So, you know, so, ban, you ban swearing,
you ban pornography, okay? So when banning comes very naturally to people, even though
of course when you go and look at the model, you'll see, well, wait a second, just because
there's some extra reality doesn't mean that there isn't still a lot of value being produced,
right? And that brings us to what is the normal economist reaction, the why sensible reaction,
the measured, considered reaction, which is taxed. Without an exclamation point.
No strong growth should not ban the, all right. And you get, of course, a tax where it's based
upon the actual size of the problem. So, yes. And then, similarly, when you go to the positive
externality, what is a normal human reaction? Not what an economist reaction, what is a
normal human reaction to any industry of positive externalities? The government should, yeah,
own it. Subsidize it. Yes, even better. The government should own it and provide it for
free. That's the way that it ought to be. So, you know, nationalize. Exclamation point.
And again, the measured, wise, considered economist reaction is, instead, to say subsidize.
We don't give it, subsidize. So that is a key difference there. All right. Now, of course,
even this does not consider public choice issues where we do public choice. Actually,
last week, we last week of the semester, we do public choice where, in the real world,
you may be concerned that when you give government the power to subsidize anything that it says
has a positive externality and tax anything that it says has a negative externality, you'll
just wind up getting a giant orgy of rent seeking and you'll end up thinking, maybe
we should have just lived with the problem. Yes. Well, just go down to D.C. and you can
see it. Right? There's a million ugly buildings with signs on them, but that's what's going
on. All right. So, questions? Questions? Questions? Anyone happy? All right. A little more sad,
but that's just. All right. And then, by the way, of course, in the real world, like
other questions on the verge are things like, when you say tax it, what is it exactly? So,
for example, if you're concerned about the negative externalities of driving, all right,
so what exactly does it make sense to tax? Well, there's something, well, what exactly
am I complaining about? There's a bunch of things you might be complaining about from
driving. All right. So, like, what are a bunch of different complaints people have?
Admissions. Yeah, admissions. And then traffic. Traffic. Congestion. Yes, yeah, congestion,
traffic. All right. And then, actually, when you think about it, like, each of these actually
a totally different kind of tax would apply. So, if you're talking about admissions, then
you want to go and base the tax upon the amount that you're bidding. Right? And then you would
do things which are like the opposite of what we actually do, which is there would be low
taxes for modern cars that have low emissions and high taxes for antique car collectors
like my dad. All right. So, those are the cars that produce a lot. Right? But then,
similarly, I mean, right now we have a system where you go and get an admissions inspection
and then they, what do they say? Either your emissions per minute are good enough and you
can drive as much as you want for no additional cost, or you're over and now you're illegal
regardless of how rarely you drive. Of course, unless it's a certified antique, in which
case you can pollute as much as you want. All right. That's, again, actual real world
policy, which bears little resemblance to what would make sense in terms of the model.
And then, similarly, for congestion, there it's even more obvious that, like the gas
tax. Is the gas tax a sensible response to congestion? No. Why is it such a terrible
response to congestion? Because it doesn't incentivize driving at certain times. Yes.
Or in congested parts of the country. If you're driving across the country, roughly what percentage
of the country has no congestion problem whatsoever? 95, 99. Again, we have a federal tax on gasoline,
which applies to the entire country. Again, like a more, say, like if you would have to
do it through gasoline, much more sensible would have it be to be local gasoline taxes
based upon how much congestion is happening right around there. Either you say, well,
people might know and buy the gas in a cheaper, more distant place. So maybe like a regional
level where like within a few hours drive, but that would be about it. Or, of course,
you could do something which is now completely technologically feasible, which is congested
road pricing, which is gradually merging. You may have noticed the new tolls around
66. When I first heard about it, it sounded really great until I found out, wait a second,
it remains. So you still could drive for three with HOV2 for several more years. So actually
the main result is just that almost, is that the people then have two more people to keep
driving during this time. And since it was totally congested already with that level,
anyone commute in the morning so like you actually notice any change? Wouldn't think
so. But it does mean that now if you only have one person, you could then go and pay
a very small, exorbitant amount of driving at that time. So you do have that. But again,
so if you were to go and raise it up to HOV3 or 4 or HOV infinity, that would be where
you would actually go and solve the problem. It is supposed to go up to HOV3 in a few years
and that probably will make a big difference, I would guess. Because a lot of people in
one frame make a big difference. Two frames, that's actually a lot. And then similarly
here for subsidizing. So many people said, well, education is positive externality, so
subsidize it. This is one where no matter how you go, so first if you've read my recent
book on education, you know this is even worse than it sounds. But just ignore this for a
second. Well, what parts of education, what kinds of education are allegedly of subsidies?
Rather than allegedly positive externalities? Is it supposed to be like the reading and
the math that are positive externalities? Seems like the market pays you for those.
So, what kinds of education would people intuitively think of as having these positive externalities?
Yeah, what was that?
Stem.
Oh yeah, so like for R&D maybe. So like the R&D part, although not if you're just going
to get a stem degree and then go to Wall Street, which is a much more common, very common.
So, people often mention civics. Like civics makes us better voters. Or you say economics.
Economics makes people much better voters than civics, right? So then, rather than
just having like blanket subsidies where you say education in general gets money poured
on it, you would say no, there's some that doesn't get any, and then there's other stuff
where it gets a lot more. Although even there, once you accept, wait a second, what we really
want to do is promote knowledge of civics or economics. Why is it we go and focus on
subsidizing an input? An input which we have a lot of evidence says is highly ineffective.
So, rather than going and saying everyone can get heavily subsidized civics classes,
which if you look at the data, there's very little knowledge of civics, and furthermore
there's no incentive at all to retain it. So like what other method could you use to
subsidize civic knowledge, rather than just going and making cheap classes when the subject
is available?
Require it for voting or something like that?
Yeah, you could require it for voting, although even that, I mean probably the normal reaction
would just be fine, I just won't vote if I have to know civics and you want me to vote.
I don't feel like, what I have to learn something to vote? No thanks.
But doesn't that make better outcomes then?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, very well could.
But again, so the whole intuition behind this is to very clearly say what exactly do you
want to happen, and then subsidize that exact thing. So one of my most performance proposals
is to say, how about this, every year we have a national test of civics, say three weeks
before the election, and if you get a good score on it, you get money. The end.
Just money?
Yes, you get money, the end. Now, key feature of the system, you're allowed to retake the
test every single year. Why? Because otherwise people forget stuff. So this encourages people
to refresh and remember and keep learning all the time. And also of course, if you just
get money for a good score, then you can go and figure out what is the best way to learn
this stuff. Maybe the best thing to do is to go and take a class. Then again, maybe
that's a terrible way, given that almost everyone has to do years of this and almost no one
knows anything. Probably is a terrible way. So maybe it would be better to go and read
books and take practice tests. Right? And this way you would give people an incentive
to go and acquire the exact skill you think they should have in the least cost way and
to retain the knowledge so they can keep using it.
So again, this is very much in the spirit of the model, but of course, normally what
people do with externalities or public goods arguments is just to look at something that
they already want to have, a policy they already favor in the real world, and say there's the
part of the textbook that rationalizes something that I already wanted. Rather than really
doing the right thing, which is to hold up reality to the mirror and say is there any
way in which what we do does not measure up? Is there any failure to appreciate the model
in the real world? My story, once you really understand the model, you'll see that the
real world is only a pale reflection of the model. Even the cases where people think that
they've got a great story worked out, they don't really have a great story. It's mostly
just post hoc rationalization because people want to say that the real world is okay.
The real world is not okay. The real world must repent. And this is where the repentance
begins.
All right. Questions about repentance?
Related topics?
Yes.
All right.
All right. That case is moving on.
All right. So people often say that collusion is a public good for the firms that are in
the industry. The idea is all the firms in the industry would be better off if they all
would produce less. But holding constant the behavior of all the firms, everybody wants
to produce more. All right. And so you might think that we could go and take everything
we learned about collusion and use it to analyze public good. So that's what we're going to
do next.
All right. So let's imagine a voluntary donation game. There's a voluntary donation game,
which is going to look almost exactly like the Crono game because it's modeled to be
exactly like the Crono game.
All right. So suppose we got individual utility function depends on total contributions times
the personal consumption. So the utility person i is equal to the consumption person i times
total donations, where d is equal to the summation of all donations, and where consumption plus
your donations have to equal one. So you see what's going on here. Everybody has to divide
their income between their personal consumption and donations, and all the money gets donated
gets summed up to a big total donation. And then our utility depends upon our product
over consumption and total donations. Total donations. So in your ideal world, you donate
nothing, and everybody else donates everything, and then you get the best possible result
for yourself.
All right. So if you look for this metric equilibrium, then again, it's just going to
look almost exactly like Crono. And what we get is c is going to be equal to n over n
plus one. So if there were only one person that says that you would donate half and consume
half, because you're just one person. So if you're one person, then there's no externality,
right? So you would have yourself as the optimal. But as the number of people rises, the share
that you keep of yourself to consume keeps going up. And yet the social optimum actually
stays constant at 0.5 per person. All right. So as the number of individuals rises, then
the contribution per person of public goods goes down. Which intuitively makes sense,
right? That's what you'd expect. All right. And then similarly, suppose that what happens
when n goes to infinity? When n goes to infinity, what happens to consumption?
C goes to 1.
Yeah, consumption goes to 1. So it says when the number of people is infinite, then there's
no point donating anything, because you can't make any noticeable difference. Now this is
the non-cooperative result. This is when everybody donates, ignoring anyone else. All right.
So you could, in a repeated game, then maybe you could get to a higher level of cooperation,
right? You could say, look, if other people don't donate enough, then I'm not going to
donate anymore, and I will punish you by keeping it. And in theory, it's possible that you
could go and get cooperation. Just like in theory with repeated play with collusion,
you can go and get cooperation. But again, just like with that, clearly with the Bertrand
game, the more people that are contributing, the higher the level of patience you need
to get voluntary cooperation to work. Right? Make sense?
All right. Okay. So that's that model. All right. And now, return to a figure that Walter
Williams never talked about. Ronald Coase. All right. So in Ronald Coase's famous paper,
The Problem of Social Cost, what he said is that all the stuff you think of as externalities
and public goods problems, really, really are all just disguised transactions cost problems.
So there's really no such thing, actually, as something that's just an externality problem
as to public good. It's all about transactions costs. And again, the idea is that if there
were zero transactions costs, we would all just bargain to the efficient outcome. Right?
Of course, the transactions costs, for them to be zero, as I mentioned in week one, you'd
have to have a bunch of superpowers, such as telepathy. Right? You need telepathy to
have zero transactions costs because you need to know how much other people are really willing
to pay to know what in order to, and you need to have it pop in your head in order to costlessly
be able to achieve all transactions. Okay. Yeah. This Coase argument does give us an
extra reason to think that as the number of firms goes up, the cooperation goes down.
And that's just because when there's more transactors, transactions costs goes up. So
notice, this is a totally different argument from what we were looking at with Bertrand.
So, or with Cornell. Right? So none of that had anything to do with transactions costs.
Right? When we did Bertrand collusion, Cornell collusion, did I ever mention transactions
costs? No. We just proved, given the assumptions, that as n went up, that the amount of cooperation
would go down. So, this Coase argument, we can add it on top of that. It's an extra additional
argument saying why it is that with more cooperation, or more cooperators, there's going to actually
be less cooperation. So, that is one reason to actually think that when there's more firms,
there's going to be less cooperation, which is true for both good and ill. What do you
think about it? Right? Because it means that when there's more firms, there's going to
be fewer, it's less likely that firms will all get together and form a voluntary cartel.
It also means, though, that a bunch of donors are less likely to get together and voluntarily
pool the resources to provide a public good. So you get both problems simultaneously caused
by transactions costs. But, here is the good news. In the real world, there is often something
called enforceable contracts. Or actually, given what I just said, it's kind of good
and bad news. Right? So, enforceable contracts is basically a way that you can get a lot
that you can change your own incentives.
So you realize, look, if the two of us each do our own thing,
it's going to be bad for both of us.
But we can sign a contract where we both
agree to take each other's interests into account.
And then this will be good for us.
And someone says, well, yeah, but why
is putting your name on a piece of paper
make you do what's good for me?
Well, part of signing the contract
is that once you sign it, you are making yourself
legally vulnerable to penalties or punishment
if you don't do what you promise.
So you are essentially changing the game.
You're changing the payoffs for your game.
Thank you.
There you are.
And what's interesting is when you really think about it,
with enforceable contracts can be way better
than trigger strategies.
Because trigger strategies, basically all you can do
is just go back to the pre-agreement situation.
But with enforceable contracts, you would go and say,
you will go and be punished.
You owe me $1 million.
You owe me all the harm.
You owe me more than the harm.
So that's possible.
So after the midterm, we'll talk a bit about some strange limits
on enforceable contracts.
This is worth pointing out.
So in the US legal system, and in general
in the Anglo-American tradition, I
guess there was a controversy about using this phrase,
but it's a technical phrase in the law,
referring to laws descending from England, which
some countries with almost no English people still use.
And other countries with a lot of English people don't use.
Anyway.
So in this tradition, there is a strange rule
which has been around for a long time saying
you are not allowed to put a penalty clause in a contract.
Now, you say, what does that mean,
that you can never put something into a contract that
penalizes someone?
No, because there are lawyers involved,
and there's a fine difference between a penalty clause
and something that penalizes someone.
They're totally different things.
Like, well, how would you know the difference?
Well, here's one way.
If there's a section of the contract that says,
the penalty clause shall hereby be X, then you're out of luck.
You have used the wrong language,
and then that will not be enforced by the courts.
So that's one thing to not do if you
want to put in a penalty clause.
But what else?
Well, it just seems too much like if there's
something where it says you owe me twice the harm.
Say, wait a second.
Twice the harm?
That seems like one more times the harm
than you would get if you weren't penalizing the person.
So in general, anything that says
you can go and you owe them all the harm they've done,
then that's fine.
Because then you're not, if there's not a penalty,
then you're just making it up to them.
But if it says you have to pay them more than you've harmed
them, that's a problem.
Now, again, if you have a smart lawyer, they will just say,
well, we'll just stipulate that we say the harm is $3 million.
And if the business says, yeah, but the harm is actually
only $1 billion.
Sorry, I couldn't hear what you just said there.
That was garbled.
Because if that was what you were saying,
then there would be a legal problem
if we were enforcing this.
And there indeed is one.
So you didn't say that.
That kind of mentality.
All right, now, Robin Hanson, in his dissertation,
had a chapter on how strange it is that you can't
have an explicit penalty clause.
And again, with the whole point of a penalty,
why would you want to have a penalty clause?
Because you want to give someone a really strong incentive
to not betray you.
It's very important to you that they cooperate.
And again, why would it be so important?
Well, here's an obvious reason.
What if a lot of times they can fail to cooperate
and you won't notice?
Suppose there's only a 10% chance of you noticing.
So if you catch them, they owe you the damages.
And if you don't catch them, what do they
have to pay you by definition?
Nothing.
So that is a case where it would make a lot of sense
to have a penalty clause.
Totally understandable, great business reasoning,
great efficiency reasoning.
And yet the Anglo-American legal tradition
says, no, that's not allowed.
Yes?
What about a warranty, so there are warranties where if a
product is malfunctioning, you owe someone?
Yeah, yes.
So here's the other thing about the system, which
is that if a firm offered you that
and you took them to court, then by the letter of the law,
you could probably only get the original money back.
In practice, since there are almost no warranties
that would be enforced by court, it's
just a matter of reputation.
You go to them, say you set double the money back,
and they give it to you.
So again, it's legal to offer it.
So it's not that you go to jail for going and putting
a penalty clause in the contract.
It's just the court will not acknowledge it.
So anyway, after the midterm, we'll talk about this.
But it does seem like this is a strange limitation
on people's ability to go and voluntarily solve
their cooperation problems by contract.
So questions about enforceable contracts
and how really the principle, like enforceable contracts
would allow you to turn any game into any other game.
So you're bound to be in a prisoner's limits.
So you both sign a contract saying that if you go and don't
cooperate, then you owe me $1 million.
And then you go and redraw the entire payoff matrix.
Really, a contract could just be to say,
here's the original payoff matrix.
Here's the revised payoff matrix based
upon the terms of this contract.
And then you could make cooperation strictly dominant.
And all problems could be solved that way, the principle.
All right.
Now, when you look at experiments, funny thing
is that we generally see way too much cooperation.
We see way more cooperation than you get from repeated play,
especially as people cooperate in one-shot games.
And we also see a lot more cooperation
than codes would allow, because people often
cooperate without negotiation.
So odd.
What should we learn?
What should we do?
What should we think about this?
Well, here's the obvious answer.
People aren't as selfish as economists assume.
There's other explanations, but this
seems like a pretty obvious one.
Why would people cooperate when it's not in their interests?
They don't always act in their interest.
Another one would be they don't understand the game,
which is possible.
Although, if the game is really transparent,
like a dictator game, what can you tell them?
Here's the game.
You'll give as much money as you want to the other guy.
The end.
How many people will not understand that game?
Seems like a super obvious game.
In fact, we all play that game all day.
Whenever you don't give your money away to other people,
you're playing this game.
So questions?
Now, something kind of interesting about this is,
if you think that what's going on
is that people are cooperating more than they normally would
because they're not selfish, then we
might actually get a more optimistic result
than I was suggesting earlier.
Because remember before I was saying that basically anything
that leads to reduced collusion in an industry
will also lead to reduced cooperation
in public goods games.
Because they're basically the same model.
It's not that model is just the same as Cornell.
So you might say, look, any story
about how it's possible to get a good outcome in Cornell
means that you're likely to get a good outcome in Cornell.
Also implies that voluntary public goods
permission is not going to work.
And on the other hand, if you say
that you are able to go and that collusion,
that you are able to go and get voluntary solutions
to public goods games, it also seems equally plausible
that you would get voluntary solutions to cartels
and that cartels would work.
So this is an argument that I had first
had with Tyler 25 years ago.
Anyway, so I do have a paper with that string
in where we show why he's wrong.
And here, in the real world, which
is the really important place to be wrong or right,
is the real world.
And this says, look, if the reason why
we get extra cooperation is that people aren't selfish,
then we actually need to look at what people consider
to be selfish or unselfish in a given situation.
So when you are raising money for charity
to go and help people, what is generally
considered to be the unselfish thing to do?
Donate.
So in that case, we'd expect that we
will get more donations than you'd expect given selfishness.
On the other hand, what is generally
considered the selfish thing to do
when you are trying to get a collusion on an AIDS drug, say?
What is considered the unselfish thing to do?
The unselfish thing?
The unselfish thing.
The unselfish thing.
Like the compassionate, kind, decent thing to do.
Not collude.
Right.
So if you think that the extra cooperation is being caused
by unselfish motivation, this is a reason
to actually think that things that people actually
view favorably, like donating to charity,
actually you will get good outcomes.
Things that people socially view unfavorably,
like trying to restrict the supply of food
in order to get more money for you and starve children,
that will actually work no better than expected.
Or maybe it would be worse than expected.
People's consciences might bother them.
And then once you start thinking about this,
you want to think, well, are there
any cartels that are moralized?
Moralized cartels where the members actually
regard someone who goes and produces more and cuts prices
being evil.
Unions?
Yeah.
So unions are a good example.
So I remember once I was in New York on May Day,
and there was a big May Day parade
that I happened to wander across.
And they had a 15-foot inflatable rat.
And there was a big sign on the rat that said,
don't be a rat scab.
So this was a case where they had actually
embraced the norm of, it's not just
that it makes us more money.
It's the morally good thing to do.
Whereas when Swiss executives fixed the price of aspirin
and ended up in jail in Texas, there's
no report that when they were doing this,
they were saying, we must do this
for the good of aspirin workers all over the world.
They're all counting on us and our selfless sacrifice.
That was not it.
It was like, all right, so we'll go and make more money
with our aspirin.
Oh, no.
That's not it.
They did not seem to see themselves as heroes.
Whereas, yes, so in unions, they may see themselves as a hero.
Sometimes farmers actually seem to see themselves
as a relic when they cut production
at certain times and places.
Like farmers in the US in the 20s,
they seemed actually in a very moralized view of it.
But again, normally not.
So the number of people that would die for a union,
there are people who have done this.
The number of people that would die for an OPEC,
that seems like a pretty straight answer.
Number of people that would die for standard oil.
I don't know.
Really?
They would die for them?
All right, so anyway, we had a paper
in the Review of Austrian Economics developing this.
But in the real world, we say that they're that.
So even though in a simple model,
collusion and cooperation public goods are totally symmetric,
in the real world, they actually are not symmetric.
Questions about that?
In that case, let's return to coordination.
And again, so let me just remind you
that you're all full of energy.
And the fact that class is approaching
makes you feel disappointed.
But nevertheless, you are so full of enthusiasm
with the subject, like if we have 15 minutes left,
let's really make them count.
And that's just what we're going to do,
since that's what we all want.
That's what we will all do.
Eventually, I will get to the point
where I will make people chant and cheer.
But I'm not ready for that yet.
Yes, yay, economics.
I can do it, but I don't feel comfortable making you guys do
it, something to North Korea and Nevada.
But it starts off voluntary and ends with.
All right.
We'll all say that.
All right, but full of enthusiasm for economics,
let us now think more about coordination.
So remember we did that very simple coordination game,
very simple coordination game where players can either
go left or right.
And if they both do the same thing,
then it's better than if they both do different things.
I do something left, right, left, right.
And then if they do different things, then the payoffs are 0.
And if they do the same thing, then it's better than 0,
although one of the two is better, in this case,
right, left, or 0.
So we've got these two pure strategy Nash equilibria.
There's also a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium here.
I'm not going to bother proving it to you,
but it's pretty easy to show there's
a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium.
But there's an interesting fact, which
is that the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is unstable.
I could go through a lot of math to convince you,
but I'm going to just, but it's very easy to do intuitively.
So imagine that you're in a country where 51% of the people
speak one language and 49% speak the other.
So which language do you probably want to learn?
51%.
You don't speak either one.
You want to learn the 51%.
And as a result, the percentage that speak the language
quickly goes to 52, and 53, and 54.
So you very naturally go to one extreme
where that's the one language that everybody speaks.
On the other hand, of course, if it
started at 49% of that language, you generally go the other way.
So the reason why the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
is unstable, that would be very much like a country where
you have exactly 50% speaking one language, exactly 50%
speaking the other language.
If it's perfectly divided, then you're
indifferent between both languages.
What's unstable is that there's a little disruption.
This is just a slight random tip.
Then the system tends to go to all one language or all
the other language.
Right now, this is very different from a bargaining
game.
In a bargaining game, remember, I
think we already saw that if everyone but you bargains hard,
how do you want to bargain?
Soft, because in a world where everyone bargains hard,
no deals are struck.
Imagine that everyone else demands 60% of the surplus.
Do you want to demand 60% too?
No, then there will be no deals.
Instead, you want to go around asking everyone for 40%.
Now, in a world like this, if you start off
with half the people bargaining hard, half bargaining soft,
and split it the other way, then that's an equilibrium.
That's a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium.
Then if there's a little bit of random variation,
since you go to 51% bargaining hard,
which strategy looks better when you slightly
increase the percentage of people bargaining hard?
Soft, yes, which offsets.
And that's why it is actually a stable mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium, where if you move a little bit away,
people want to start doing the opposite of the thing
that became more common until you get back.
But with the coordination game, on the other hand,
if you move a little bit away, people
want to just amplify that and amplify it
until finally you go back to one of the pure strategy
Nash equilibrium.
Again, imagine you're in a country
where exactly half the people drive
on the right side of the road and half drive on the left.
What are the more you can do?
You're stuck in the country.
Like, I would just not go to country in the first place.
You show up there, ah!
All right, if it was exactly 50-50, then you're just like,
well, both strategies are equally deadly.
But on the other hand, if you notice a slight imbalance,
51% are driving on the right.
It's like, well, it's only a slight advantage,
but if it reduces the subsidy, though,
there's a slight reduction in the risk that I die today,
that seems worth it.
And so once everyone who looks at 51 sees it,
then you might go 53, 55, 60, 80,
and then the country saved itself purely
through decentralized means, as people just
want to do whatever it is that other people are doing
so that they don't die.
So anyway, that is why the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
is unstable here.
There's math.
You can do the math, but the math
is less actually informative than just understanding
what it's like to be in a game where
the fact that something's becoming more common
means that you want to do it even more,
versus when something's becoming more common
means that you want to do it less.
Ones where something's becoming more common
means you want to do it less, or ones
that those are stable mixed strategy Nash equilibrium,
and ones where other people want to do it more
means you want to do it more, those are unstable.
Questions about that?
All right.
So lots of applications for coordination games.
Language.
It's very common for countries to have just one
commonly spoken language.
And you may even often notice even one accent
comes for fail.
Everyone in the area just tries to go and speak
with the same accent as everybody else.
This is so much a part of human nature
that kids do it unconsciously.
It's not like kids generally say,
I'm going to go and try to speak like other kids in my school.
They do it automatically.
But I don't see this very much.
And kind of striking when you take a look at,
it is common for countries to try to actually promote
a national language.
So they're actually trying to go and say,
this is the one language they're all
going to speak with each other.
There is a famous anecdote in Concur, I think it was,
I can't remember if it was some Jesuits or the King of France,
and they went over to China and said,
why don't you go and switch over to a phonetic alphabet
like we have.
And then it would be really easy to learn to read.
And then they said, why don't you switch over
to a pictographic alphabet so that you could read people
in other languages.
So my understanding is, so in China,
different dialects, someone could write something
into different dialects, and you could read it
even though you can't speak it.
At least the usual story, is that kind of true?
You can read it.
You read it in your own language.
But someone else who speaks a totally different dialect
writes something down, and you can understand them
even though you can't talk to them.
I don't know.
I don't think you can read dialects,
you can write it down.
You can just read it.
But if it's totally, even if it's
like Cantonese versus Mandarin, you
can understand both automatically?
No, right.
But if someone in Canton writes something,
writes something in Cantonese, someone
who speaks Mandarin can read it and understand.
Writing in Cantonese.
What's that?
There isn't a writing in Cantonese.
They don't have any?
I don't think there is.
It must have some writing.
There is.
There is just one common written characteristic
that is spread out in the whole country.
But the dialect is different.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's what I'm saying.
So you can't understand the word.
When you speak, you can't understand, but when you write.
Yes, yeah.
Oh, they are writing Cantonese, but I cannot read it.
Yeah.
I cannot read it.
Can you understand?
No, I cannot.
You can't understand what they have in mind?
It's a totally different reading.
It's a totally different alphabet.
It's totally different symbols too?
Yeah.
No, but they still are durable.
All right.
So, well.
I never see it.
Yes.
Here's something.
I mean, the problem is to manage this
to be one of a few people that only speaks the,
I mean, you might want to be bilingual anyway.
But if you wanted to signal that you were rich enough people,
you might want to be the only person that knows French
or everybody else knows English.
Yeah, there is some advantage.
But again, if you have to learn one language,
normally you want to learn the language
that's common in the area.
I have a question.
All right.
So, Wayne, you want to start?
I have a question.
Why doesn't the word coordinate to speak only one language?
The whole word.
Ah, so that's a great question, actually.
Yeah, so.
You know, like, if you have very little
interaction with people in other countries, there's that.
Right, so if you very rarely interact with them.
So, yeah, this is something where you probably want to modify the model so that if you,
like you want to speak a language that is common enough,
but if there would be a high cost of going and switching,
then you may want to stick with whatever language you started with.
So, yeah, it's true that every year there are a lot of rare languages that are dying out and becoming extinct.
Right, so there is a general tendency towards this, but it is slow.
You may wonder whether the tendency is so slow that it will take 10,000 years.
Right, so that is possible.
So, anyway, language is one nice example.
Yes?
Could you do that type of analysis of languages as if languages were public goods?
I mean, similarly, in the sense that if you are 50-50, then the N is probably very high,
therefore you don't want to coordinate, or it's very...
Yeah, well, again, public goods and coordination are actually very different.
The whole idea with public goods is that whatever everybody else is doing, you don't want to help.
With coordination, on the other hand, is that if other people are doing it, you want to do it, too.
So, again, if speaking English were a prisoner's limit, then probably no one would speak English.
Since it's a coordination game, if other people are doing it, you want to do it, too.
So, like, you know, a big difference.
Now, you can also say the same thing about culture in general.
So, if you look around the room, you'll notice that I don't think any two of us are wearing exactly the same clothes,
but there's a lot of commonalities in the clothes that we wear.
Right? Like, none of us have clothes that have, like, a covering of our face.
Right? So, like, none of us are wearing masks.
Like, why not?
So, see, there's comfort.
Mask week is next week.
Yes.
Right? You have a set of, like, you know, if you were...
Imagine you were a society where everybody wore masks.
You would probably wear one, too, just to fit in.
Right? And there are many other things like this.
So, for example, how hard should you encourage a guest at your home to eat food?
So, there is the American norm where you say, would you like some food?
And if the person says yes, you give it to them.
And if they say no, then you don't give it to them.
And that's it.
But on the other hand, if you're in a Romanian home, they have a totally different rule.
And the rule is they offer you food and you say no, and then they insist.
And if you don't want it, then you say no again, and they will then insist even more strongly.
And then they may try to actually put it on your plate when you don't want it.
And then you may need to move your plate.
And in this system, if you...
Like, it can be rude just to...
It can be rude not to refuse even when you do want.
Right?
And both systems can work well if everybody accepts the norm.
So, in the U.S., if both people accept the norm of I offer, and if you want it, you say yes.
And if you don't, you say no, and that's it.
In that case, the guest gets the food and the host feels like they've been a good host.
On the other hand, if you have two Romanians together, then the Romanian host offers and the guest politely refuses,
and then the host offers again, and then the guest may then accept at that point, and then everybody's happy.
But if you mix up the American with a Romanian, then you can have the unpleasant situation where one person keeps pushing
and the other person doesn't know how to not receive food they don't want.
And then there's a breakdown and people get more upset or upset.
All right.
So, lots of examples.
So, like many other cultural examples you can think of.
Yes?
The song, Baby, It's Cold Outside.
No, don't...
Christmas song called, Baby, It's Cold Outside, where this guy's trying to get her to stay over,
and she also wants to stay over, and that's what the song is about.
Ah, okay.
And she keeps making up reasons, like, why she should go.
And it's basically the same thing.
Yeah, yeah.
So, again, like, some cultures are very straightforward, others are not.
I remember philosopher John Searle was telling me that he said, like, you know, so he was American,
but he said, you know, be at international philosophy conferences,
and you would see two extremely different cultural norms about how much personal space a person needs to have a conversation.
So, like, the British norm, like, you need, like, a good four-foot gap to have a proper conversation.
And the Italian norm, maximum, like, six inches.
So, you know, he said you could actually look and you could see, like, the Italians almost literally chasing the Brits around the room.
Because the Italian keeps trying to get close enough to talk, and the Brit keeps trying to get far enough away to have a conversation.
Right?
And, again, as long as both sides have the same cultural norm, then there'd be no problem.
But when you have two incompatible norms, then you do have this difficulty.
So, coordination needs have been invoked to explain culture, and a lot of this makes a lot of sense.
Okay.
So, coordination needs have been used for technology.
Remember I mentioned this path-dependence literature?
So, again, the idea is that there are some technologies where the reason to have it is that other people have it.
So, when I was first teaching this class, there were two competing standards for the next-generation DVDs.
Right?
So, there's the one that won, which is Blu-rays, and then there's a totally different standard, which had a better name.
HD-DVD.
Very intuitive.
Right?
It's like high-definition DVD.
But Blu-ray actually won.
Right?
But there was a period, about two years, when they were both fighting to become the winner.
And during this period, there were an enormous number of people, including me, who just didn't buy either,
because we were waiting for coordination to kick in and wanted to dig over so we wouldn't need to go and get two players,
or make the wrong bet and then be stuck with a player that didn't work, which a bunch of people did.
I made the wrong bet.
You must be getting one at a very young age.
Yes.
Ah, all right.
So, anyway, that's one case.
Or, again, think about credit cards of a certain size.
Would any bank want to go and come up with a double-sized credit card?
Right?
Here, we have our new double-sized credit cards.
Right? They're great.
And, again, even if it was better, who would want one, given that it wouldn't fit in anyone else's machines?
You wouldn't swipe it anywhere.
It wouldn't fit in wallets.
So this is one where you want to go and have the same dimensions for your technology as everybody else.
Regardless of anyone.
Even if the other one had some extra merits, you still would have a reason to want to just have the same technology as everybody else.
It sounds like something Steve Jobs would do.
Yeah, maybe.
So, of course, if you're a really big player, you might think, I'm so important in this world that I can change the world.
I can get everyone to switch over to my new thing.
So, in that case, maybe you could.
All right.
So, anyway, technology reviews.
And then location is another great example.
So Paul Krugman is still bitter that his work on location hasn't really caught on.
I think he probably has hundreds of citations, but Paul Krugman is a high stander for how successful his work has to be.
But it comes down to this.
Why do you want to use Manhattan in Manhattan?
Isn't that a stupid place to have Manhattan?
It gets cold and you're on an island, so it's inconvenient to get in and out.
And the land supply is very low.
Why not just take everyone on Manhattan, everything on Manhattan, and move it to Florida?
Like a nice, unoccupied area of Florida.
Which, of course, is what Walt Disney did for the Magic Kingdom.
Because he got a giant unoccupied area and he just built his dream world there.
But why not just scoop up the entire area of Manhattan and move everyone to another area where there would no longer be any bridges or tunnels to worry about,
where you could expand out easily, and you'd have way better weather.
And the coordination answer is, well, you go first.
If you're already in Manhattan, you have a good job in Manhattan, and you say, fine, I'm going to move to the middle of nowhere in Florida,
what happens is not that you get to have all the benefits of Manhattan combined with all the other great stuff,
what happens is that you lose it all because unless everyone moves as a group, you have a problem.
Now, if you know the history of cities, what are the best predictors of where a city today will generally be?
Where the same city was 100 years ago.
And why did cities generally get placed where they are historically?
Water. Yes, water is the main reason.
So you'll see all these cities are either by coast or by major rivers.
Even though now we have a bunch of improvements in transportation, which make it much better to have cities in other places,
but yet still on a likelihood, likelihood.
So what does it suggest?
So I think actually 90% of the U.S. population is within 100 miles of the border even.
And most of the other, so an enormous amount of that is just from the coast.
So, anyway, that is the reason.
So Krugman likes to talk about, like, why is it that almost all carbon production happens in Atlanta, like outside of Atlanta?
And there's no particular reason based upon physical inputs or crops or anything else,
just that, well, there's some, like, since everybody else is doing it there, you want to do it there too.
And of course, like, why go and put your startup in Silicon Valley when the real estate costs are astronomical?
It's like, well, because there's a whole lot of other qualified people that are already there.
So if I set my business up there, super high cost, but there's a big pool of qualified applicants.
So that makes it better.
And we will stop here.
