Okay, so I'm around at least.
If you've got questions about the museum, happy to take them.
All right.
So, where were we?
Yes. So we've been going over the law hazard,
and I was mentioning the great neglected topic
of voluntary punishment.
Like why can't you write a contract
where you specify how you'll be punished
if you break the contract?
And why isn't a contract like that enforceable
under Anglo-American law,
which traditionally does not fit, right?
And if you read the legal statements,
it's even more confusing,
because you'll just get some
of the most question-begging comments like,
well, it is not the purpose of the law to punish.
This is the punishment that is least objectionable.
This is punishment someone signed a contract
and said they wanted to accept the punishment.
And of course, basic compensating differentials,
if a contract is very slanted against you, what does that do
to the price you receive?
Yeah, you get a better deal.
So, if you say, you catch me playing Tetris,
you can fine me $5,000.
That makes it easier for you to get a high-paying job,
because then people feel comfortable
that they are not going to actually be playing a Tet,
paying you to play Tetris all day.
And as I said, Robin Henson has a chapter
in his dissertation on this topic.
I haven't heard anyone else doing anything more with this,
even though it seems like an obvious and great idea.
So, one day, someone in this class will take the idea
and run with it, and this could be the year for this.
All right.
So, moving on.
Adverse selection.
All right, so we've already done moral hazard.
Now, adverse selection.
All right, this is a much more complex form
of asymmetric information.
Moral hazard is really very simple, right?
It's just the idea, once you have insurance,
then you're going to do, you're going to take more risks,
do more on the way.
If someone else is picking up the bill, then you're going
to do more bad things.
Like, no big surprise there.
All right.
But adverse selection is a little bit more complicated,
and not really obvious at first to people what's going on.
All right, so the basic idea
of adverse selection, though, is you know what you are.
You know the real you.
But the world, however, does not know the real you.
The world has to judge you based upon your superficial
characteristics.
What you look like.
What you seem like on the surface.
Which, of course, could be literal physical appearance.
Like if I had a spider web face tattoo.
That's as superficial a trait as you can get.
And yet, you would judge me for it.
Right? Or I remember once my, who was it?
Once my daughter had lice, so I just decided to shave my head.
And I'm walking around saying, wow, I look really tough now.
Like Walter White.
I'm walking around with a bald head.
Someone, people should be scared to mess with me.
And I look in the mirror, like I actually am a little scary now.
Whereas normally, not scary at all.
Right? And what's so scary about having a shaved head?
I don't know.
But, look, but simple story is that on average,
the guys with the shaved heads are, in fact, scarier.
So if you happen to shave your head
for a totally unrelated reason, namely lice paranoia,
like how can I be absolutely sure there isn't lice in my hair?
I can't be, oh, every little feel,
if you feel it in your scalp, oh, there could be lice.
Or just take it off.
Shave all the hair off.
And now, I'm not trying to be scary.
I'm just trying to get rid of the lice.
But people walk near the street and they judge me
as a scary guy, at least on average.
They will think I'm scarier than I would normally anyway.
So, you know, yes?
Maybe they think you're scary because you might have lice.
It's not normally, it's disgusting more than scary.
But, yeah.
All right.
So, anyway, it could be a totally superficial trait.
But it could also be superficial as in your resume.
Your resume isn't the real you, is it?
There's more to you than what you can put on one piece
of paper about your signature strengths and so on.
And yet, if someone's trying to decide to interview you,
they're likely to do it just based purely upon the basis
of what's on this piece of paper, right?
Or when you're coming up for tenure.
Yes, there are people who actually count the lines
on the VITA, right?
At least, normally, they only count the publication lines.
And so, but, you know, other people might count even more.
So, you know, he's got 10 publications.
That's good enough here.
You're like, what?
They don't weight them by quality?
Well, the higher the quality of the place
that you're being evaluated at,
the more weight you put on quality.
There are plenty of places where publications
and publication, hence the joke about getting published
in capital A, capital R, refereed, capital J journal,
A referee journal, right?
So, where all you need is a publication somewhere or other,
and that can count, right?
And this is where someone is being very superficial.
Like, well, I don't know the quality of the journals
or the quality of the articles.
I'm just going to hand out dream jobs for life based
upon whether you got 10 publications
in something or other.
All right?
So, that's another way that people might do it.
Okay. So, there's lots of different kind
of superficialities, physical appearance,
what's written on a page, you know, your car,
the clothes you're wearing, you know, like your family,
your family name, your race, your gender.
There's so many different ways that someone could just take two
seconds to look at you and then say, yeah, all right,
like a three out of 10.
All right?
Very simple.
That's all I need to know.
At least that's all I'm going to bother learning.
Okay. All right.
Now, so you know, however, what you're really like.
You have your selection model.
Other people are going to treat you based upon the average
characteristics of people who superficially resemble you.
Now, what does this mean?
Well, suppose that you are above average.
You're above average for people who look like you.
Then you might decide that there's no point participating
because you get treated like you're average even though you're
better than average.
Let's see if I can get that to fall.
There. That's good.
All right.
So you get treated like you are average when, in fact,
you're better than average.
So if you have any options of whether you want to participate
in something, above average people naturally want
to drop out.
Right? At least they are more inclined to drop out.
Whereas below average people, on the other hand, say, hey,
this is great.
I love being treated like I'm average
because I'm not average.
I'm terrible, actually.
But I can blend in.
I can just blend in.
Right? So if you are, say, what would it be?
Yeah. So suppose that you look like me.
Right? All right.
So look at this here.
But suppose that actually you are even more socially inept
than someone who looks like me would normally be.
In that case, you say, isn't it great I get judged
as just being average because I'm not average, actually.
On the other hand, if you are the unusually socially adept guy
who wears a Mutants of Mastermind shirt, then,
those are the cases where you say, well,
maybe I don't want to participate
because I get treated like scum.
Right? So that's the idea.
All right.
Now, here's the problem.
If enough above average people think this way,
then the average goes down.
And when the average goes down,
then more people may want to drop out.
And then when more people, and who wants to drop out again?
The people that, the best of the remaining people.
And then the best of the remaining people.
And the best of the remaining people.
As I think I said last class,
imagine if I said I failed the bottom half of the class.
Well, if you know where you're going to be,
then the bottom half drops.
But then I said, well, I didn't say I would fail the bottom half
of the initial class.
I said I'd fail the bottom half of the class,
which is defined as people who are enrolled.
And I said, all right, now I've got to worry
from the bottom half of the top half, the original top half.
And that group drops.
And then the bottom half of the remainder may drop.
And so on.
Same idea.
All right.
Now, there's a classic example, which is surprising.
Oh, can you close the door back there?
So there's a classic example, which has also been
done experimentally.
And again, it's a very similar model with a result
that is extremely surprising to almost everyone
who hasn't actually worked through the model in detail.
All right.
And here's the idea.
Suppose that there are companies with true values
that are uniformly distributed between 0 and 100.
All right.
But, key point, every company is worth 50% more
in the hands of the buyer.
So there's sellers who have these companies.
But if you can find a buyer,
the buyer will actually be better at managing the company.
And you just inherited this company, say.
You inherited it, but you know how good it is.
That's key.
So you sell it to someone else who knows what they're doing,
it'll be worth 50% more in their hands than in your hands.
All right.
So, now all that buyers know, let's assume,
is the average value of companies that are being sold.
They don't know whether your company is good or not.
All they know is what's average.
All right.
So, of course, the average value of these companies,
since it's a uniform distribution, is 50.
Right? And a normal reaction people have is, well,
why don't we, is that, why don't we just bid 50?
Let's just bid 50.
And then the idea is if we bid 50, then 50 plus 50% is 75.
So then we're going to go and get, and we have a profit of 25.
But that's wrong.
That's so wrong.
That's so wrong, because if you bid 50, which companies will not be sold?
The ones that are worth more than 50.
Yes. None of these companies are on the market when you offer 50.
And, therefore, the companies that are going to be sold will have an average value of 25.
And 50% more than 25 is 37.5.
And since you bid 50, and on average you only, you get a company worth 37.5 to you,
you have lost 12.5.
All right.
So that didn't work out.
And you might say, well, why don't we go and up our bid?
How about we go and bid 80?
Well, if you bid 80, then you do have more good companies that are in the mix.
But still, the top companies don't, are not going to be involved.
And, therefore, you're going to have all companies that are worth between zero
and 80 to the sellers.
And the average of that is, of course, 40.
Add 50%.
60. So now we are paying, well, now we are offering 80 for companies worth 60.
We've actually made our losses even worse.
All right.
So this is where you say, all right, fine.
Let's not go and raise our bid.
Let's cut our bid.
How about we cut the bid down to 20?
Cut the bid down to 20, average value, average company solds worth 10 to the seller,
15 to the buyer.
So now we're only losing five.
So we're moving in the right direction, at least.
All right.
Now we cut the bid down to four.
Now the average company sold two, we're three.
We've only lost $1.
All right.
We're still going in the right direction.
But keep going.
And it turns out there's only one bid you can make that doesn't lose you money.
And that's zero.
Bid zero.
No companies are sold with an average value of zero.
50% more than zero is zero.
So you bid zero.
You get no companies that are worth zero each.
And you amass the leading.
Okay.
So in equilibrium, zero is the equilibrium price.
That's what happens.
And the whole market has vanished.
A market full of surplus.
A market rich with surplus, where every company's worth 50% more to the buyer than it is to the seller.
Now notice, with symmetric information, none of this would happen.
So with symmetric information, if you offer 50, then which companies get sold?
Well, so you use the symmetric information so the sellers don't know how good their company is.
So if you offer 50 and the sellers don't know how good their company is,
what do they believe their company's worth?
It's 50.
So you offer 50.
Everyone sells.
Because they don't know that the people with above average companies don't know their companies are
above average.
And then on average, the buyer gets the company worth 50 to the seller, but worth 50% more.
So then it's worth 75.
So with symmetric information, notice, symmetric imperfect information.
Symmetric imperfect information, the market works perfectly.
Further proving my point at the end of last class, which is that symmetric information is not an
efficiency issue.
If there were imperfect information on both sides to equal degrees, so buyers and sellers were equally
ignorant about the true value of the companies, sellers offer 50, all companies are sold, all
surpluses realized.
Which is a pretty amazing result.
Right?
Because it's always tempting when you're learning economics to think that once you have one
problem in a market, that adding another problem will make things even worse.
Not so.
It doesn't have to at all.
If you have one problem, it can be better if you add on another problem, which then
counterbalances those problems.
Right?
Just like if you have pollution, right?
You may remember this.
If you've already got pollution, you can get an efficiency gain from monopoly.
Right?
Because the monopoly effectively will produce less.
The whole problem of negative externalities is firms are producing what?
Too much.
So yes.
So a monopoly can correct a negative externality.
And making the buyers ignorant can correct the problems caused by the sellers being,
or rather making the sellers ignorant can correct the problem of the buyers being ignorant.
Right?
Now this is just one example.
This is not always true.
I have deliberately constructed the numbers, or actually I have borrowed numbers constructed
by others to lead to total disaster.
All right?
You don't have to have total disaster.
So for example, suppose that companies were worth not 50% more to the sellers, but what
if they were worth 100% more to sellers?
All right?
So in that case, let's see.
So in that case, there's no effect at all.
Right?
Because you could go and bid 50, and then, let's see, you could go and bid 100, and
then all companies would be sold.
And let's see.
Then you would break even, I believe.
I think actually if 100% more, then I think you break even no matter what you do.
Let me just double check that.
Yeah.
So if you offer 50, then the average value of the company sold, of somebody sold is 25,
but it's worth 100% more to you, so 50.
Yeah.
So if the companies are worth twice as much in the buyers' hands as the sellers, then
everything's in equilibrium.
Right?
So every bid is going to be equally profitable.
So then there is an equilibrium of full efficiency, where you just bid 100, and you get something
that's worth 100.
So that's a good deal.
Right?
Or you could imagine doing a change in the distribution.
So imagine that instead of having a uniform distribution, we had a world where half the
companies are worth 50, and half are worth 100.
So there's this 50% weight here, 50% weight worth here, all right?
But we're back to the world where it's worth 50% more to the sellers and the buyers.
So in this world, you wouldn't want to go and offer 100, right?
Because if you offered 100, then let's see.
Actually, maybe you would.
Let me just double check.
So if you offer 100, now then the average value of the company sold will be 75, and
let's see.
Actually, no.
Yeah, I guess, yeah.
Then actually, yes, you would make a profit.
Let's see.
Maybe, yeah.
So as you see, so if you offer 100, then the average value of the company sold is 75, and
then the average value, the average to the sellers will be 112.5, right?
Yes, so that would be right.
And so you offer 75, and you make a profit there.
And let's see.
What if you went and offered 100?
No, no, excuse me.
That's actually when you offer 100.
So you offer 100, all companies are sold, yes, and then you get perfect efficiency.
If you went and offered 50, then what would it be, then half the companies would be sold.
You would make, you'd pay 50, you'd make a bigger profit on each one.
You'd make a profit.
Actually, no.
Actually, no.
You'd make a higher average profit there.
So yeah, in that case, was it with this distribution, then you want to go and actually pay 100.
So you bid 100, and you get all the companies, and again, perfect efficiency.
So you've got to get the distribution right and the value difference right in order to
get a total disaster.
Right, so when you hear about like the market for lemons, something like that, remember that
it doesn't prove that you will always get a total market unraveling.
Just proves that you could get a market unraveling, right?
So that's an important distinction.
There's a big distinction between there might be disaster and there will be disaster, right?
One where if all of the, if everything comes out wrong, then there will be disaster, right?
That's not surprising at all, right?
But on the other hand, if there's normally disaster, that's more surprising.
All right, so questions?
Questions about the setup?
All right, now the implications of adverse selection are very poorly understood because
the model is normally applied to markets where people are very angry.
All right, some of the markets where people are very angry.
Well, there's the original market for lemons, which at least in the United States means
the market for used cars.
All right, so do other countries call bad cars lemons or is this even done in other
English speaking countries or any idea?
So like in England, do they call bad used cars lemons or not?
I don't think so.
No, all right, so just here.
But anyway, so there's the original used car market.
Now actually resentment of the used car market has gone down because many companies have
figured out ways of reducing this adverse selection problem.
But certainly when I was a kid, the stereotype of the correct use of used cars was that
corrupt, evil used car dealers were very strong.
And then similarly, another kind of market where people are generally very angry is insurance
markets, especially health insurance.
So that's another one where people are concerned about adverse selection.
And again, people are very angry at these horrible, horrible health insurance companies
and what they're doing.
All right, so people often look at this model and say, aha, that's why health insurance
market is terrible.
That's why used car dealers are terrible.
All right, and in particular, that's why they're always ripping us off.
That's why they're able to go and bleed us dry, charging enormous prices for their
shoddy products.
A common view of how these markets work.
But that model might be true, but this is not the model that justifies that story at
all.
All right, so if the used car market has an adverse selection problem, and it's not
a problem, this does not mean that asymmetric information allows car sellers to take advantage
of buyers and make lots of profits by selling junk.
It's not the story.
It's not the story.
So it's not a model that is primarily about cheating.
It's not a model about taking advantage of people.
It's not a model about ripping people off.
It's not a model about this is a wonderful industry to be in.
You can make tons of money by selling junk.
It's none of those things.
Right?
Key point, in these models, buyers on average benefit from purchasing the product.
So conditional upon buying a used car, if there's adverse selection in the used car
market, the buyer gains on average.
Right?
Conditional upon buying health insurance, the buyer gains on average.
That's how these models work.
So you say, well, some are dissatisfied.
Yes, and some are over satisfied.
Who are the people who are dissatisfied with their used cars, if this model is the right
model?
With the people who are dissatisfied.
The people who buy the blank dash average cars.
Below average cars.
Who are the people who actually get a great deal and are super happy?
People who get the blank dash average cars.
The above average cars.
So in a symmetric world, half the people, half the cars are going to be people who are
are going to be above average, half will be below average.
So this is not a market about consumers, on average,
getting ripped off.
It's a model where half the customers
get less than they bargain for, half
get more than they bargain for.
Does that sound like a terrible market to be in?
Well, 50-50 chance of getting more than I thought or less
than I thought.
That sounds like any other market
where there's a symmetric distribution of outcomes.
So no particular reason to be dissatisfied in the market
if you, in fact, buy.
So what's going wrong with these markets?
The problem with the markets is all the exchanges
that don't happen.
It's not a market about the rip-offs that we see,
but about the mutually beneficial trades
that we don't see.
Remember Bastiat, what is seen and what is not seen.
In the adverse selection model, the problem
is all the cars that actually don't get
sold because they're too good.
It's the people with the better cars,
they're not going to go and sell that car
and get that stupid low price, even though they actually
don't really want the car that much,
even though there's a buyer out there
who, with perfect information, would totally buy that car.
But due to the adverse selection problem,
because the best stuff gets pulled off the market,
the trades don't happen.
Same thing with health insurance.
The problem of the adverse selection problem
implies not that you're ripped off
if you buy health insurance.
The problem is all the people who would like health insurance,
but who nevertheless don't wind up buying it because they
are the healthier people and they pull out of the market.
So the idea is that if you're a healthy person
and you could receive insurance that was accurately
priced at a risk, then you would just
go and get super cheap insurance.
And you'd be happy saying, hey, I'm super healthy,
but I love having insurance because it
gives me peace of mind at a really low price
because I'm so healthy.
And the problem with adverse selection
is those people don't buy insurance.
And therefore, the gains to trade for the healthy people
to buying insurance go out and disappear.
Right now, of course, in the real world,
when people complain about health insurance,
the complaint is always that what kind of people
can't get insurance?
Sick people.
That's not the adverse selection model at all.
Complete opposite.
The problem in the adverse selection problem
would be that healthy people aren't getting insurance.
Have you ever heard someone saying,
I'm just so sad about all the healthy people who
don't buy insurance because their health is so good that it's
not worth it for them to pay these prices inflated
by all the sick people?
Is anyone going and having a day of sorrow
for these healthy people who don't buy insurance?
Yeah, very unusual.
Yeah, Ash?
Is this Jonathan Kruger?
Yeah, Kruger.
Yes.
Well, let's see.
I read his graphic novel.
He didn't have any pages in the graphic novel shedding tears
for them.
In fact, in the graphic novel, so I
wrote a review of the graphic novel on the theory
that if you write it, it can be reviewed.
And in the graphic novel, what he says
is that, well, some young people don't buy it
because they don't realize they could get sick too.
That's one possible story.
It's not a story that any economist else in the world
is telling.
It's like, well, there's the problem
that young people believe they have zero probability
of getting sick.
It's like quite an error for people to be making.
So why did he do that?
Well, I believe that he was trying
to give an argument that would be persuasive rather than one
that would be strictly accurate.
So at least that's my best story.
I think that he would understand the model more than well
enough to not make the mistake.
Yes?
Yeah, if it's the people who are healthy above average
in the model that don't get satisfied and then it unravels,
it also means that people who are unhealthy also
don't get it.
Yes, yes.
So yeah, you could say the problem is that only the,
but again, still, the complaint is that the sickest people
don't get it.
And no matter how, unless there's 100% unraveling,
it's always the less sick people that are not buying.
So essentially, the people that people are most worried about,
most sad about, are the ones the model says
will buy the insurance.
And it's everybody else that actually is the problem
according to the model.
OK.
All right.
So anyway, the efficiency problem
stands for exchanges that don't happen because buyers can't
distinguish good cars from bad and health insurance companies
can't distinguish the really sick people
from the really healthy people.
Now, here's the fun thing.
So in a world of perfect information,
what would happen in the insurance market?
Because there'd be no insurance.
Everyone would just be charged based
upon their actual costs.
Now, how about in a world of symmetric information
where you know your general riskiness,
but you don't know the actual details of how bad things will
be?
So in other words, imagine that you have a risk category, which
you know, A through F. But then within the A category,
there's another random variable that gets tacked on.
Within the B category, there's another random variable
that tacks on.
So in that case, what would the pricing of LBLF?
So insurance companies, they know your grade of health,
but nobody knows this random variable, which literally
has to be you have to throw the dice every year or whatever.
So in a world like that, what does the health insurance
market look like?
Is there any health insurance sold then?
Would it be according to your expected health?
Yeah, exactly.
So you would have a charger rate based upon your health grade.
And then why do you want to buy insurance?
Because you want to insure against that random variable
part.
So yeah, I'm A health.
That's what I know.
That's what insurance company knows.
But I could get hit by a bus, and then I'd have a problem.
So and again, of course, that A grade
should in a world without asymmetric information
would include knowledge of the riskiness of your behavior.
So how often do you look before you cross the street?
Are you a careful looker?
Are you three way?
Or do you look both way?
Look left, right, left again?
Or what do you do?
Are you a skydiver?
What's your diet like?
So and then, yeah, so in a world where nobody had any clue
at all about their health, suppose
nobody had any idea what their health was,
and the insurance company doesn't know, you don't know,
then is there going to be any insurance in that world?
Sure.
And what do the rates look like in a world
where nobody has any clue about anything?
Yeah, then everyone just pays the average rate.
All right, so what I think people really want
is a world where we pretend that everyone's average.
That's the dream that people have.
And then everyone gets charged the same rate.
Or of course, there's some people
have a dream of enforcing it by regulation
that everyone must be treated the same.
So Charles Murray, in his book on the universal basic income,
actually advocates a regulation saying
that literally everyone, every adult in the country
must be sold insurance at the same rate,
not even adjusting for health.
Not even adjusting for age.
And but anyway, so this is the idea.
Now, of course, in the real world,
you pass a law like that.
What does every health insurance?
So if you basically say you must treat everyone
as if they're identically risky, even though everybody knows
they're not, so what does every health insurance
company try to do in a world like this Charles Murray world?
Drive the price up as high as they can.
Well, if you drive the price up as high as you can,
that by itself will, you know, so let's see.
What's the right way?
So that by itself doesn't actually,
so that'll just mean that everyone will want to buy
from the cheaper people.
So by raising your price higher than everybody else
doesn't actually differentially attract healthier people.
But yeah, Nathan?
About the services you offer, so if I don't have, say,
a cancer provider, then someone like me
with high risk of cancer, I'm not going to buy that insurance.
Yeah, so you know, how about this?
You just have like tons of like sports medicine
and other stuff for like super physically active people,
right?
So you know, like we have basically a bunch of services
that only young and healthy people would ever want,
and then you just don't do anything else.
So Murray didn't really deal with this,
but that is the idea.
All right, so when you actually think
about what it is people are complaining about,
the problem isn't really that it's a world where people are
not being priced, so yeah, the real problem is that people,
is that prices are not adequately tailored to risk.
But the populist complaint about insurance
has nothing to do with that at all.
In fact, quite the opposite.
I think most people's nightmare world
is that everyone has insurance that is exactly
tailored to your personal risk rate, right?
And again, imagine a world where you actually
are simultaneously solving adverse selection and moral
hazard by say, charging people based upon their BMI.
Charging people based upon like you monitor
how often you go to the gym.
You have a bunch of different measures, right?
And go and charge people for all of these details
about their actual riskiness.
This is the kind of thing that would infuriate normal people.
But economically, that's much better.
That actually solves the problem.
It actually is.
That's solving the moral hazard problem
and solving the adverse selection problem,
just tailor rates to risk, and then there's no longer
any problem.
All right, now, so adverse selection
is probably economists' favorite argument
for insurance regulation.
Moral hazard is often thrown in there,
even though there are essentially
no insurance regulations that do anything about moral hazard.
If you really start thinking about it,
then you have a few things like jail time for insurance fraud.
All right, so that's a pretty good counter example.
Although, say, wait a second, wasn't fraud illegal
even before there was insurance fraud?
There's just fraud.
So it's just a normal law.
It's not really anything special.
But yeah, so imagine that you legalize insurance fraud.
In that case, what does that do to the adverse selection
problem?
Makes it, yeah, it increases it.
Yeah, it makes it worse, because now there's a bunch of people
who are going to go and fake accidents and things like that.
And they say, hey, there's not even
any punishment for doing any more awesome,
so time to fake an accident.
You ever seen the movie Double Indemnity?
All right, so, well, Double Indemnity,
the title refers to insurance policies, which maybe still
exist, but anyway, at the time in the 40s and 50s,
there's a lot of insurance policies
that would specify that you get double the payoff if people
die in a rare and gruesome way, such as in a train accident.
Then there's a woman who hates her husband,
and she conspires with an insurance agent
to go and sell her a very large policy with a double indemnity,
and then gets him to murder her husband,
and then they're going to fall in love and split the money,
right?
And then that's the way all these movies work out, right?
Happily Ever After is the way that they all work out.
But anyway, so if there were no law against going
and trying to murder, getting an insurance policy on someone
and then murdering them, so not only would this
lead to more murders, right, but also would mess up the life
insurance policy for the non-murderers,
because you'd have a whole bunch of people say,
oh, I want like a $50 million life insurance
policy on my beloved enemy.
And then you go and you take out a life insurance policy
on someone you want dead.
Or of course, it doesn't have to be
that you're going to murder them.
You might go and say, I'm just going to take out insurance
policy on a friend that I know who's actually
going to go and fight in Syria or something like that.
I'm going to take out insurance policy on them.
And if you can go and take out insurance policy on someone
that you know is taking a lot of risks,
then again, there's a bunch of people
that are buying the policies because they
expect to get a high payoff.
And if they get to buy it for the same rate as everybody
else, then there's a problem.
So anyway, adverse selections probably become his favorite
argument for insurance regulation,
and especially for one kind of regulation,
which is the mandated purchase, a law that
requires you to buy insurance.
You must buy insurance.
Yeah, Ash?
I was just going to say, if insurance fraud would
be legal, wouldn't that create a market for rating insurance
purchasers?
Sure, but given that's legal right now,
so it's very reasonable to say that insurance companies would
try to compensate for the problems.
But still, it seems unlikely they'd
be able to compensate as well because insurance companies
can't jail anybody.
Remember what I said, you can't contractually
agree to private punishments.
So yeah, you can imagine saying, I signed the insurance contract,
and if I'm found guilty of insurance fraud,
you can go and take everything I own.
Just based on credit.
Yeah, so but yes, but if the harsher penalties
are unavailable to private organizations,
but government has them, if government
stops providing them, then probably
it's going to be hard for the other alternatives
to be as effective.
Although, maybe they would be.
So adverse selection is a very common rationale
economists have for a law requiring everybody
to buy insurance, which of course
would be for car insurance or for health insurance.
Anytime the law says you have to have insurance,
there is a very simple story behind it
that economists have, which is adverse selection.
So again, in this case, imagine there
were laws saying you must sell your company.
You can't keep your company.
So in that case, everyone sells their company,
even though they know that the companies are actually
worth more than what they're selling, or some of them.
So in that case, all are sold.
So all companies from 0 to 100 are sold,
and the average value to the buyers is 50.
And then sellers will be happy to buy,
because they know that on average,
they get a company that's worth 50 to the seller, 75 to them.
And again, the interesting thing is
that a lot of the sellers gain, although of course not all.
Who are the sellers who lose as a result of the mandate?
Sellers whose company is going to win.
What's that?
Well, let's see.
Well, so let's see.
Yes, yes, yes.
So the story that I told, yes, then exactly.
So all these people lose.
So then how is there an efficiency gain?
Well, the answer is when you add up the gains to all
of these people, plus the profits to the buyers,
it exceeds the losses to the sellers.
And that is our definition of which kind of efficiency?
Gallery Hicks.
Gallery Hicks.
Right, yes.
If it's mandatory to sell at the price offered,
why wouldn't the buyers offer a lower price?
So there could be competition there.
So basically, the buyers bid for a car.
And with perfect competition, you
think they would actually bid the price up to $75.
And then actually even more gain.
In that case, all of these people gain.
On average, the buyers have no profit
because they're going to be paying $75 for companies that
are worth $175 to them.
And then everything comes out of the hides of these people.
But they don't even lose that much.
That's the amazing thing.
So adverse selection, standard justification for a mandate.
Now, if you're wondering, what is
the deal with all the other parts of things like Obamacare?
There's a great Paul Krugman column
where he goes and tries to explain it.
Because what, of course, is the part of Obamacare
that almost everybody hates?
The mandate.
The mandate, which is the only part actually
justified by adverse selection.
So the part that actually has anything
to do with the market failure that we're talking about
is the part that most people hate.
So there's actually a very good survey
that breaks up the different components of Obamacare
that are the popularity.
And I think only like 30% of Americans support the mandate.
All right, now, what are the other parts?
So the parts that people like.
All right, well, there's the ban on pre-existing conditions
clauses.
All right, and remember, so pre-existing conditions
clause, this is a clause where an insurance company says,
we don't pay for problems that you knew you had
when you bought the insurance.
Now, when you think about it, that's
almost like banning the prevention of insurance fraud.
Right?
Because this is saying that it's like you.
Well, you can't refuse to sell insurance to people
just because they're already mortally ill.
So this is a regulation that has something
to do with adverse selection.
Although, by itself, what is the connection
between this and adverse selection?
Means to force.
Yes.
So there's this part that actually
is connected to the model.
This part, where if you believe the model is actually
intensifying the problem.
And then finally, there's the third part,
which also very popular.
These are the subsidies.
So this is the part where you say, well,
once we mandate you have to have it,
a lot of people can't afford it.
So the subsidies are there to make
sure everybody can afford it.
And Krugman actually, very reasonably,
goes and says that this is Obamacare here.
And these are the three legs of Obamacare.
It's a stool with three legs.
And he needs all three legs to be stable.
And the way that he explains it, well,
once you ban pre-existing conditions clauses,
and you can actually also think about this combined
with people rates or pretty equal rates,
not exactly equal, but think about this in general
as rate regulation.
So once you go and say that any person can get insurance,
no matter what the state of their health is,
and that you're not allowed to go and charge them
much more money, then the obvious thing
in terms of the adverse selection model,
how will people respond?
You can get insurance at the normal rate
if you just wait around until you really, really need it.
So adverse selection says that people will do what?
Wait around.
Wait around.
So if you wait around, then the problem is that the market
equilibrium will be certain high prices.
So that's where Krugman says, well,
once we've done this regulation, then we
got to do that regulation to go and solve
the problems created by the first regulation.
And then we need this regulation to solve the problems created
by the other regulation.
And it is a reasonable package.
So I like the case for it.
It's a very clear case.
Although to go and say that Obamacare is there
because the free market doesn't work is a gross injustice.
Because he said, well, how about we just
have none of these regulations?
Then would there still be a problem?
In particular, there's something really weird about this one.
Because if you believe that insurance companies couldn't
figure out who was sick and who was healthy,
would there be any point of that regulation?
Yeah.
Why do you have that regulation?
Because insurance companies do know.
Insurance companies have armies of actuaries
to do the run of statistics to figure out
what your health status is.
They've got lots of information.
They can do tests.
They can use your age.
They can use past expenses.
There's tons of stuff that they can do in order to figure it
out.
So this is the regulation that, at minimum,
it makes the adverse selection problem worse.
And then tries to, at first, makes it worse
and then solves it another way.
But it's also a kind of confession of guilt
and saying, all right, fine.
It's actually not the case that insurance companies don't
know what's going on.
Insurance companies know a lot.
That's why they're going to go and charge sick people more
rates, which would solve the problem we're actually
talking about.
But that's not our actual complaint.
And then this brings you back into the normal world
that has nothing to do with economics.
What does a normal person want to go and require
either ban pre-existing conditions clauses
and require equal rates?
Normal, economically illiterate person.
They find it unreasonable.
for a sick person to find it hard to wake up.
Yeah, that's all it is.
It's got nothing to do with any complex model.
It's just like, why these mean insurance companies
are going and charging high rates to people
who really need health care.
Then there is the puzzle, well, but why
is it that people who sell insurance
are the ones who have the responsibility for taking
care of sick people?
Why is it like, so if I'm going to go and deal with a problem,
then it's up to me to go and solve the problem
for free for other people?
Again, it's one thing to say that there
needs to be a government program or charity
to solve it as to why you go and charge your anger
at insurance companies.
That is, again, pretty odd.
So in the end, you say, well, what could you do instead?
Well, you could have a government voucher
program for sick people.
You could do that.
And then you say, well, isn't that
just going to create this adverse selection problem?
Well, how about if you don't give the voucher to people
who waited to buy insurance?
So if you actually already, if you've
been buying insurance your whole life,
and then you suddenly get really sick,
and then nobody wants to sell you
insurance at an affordable rate, then you get the voucher.
Worse, if you're just going along your whole life
refusing to buy, then say, well, sorry.
That's your problem.
You should have been responsible.
So you could do that.
Of course, also, you could have charities
that go and try to take care of the problem.
Although, once you start thinking about that way,
then there's the obvious thought of, well,
isn't there a better way to spend the money?
Which there almost certainly is, actually,
if you looked into effective altruism.
Because health care is so expensive.
It's a really expensive way to solve problems.
Whereas, you could just go and do
deworming pills in rural countries
and help a lot more people that way.
All right, so questions about this?
Questions?
All right.
All right, so in any case, so economists rarely
notice all the insurance regulations
that are on the books that seem to be designed
to make adverse selection worse.
So there are lots of regulations that specifically
forbid insurers from conditioning rates on risks.
So that's one.
And in terms of the adverse selection model,
that makes no sense.
Because if there's really this adverse selection problem,
then insurance companies wouldn't be able to do it.
Or if it's a more moderate problem,
then at least they reduce the problem.
So you might say, well, look, there's
not perfect information.
There's some adverse selection.
There isn't any reason to prevent insurance companies
from solving the problem as well as they are able.
And at that point, say, now we'll see what can be done.
Now, here's one that I have a lot of trouble understanding,
even from a normal point of view.
There are a lot of states that actually subsidize insurance
for high-risk drivers.
It's one thing to go and say, they're sick people,
can't afford insurance.
I feel sorry for them.
I totally get that.
But saying, look, there's some people
who have been in tons of accidents.
And it's really expensive for them to get insurance.
And I feel sorry for them.
That's the one where like, those are
the people you feel sorry for?
I'm scared they're on the road.
Look, those are the ones where if I were a philanthropist,
I might go and pay insurance companies
to not sell them insurance in order
to get them off the road because they're a danger.
Yes?
When you say high-risk drivers, does that
match any specific demographic?
Well, young males.
That's the big one.
Not elderly?
Elderly, too, although you have to get pretty old before you're
as bad as a teenage male.
But yeah, I think probably when you're in your 80s,
then you're getting pretty comparable to a 16 or 17
year old.
Right?
But again, do you really?
So we actually have a bunch of things
to try to get incompetent elderly drivers off the road.
Like once you hit a certain age, you
have to be tested every year.
Right?
There is a social moral about trying to get the keys away
for grandma, both for her sake and for the sake of others
and for not destroying the inheritance
of the whole family in a lawsuit.
So in the state of New Jersey, the system,
at least when I was living there,
is called something like mandatory risk, where basically,
suppose you're an auto insurance company,
you have 25% of the auto insurance market.
The state of New Jersey would just say, fine,
you have 25% of the market.
Then you have to insure 25% of the worst drivers in the state
at below market rates.
And that's the system.
Right now, when I go and talk to people about this,
they say, well, look, you've got to do that,
because people are going to drive no matter what.
People have to drive.
They have to drive.
Especially where New Jersey, there's
actually a lot of public transportation in New Jersey.
But people have to drive.
And therefore, you must make insurance affordable for them,
because otherwise, people would not
be able to do this thing they have to do.
But then, of course, if you decide
to drive without insurance, then you will lose your license.
And then this you have to drive excuse
is no longer acceptable.
And then, of course, if you drive without a license,
then eventually, if you do it repeatedly, you go to jail.
And once again, well, people have to not be in jail.
Theory, that doesn't go very far.
So to me, again, it's all pretty confusing.
Why not just say there's an insurance mandate,
and if no one will sell you insurance that you can afford,
then it is illegal to drive.
And we will jail you for driving.
I can see some libertarian objections,
but in terms of just what a normal person in New Jersey
thinks, I'm very puzzled that this hasn't happened.
Because to me, reckless drivers are not sympathetic.
Again, even though you're talking about the elderly,
how many elderly people have been in multiple accidents?
People say, oh, poor grandpa, but, and they say, but,
and therefore, we really need to make sure
we can afford insurance so we can keep driving.
I don't know.
That's strange to me, but obviously, I have not really
gotten inside the head of people in New Jersey.
Again, this argument of, look, people have to drive
seems very convincing to people.
And therefore, people have to have affordable insurance.
So that sounds similar to an argument
that I've heard about regarding health insurance and health
market and health care usage, where people say that there is
no, like there's a perfectly inelastic demand
curve in health insurance, or health markets,
where if you get sick, you must go.
Right, right.
Which I assume has to play into the emotional response
that people have when they're discussing things like health
insurance markets and whatnot.
And I just wonder when the last time was
that someone who got a cold had to go to the hospital for it
and had to see a surgeon or something like that.
And that was just, it reminded me of that sort of thing.
And is that a common thing that you kind of see?
Yeah.
So during the Obama-era debates, the idea
that people without insurance are going to emergency rooms
and then at great expense was often voiced.
Although, my memory is that in an emergency room,
we're only absorbing a total of 2% of all health spending.
So this problem is greatly exaggerated.
I agree that when people talk about health care,
they often sound like there's perfectly inelastic demand.
And yet, the whole point of health insurance
is supposed to be to improve access.
So make up your mind.
And of course, we should always make up our mind
in direction of there being some elasticity for almost
everything, right?
So the real story, it's like a normative.
You have to buy it.
It's not that people will, in fact,
but you should buy all the health care for your problem,
regardless of price.
Although, it's perfectly OK for people to not do it
based upon convenience.
So if someone says, well, I didn't go to the doctor
because I didn't feel like taking time out
of my working day.
Oh, well, that's reasonable.
I didn't do it because I couldn't afford it.
Our society is evil.
Our society is a corrupt and wicked society.
I can't even bear to live in a world like this.
And again, as to why elasticity with respect to time cost
is OK, but respect to money cost is not, again,
and clearly I have not adequately understood
normal mankind well enough in order to explain it,
but it's weird to me.
So as I said, so other examples.
So as I said, states often subsidize current insurance
for reckless drivers.
There's forcing insurers to cover the middle loss, which
is the New Jersey way, and I think
other states have the same laws.
And then medical insurers often barred
from denying coverage to customers
with pre-existing conditions.
Just to see the absurdity of this,
imagine if for life insurance you
said you couldn't have pre-existing conditions.
Like, suppose you could take out life insurance on someone
the day after they die.
Say, why not?
The person's dead.
We need money.
So let's get life insurance.
All right, well, then obviously it
would make sense for everyone to blank until after blank happens.
Wait until after the person dies,
and then the price would be astronomical.
It would destroy the market, because to cover the overhead,
you'd have to charge more than the value of the premium.
Now, in practice, of course, insurance companies
have all kinds of methods that they
use to solve the problem.
Here's one that actually isn't.
There is an urban legend that life insurance
doesn't cover suicide.
So this is actually completely wrong.
So what is true is that insurance company,
life insurance will often have zero or heavily reduced
benefit for one or two years.
And again, apparently the theory is
that people are not going to go and buy insurance planning
suicide, planning to kill themselves in a couple of years.
It's the kind of thing that you would only do with relatively
little delay, or at least to say it's not a big problem,
that someone might go and say, I'm
going to buy a lot of insurance and then kill myself
in two years.
Rarely happens.
But if I'm going to buy it, I'm going to kill myself tomorrow.
And in order to get my family some money,
that's a much bigger danger.
So you might remember the book Super Freakonomics.
So one of the subtitles was why suicide bombers should
buy life insurance.
And I had just actually been investigating
the actual legality of the law and the general industry
practice.
So normally, life insurance does cover suicide.
So I emailed them to say, actually,
there's just a factual mistake on the cover of your book.
And they said, we know that.
We're trying to go and so they got,
now I can tell you, because this is many years ago.
They said, we're hoping that actually,
we're hoping that some terrorist goes and gives himself away
by buying a whole lot of insurance.
And we've sort of tipped off some key people
in the government to be watching out for this.
And then they were hoping to get a giant dash of free publicity
economists, prevent terrorist attack.
But it didn't work.
All right.
But anyway, so I'm not sure, I don't
think I'd be comfortable putting a deliberate error
on the cover of a book on the hope of as a publicity stunt.
But if it had worked, I would have shut up and say,
well, that's really cool.
But all right.
I don't hear that idea.
All right.
So questions.
So adverse selection, one of the most abused ideas
in all of economics, used to rationalize a bunch of stuff
that people want for totally different reasons that
are actually inconsistent with the model.
All right.
And kind of embarrassing, really,
how many economists have let to go and rationalize the status
quo for solving a problem that seems to, in fact, be largely
a product of regulation.
All right.
So at minimum, you think that you'd
want to get rid of all the regulations that
increase adverse selection and then see
how bad the problem is.
I think so.
It's not much of a problem at all, actually.
All right.
Now, there's actually, even in our current world,
where there's a lot of regulation that
encourages adverse selection, there's
some empirical studies that have found little evidence of it.
So what kind of evidence?
Well, so there's a big study in the market for life insurance
that found a very strange industry practice.
Bulk discounts.
If you double the size of your policy,
you generally pay less than double per dollar of insurance.
In the adverse selection model, what
do you think about the people who
want to take out the massive policies?
What's their risk like?
Someone wants a billion dollar policy.
High risk people.
So given that on average they have higher risk,
what should you charge them per dollar of insurance?
More.
Life insurance companies do the opposite.
Weird.
Then there is a small, very cutesy study
of people involved in motorcycle accidents.
Now, according to the adverse selection model,
what would the typical level of insurance
be of people who get into motorcycle accidents?
Yes.
Well, how much insurance would they
have according to adverse selection?
Very high.
Yeah, very high.
It's like, I drive a motorcycle and I get in accidents.
I'd better have a lot of insurance
to take care of this problem.
In the real world, people who get in motorcycle accidents,
how insured do you think they are?
Very barely insured at all.
Growing up in Los Angeles, there was a strong stereotype
that I saw verified at least once,
and I think twice, firsthand.
It says that if you get in an auto insurance accident with,
rather, an auto accident with someone else,
they will be uninsured.
Rule of thumb.
And this is, of course, in a state where you legally
had to have insurance, but it didn't matter.
So often, of course, the laws are just not enforced that much.
But still striking, you would think, well, gee,
given that you get in all these accidents,
you're accident prone, why don't you have insurance?
And then here's another fun one.
So you know that there are these policies
you can get on your credit card where if the card is lost,
then you have no liability for any false charges on it.
You pay an extra $10 a month, and then you
have total peace of mind.
Never mind that your maximum liability's already
capped at $50.
So basically, you lose your card once every five months.
But in any case, fun fact, people
who buy this insurance policy, do
they have an unusually high or low rate
of losing their card?
An unusually low rate.
Is that what adverse selection predicts?
Nope.
All right, so there's all these anomalies out there.
The main cases that we have of adverse selection
do, in fact, seem to be the ones caused by regulation,
where you have this ban on pre-existing conditions,
you have a lot of rate equalization,
although normally not full equalization,
and then you either don't have a mandate
or it's not very well enforced.
Those are the places where we do see these big adverse selection
problems.
So that's what's actually going on,
is there's a problem of regulation.
But in any case, so there are two stories
about what's going on in all these cases
where we don't seem to be finding adverse selection
or we're finding the opposite.
So here's one.
Our empirics are just screwed up.
It is not true you know more about yourself
than your insurance company knows about you.
You say, how is that possible?
I mean, it's not like they're following you around.
Well, the right way of putting it
is you know way more details about yourself
than the insurance company knows,
but they're wrong details.
They're unimportant, irrelevant, innumerate details
about yourself, whereas the insurance company
knows a few hypernumerate facts about you,
a few things that actually sum you up as a liability.
So insurance companies, for example,
have actuarial tables, they have actuaries.
So they're good at figuring out what your risk is.
So think about this.
If someone, if a telemarketer calls you up
and wants to sell you some insurance,
well, how do they decide to go and sell the insurance to you?
Who came up with this idea?
Well, there's probably some actuaries who said,
you know what?
These people have low risk, but they like buying insurance.
Let's go and find a bunch of people like this
and make them an offer.
See what happens.
So let's go and find these people.
And in that case, you say the adverse selection is actually
going the other way.
It's really you should be worried
when someone hunts you down and tries
to sell you some insurance.
It's like, why do you want to sell it to me, you awful people?
It's like, well, because we're really
concerned about all the risks in your life.
That's why you want to really sell me insurance?
Isn't the real reason that you're not
concerned about the risks of my life,
that you think that I'm a very safe person?
Maybe that would make more sense.
Then there's another story, which also
could be simultaneously true.
And this says there's a certain type of person who
buys lots of insurance.
And this type of person, as we can think of as a cautious
or a conscientious person, whatever adjective
you want to use, but the kind of person
that wants to buy a lot of insurance
and is also very cautious generally.
So again, look at me.
Do I look like I'm living a high-risk lifestyle?
So no.
Really, the most dangerous thing I do is blog.
Right?
And if anything really bad ever happens to me,
I think that's the most likely scenario.
So yeah, if Tyler wasn't a blogger,
he wouldn't have gotten attacked a few years ago.
He was fine.
But yeah, he seemed to be fine.
But I would have had major PTSD after that.
He got pepper sprayed in the eyes.
So by a guy who said that he was hacking his computer,
Tyler can barely hack his own computer.
All right.
So anyway, so you look at someone like a dad with four
kids who, like, when I take a walk at night,
I wear a flasher.
All kinds of precautions that I take.
I got so much to live for.
So many people depending on me.
So it doesn't surprise you to know
that I have a supplemental $600,000 life insurance policy.
Well, I do.
All right.
And it's cheap for me because people
want those policies to fit my profile hardly ever die.
So awesome.
Awesome.
Now, as you probably know, you are actually
in the right profession for life over longevity.
Notice all of those 90-plus Nobel laureates
either walking around or like they get to codes.
Well, like 103.
All right.
So an economist dies at 75.
He's like, young life tragically cut short.
All right.
So you're entering the right field.
I don't know whether the actuaries have actually
figured out how good our occupation is,
but they probably know their own occupation is a really good one
to sell life insurance to.
Actuaries, I know at least one.
And those people, sell them insurance.
They're not doing anything wild or crazy.
They're sitting there calculating rates of death
for other people all day long.
So cautious people.
All right.
So anyway, and this conscientiousness model
explains all the other ones.
Like what kind of a person rides a motorcycle?
You think I ride a motorcycle?
Yes.
So Steve Miller's an economist with six kids
who rides a motorcycle.
And they're like, whoa, that's really weird, Steve.
But I think I actually told him I would never
allow that if I were married to you, Steve.
That's why I'm not married to you, Brian.
All right.
All right.
So but anyway, so I don't ride motorcycles.
I don't climb mountains.
Don't do anything like I'll say.
Like I don't go to bars.
Don't go to parties where people drink alcohol.
All of these things that other people
might be doing that are endangering their lives,
I'm not doing any of them.
And I also am concerned that we have a sufficient insurance.
And that's the profile of people who want to buy insurance.
So in that case, again, it actually flips things around.
So it is the lowest people want to buy,
unless, of course, there's regulations
that are twisting things around.
And then there was no longer recent paper.
Actually, good, I took out the recent paper line
from the notes.
So this paper in the Rand Journal
that theoretically models.
what can be called advantageous or also propitious selection,
where it's actually the low-risk people want to buy
because they have a personality trait that inclines them
to caution and precaution.
All right.
So, questions about adverse selection in the real world?
So, bottom line, like one of the most overused models,
abused and overused, because when it's actually been tested
out in markets where regulation's not a big deal,
seems to not even be true, the opposite looks like it's true,
and then uses an argument for regulation
when if you look more closely,
there's a regulation first caused the problem, right?
And all of it really coming down to populist resentment
that markets want to charge riskier people higher rates.
So, again, you can understand in some way,
like when it is a sick child
where the parents can't buy insurance,
why there's a lot of sympathy.
Although, it's still hard to understand why there's
so much blame directed specifically
in insurance companies rather than at lack
of human compassion more generally.
Why is it that just because you're the provider
of the insurance that it's your job to go and lose money?
Right? You know, we don't go and expect farmers to go
and be the people that feed the poor, right?
So, normally that is either paid for by government programs
or charity where just everybody goes and chips in to go and pay
and provide food for the poor.
We don't think that farmers have a special obligation to go
and provide cheap or free food.
So, why should health insurance companies be the ones
that have the special obligation?
Right? It's very hard to understand, at least to me.
All right.
Oh, yeah. Now, let's just go do a really fun one.
So, you know, integral capitalism.
A unpopular idea, even here at Mason I would say,
but still less unpopular than at most places
on earth by a wide margin, right?
So, it is the idea of privatizing the last remaining
functions of government, privatizing the police,
privatizing the courts, privatizing the rule formation.
All right.
So, anyway, as you know, or as I say, this is not a popular idea,
but the average selection model allows us to say
that one argument against it is bad.
All the other arguments might be right,
but one common argument against this is
that in this world insurance companies would try to pump
up demand by loudly advertising
that they will gladly defend axe murderers, hit men,
and other criminal types.
And, in fact, they said, we'll defend you
to the death to pump up demand.
All right.
And people get worried about this.
Oh, my God.
Yeah. So, if this were private, then you'd go and try
to get extra customers by promising, look,
if you're my customer, you're my customer all the way.
I take care of my people.
Right? And no client of mine ever goes to jail
or ever gets punished for anything they do.
Right? That sounds like a pretty attractive appeal,
but what does the average selection model say
about that offer?
Yes?
So, the target is they feel like you're never going to go to jail.
Yes. Yes.
So, the people that want to go
and buy the policy are your hit men, your axe murderers, right?
And, therefore, you're going to have
to charge extremely high rates to go
and pretend to defend these people.
No. So, this would be like running insurance companies
saying, look, all of our customers have everything,
every expense covered no matter what.
We don't care whether you cause the problem yourself.
We don't care what the danger of all.
We don't care about the price.
Come here.
You're our people.
We love you.
That sounds like a good sales pitch,
and it would attract a lot of people,
but the wrong kind of people.
Right? Then, you know,
who do insurance companies really want?
They want me.
They want people like me who never get in any trouble.
Everything's fine, but I like just cautious, bourgeois,
middle-aged dads, maybe even better moms, right?
You know, so once in a while,
a middle-aged dad does something wild,
but to get the middle-aged mom with six kids,
she's not doing anything wild.
So, and, of course, once in a long while, not true.
But, if you're in the insurance industry,
you're playing the odds, of course.
All right.
So, questions.
Questions. All right.
Yes.
Anarcho-capitalism gets off your customers
when they become too much trouble?
Well, that's the interesting business model.
That's also, well, so there's an adverse selection problem there,
too.
Who are the customers that are going to, you know,
that's when we're at least, who are the people
that might want to buy the insurance?
Well, like, at least, well, the people,
definitely the people with high risk don't want that policy.
Well, they think about it, even the people
with really low risk don't want that policy,
because it's always, like, either they pay you money
for nothing, or you kill them, so that doesn't sound
like a very good deal.
All right.
Not to me, anyway.
All right.
So, now, moving on to the next form of asymmetric information.
This is an issue that has consumed the last six years
of my life.
I'm finally at the end.
I got the final green light from Princeton today, so, whew.
All right.
All right.
So, let's just start with some puzzles
to understand what the model's trying to explain.
All right.
So, first one.
This is the main one that my book is all about.
There's a whole lot of schooling that people do that appears
to almost everyone to have nothing to do
with any job you're ever going to do,
other than maybe teaching the very subject
that you're learning.
All right.
And yet, employers still seem to care.
So, if you're one Aristotle class short of graduation
from college, that one missing class sure seems
like it can hold you back tremendously in your career,
and yet, what possible job skills are you acquiring
in this Aristotle class?
Yes. Eudaimonia, right.
Yeah, you really need that.
I did have a big, once, like 10 years ago,
I had a student who was a huge Aristotle fan
and was claiming it was super useful.
I said, well, I've read it.
First of all, it doesn't seem super useful, but second of all,
even if it were super useful, if you really understood it,
almost no one who takes one class
in Aristotle really understand it,
so it still doesn't make any sense
that people would pay for it.
And yet, employers seem to make a big deal out of it.
And when you start going down the list
of the different things that you've had to study in life,
the list gets very long, right.
So, in the United States, how many years
of high school foreign language did you have
to do just to get into college?
Yeah, two years.
California, it's actually three if you go to either UC or CSU.
So, like more elite colleges,
you may actually need four years of foreign language.
All right, now, four years of foreign language,
if you like, is enough to get how many people to fluency?
Yeah, almost nobody, right.
So, yes, I mean, I looked at the general survey.
So, out of people who only studied a foreign language
in school, under 1% claim that they can speak the foreign
language very well, right.
Now, how many jobs are available to people
who can half speak a foreign language?
Yeah, very few.
Maybe high school Spanish teacher, actually.
You've seen King of the Hill, but even that,
that's a little unclear.
But, you know, and there's the obvious point of, look,
thanks to immigration, there are tons of people
who are totally fluent in the foreign language.
You don't need to go and get a native made crummy imitation.
So, there's like no real point of studying a foreign language
for most people, but you need it to get into a good college.
And then, and if you don't get the college degree,
then you need it for a good job.
So, you have to go and do this thing when you're a teenager
that has no apparent effect on your productivity
in almost any job you're going to do.
And yet, if you don't do it, you are really hurting yourself.
Yeah, so in my book, I point out I could not be a professor
in this office if I had just said foreign language is stupid.
You don't need it in America.
Instead, I went and did three years
of god awful foreign language instruction, which was both,
failed to teach me the language, but also filled me
with great anxiety about Spanish.
Because, like, what they did to me.
It was horrible.
Once a month, you had to memorize a speech in Spanish
and deliver it without any notes.
Because that's a great way to learn a foreign language, right?
Is to give a memorized five-minute speech
in a foreign language.
That's how you really learn to speak, right?
Whereas, we never actually spoke to each other
in the foreign language in class.
Anyway, so I still get really freaked
out when I remember these horrible times.
I have them like nine times.
And then, on the last one, the teacher,
the teacher said it wasn't for a grade.
And so, and then I did a really bad job.
And then, she said, well, in that case,
I'm going to drop you a full grade in the class.
Like, you didn't say that was a possible effect.
In fact, I specifically asked, what if you do a terrible job?
And the effect, no, as long as you get up there.
And then, after everyone else had gone,
then she did the sub game imperfect thing of saying, no,
I'm not really going to drop your grade.
Anyway, that one, like, compounded the PTSD from that.
Perhaps I'm more vulnerable to this than I am.
All right.
Anyway, and then, if you start making lists of other classes
that you must take to advance along the educational pyramid,
even though you are almost certain
to never use it in real life.
So, like, history, how often do you use that in real life?
Like, regular social studies.
You know, like, you guys,
you're getting your PhD in economics.
But, like, how was your social,
how important was your social studies instruction
in K through 12 for you being here today?
Did you even learn supply and demand?
Right. So, and yet, how many years
of social studies did you have to do?
Or, yeah, like, it was on and on and on.
And yet, even, like, showing two lines crossing was beyond them
to actually tell the students about this stuff.
So, there's that.
And then, there's things like you have to do gym.
Like, if you just refuse to do gym,
then you can't graduate from high school.
And then, you can't go to college.
So, all right, another weird thing.
And then, you know, just go down the list
of all the classes you've ever had to do.
And, like, what was the point of them?
So, people, you know, a lot of people assume I'm talking
about college.
I'm not talking about just college.
I'm talking about from day one of kindergarten.
This is the way the world seemed to me.
Day one of kindergarten, there's a bunch of things we had to do
where if you didn't do them, there was a big problem.
And, you might even be held back a grade.
And yet, when you need, so, like, what's that?
Like, singing and dancing?
Yeah. So, when my kids were in grades four through six,
they had to do three different music classes.
They had to do chorus, then music appreciation,
and dance, all three.
I actually tried calling up the school and saying,
is there any way to get out of any of this?
Could they just go to the library?
And, no, there's no way to get out of it.
You must do this stuff because there's so much
of the modern economy is based on music and dancing.
Now, you know, a lot of people want to say, oh, but it's,
you know, like, people learn
and people enjoy these subjects.
First of all, there's a lot of people who don't enjoy them
at all who are totally miserable, right?
If you go and look at any mandatory dance class
for young kids and look it out, the expressions on the boys' faces,
at least, they are not only unhappy, they are having some
of the worst experiences they will ever have in their lives.
I've seen boys being forced to dance just like this.
Like, not just one or two, they're just like,
they're just so miserable and so humiliated.
And yet, they have to do it.
So, in any case, no matter how much most people enjoy it,
there's still the puzzle, why do employers care?
Do employers, are employers supposed to care
if you enjoyed yourself when you were in kindergarten?
No, they're supposed to care about your marginal productivity.
So, unless you're going to say that these dance classes are
somehow raising productivity in non-dance areas,
seems like a real stretch, right?
Again, there's always people to say, well, look, you can't,
well, like, you know, like, who knows what
if that raises productivity?
Well, I suppose we don't have any definitive proof
that dance doesn't make you a better investment banker.
But, it's, that seems like one
of those extraordinary claims requiring extraordinary evidence,
not just something that you would believe
if someone says so.
All right.
So, anyway, first puzzle where I have the longest book I think I'll
ever write, why does non-job related schooling still raise
your income?
Or, in the words of the class smart aleck, what does this have
to do with real life?
What does trigonometry have to do with real life?
All right.
Well, now you know, right?
Life has just been one giant trigonometry exam ever since,
right?
Not my experience.
All right.
Now, here are some other ones
where the answer may be more obvious,
but it's all part of the same model.
So, why is it that people often won't buy a good
without a warranty?
Even if you know that you're not going to go and cash
in the warranty or use the warranty.
Like, suppose you're a tourist, you're driving through a town,
you buy a good, and you look to see whether there's a warranty,
even though you know that you're leaving town
and it will be too inconvenient for you
to go and return the product.
Why do you look for a warranty even if you know
that you're not going to be collecting the warranty?
Or, here's one.
Why use nice paper on a job application?
So, when you are sending out resumes, people often advise you
to go and get the nice paper, the 25% cotton paper.
What's the big deal?
Do you really think there's a person opens up the envelope
and goes, oh, I like the paper.
It's so good.
I love this person.
Is that the story?
It seems hard to believe.
That's the story, right?
Or, why is it there's so many jobs where you have
to wear a suit to work, right?
Somewhere you deal with the public,
you might think the public cares about how you look,
but what about ones where you don't?
Why do you have to wear the suit, which has got to be one
of the dumbest uniforms ever made?
Especially like summer in D.C., a lot of people were wearing suits
in D.C. in the summer.
Why not just say everyone has to wear an Eskimo outfit
or something like that?
Why is that the uniform?
It's so uncomfortable, it's so unpleasant, it's horrible.
But a lot of jobs, if you just say, look,
I just don't wear that uniform, I don't like it, well,
then you're going to not like it in a different place
of employment because we're not hiring you.
All right.
Here's another one.
Why are wedding rings so expensive?
How else could two months' salary last forever?
All right.
And there's a place like, so that means that when the price
of the rings goes down, I just have to buy a bigger ring.
It's kind of a weird framing, and yet, it is actually a common attitude.
Right? And in particular, just imagine that someone figures
out a way to make diamonds that are chemically indistinguishable
from natural diamonds, but they can make them for a penny a diamond.
How long will people continue giving diamond engagement rings
after this innovation?
Like a day?
Hours? Right?
So probably not very long.
There's something about it where it's got to be expensive.
Or here's one that was often asked during the 1980s.
Why are there so many countries that have arsenals of weapons sufficient
to destroy their enemies 100 times over?
What's the point of that?
Right? Why would you have weapons that are more
than enough to destroy the world?
Right? And why go and have a big parade where you show them off?
Like there's the classic military parade in Red Square
where they just have like an endless row of scary-looking missiles
and tanks and everything.
And like you don't want to really launch those things.
You'll be dead too.
It's like look at our arsenal.
Look. Right?
And then here's the last one, which may seem really weird,
but it's also been resolved using the same model.
Why do male peacocks have such large tails?
So have you ever been in a place that had both male peacocks
and then female peahens, as they are called?
So what do peahens look like?
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah, they're like ugly chickens.
All right?
Like small.
Like they don't look like, like you would never recognize
as peacocks.
They're just like, what is this thing?
And then there's the peacocks going around with the tails,
some of them like 15 feet long.
And we're supposed to believe natural selection said
that that's what's going to happen.
I mean the peahens, like yeah, sure,
they're like designed to survive.
Right? But the peacocks look like they're designed to die.
Like look at these things.
Like anyone could catch these animals.
Right? And like what are they, killing wolves?
With their feathers?
Like what in the world is going on?
What is this creature?
Which, is Darwin wrong?
Like this creature could be here?
Seems like it's a great counter example.
It's an animal that is selected for almost instant death
in the wild.
Yet there they are.
So how can that be?
All right.
So now we have these puzzles on the table.
Why don't we take our 10 minute break,
during which time you may resolve all the puzzles
or anticipate the resolution.
Ah, yes, yes.
And why don't we go and turn in homework.
And you can also at this point pick up the answer key
for homework six, as well as homework seven.
All right, let's get back to work, please.
All right, let's get back to work.
All right, so before the break we had the cliffhanger.
And you've all been asking yourself,
how will the economist solve these incredibly difficult
seven puzzles?
How will they, will he be, will he throw up his arms
in total confusion?
Or will he have devised a theory that explains each
and every case?
Right? And of course, the answer is, we've got a theory
to explain each and every case.
So at least a popular way to resolve all
of these seemingly paradoxical results,
those are the name of signaling.
There's lots of signaling models,
but they've all got three basic assumptions.
First of all, there's the assumption
that there are different types of people, firms, animals,
things.
All right, so the types might be able versus unable,
smart versus dumb, honest and dishonest,
hardworking and lazy, all sorts of possible types
out there in the world.
All right, so that's step one.
All right, step two is that we've
got asymmetric information about type.
Why?
Because you know whether you're hardworking or lazy, probably.
But if you go to interview for a job,
and they ask you, are you A, hardworking, or B, lazy?
What does almost everybody say?
Hardworking.
Everyone's hardworking, which means
that there's asymmetric information,
because you know whether you're hardworking or not.
But as far as employers are concerned, on the surface,
everybody looks the same.
It's a bunch of people all claiming
to be married to their jobs.
So there's that.
Also hard to observe the types correctly.
And then the last assumption, the key one,
is that different types have different costs
of doing something observable.
So there's got to be different costs in observable activity.
And then when you put these three together,
the result is if you are the good type,
then you know that you are not going
to get credit for being good just because you say I'm good.
Instead, what you're going to want to do
is to find something to do that convinces outside observers
that you're good.
You want to do something that would be really
expensive for a bad person to do,
less expensive for a good person to do,
so that it is believable that you actually are good.
That's the whole idea.
Now, if we have something like this,
then it can be in the interest of whoever
is in higher demand, whoever gets better treatment
in the world, to go to school and study Aristotle.
Not because you need to know it.
Aristotle to do a good job, not because it has any effect
on your productivity as a worker,
but because you are showing off.
Like, look at me, like Aristotle.
All right, now that may seem like, well, who does that?
Well, the Aristotle one in particular is unusual,
but I have completed the college curriculum.
Ta-da, that is a big deal, right?
Whereas being, I'm one class short
of completing the college curriculum,
oh, fire me, not a very good pitch.
All right, so I've completed a college curriculum.
Right, that is a very compelling, right?
And the idea there is that there are good and bad workers,
right, but of course, everyone claims to be good.
But if you are a good worker,
you also probably find it easier in some sense
to do well in school and to finish.
Whereas if you're not so good,
then you probably don't find it so easy, right?
And the idea is there's a lot of overlap
between the work ethic and the school ethic.
Someone who's a good student is normally a good worker.
Doesn't need to always be true, of course.
It just needs to be a probabilistic relationship
because in business, if business is not a logic class,
you're not demanding certain proof
that any strategy is going to pay.
Instead, you're just looking for a good bet, a good gamble.
Is this person going to be the best use of my money
that I've got, that I can think of,
that I've been able to find?
All right, so if you're behind demand,
then it's gonna be in the interest of your school,
fill out an application for extra care,
provide a warranty, and even if the effort
is directly valued by neither buyer nor seller,
even if by itself, no one actually
really likes what's happening,
even if nobody really likes sending the nice paper,
nobody really likes receiving the nice paper,
still the fact that you made the extra effort
says something good about you.
All right, so another way to think about it
is people want what the effort proves
you already had in the first place.
The point of taking a bunch of pointless classes in school
isn't that you're learning how to do a pointless job.
The point is that you've shown,
look, I have gone and jumped through all these hoops
and that makes me the kind of person that you wanna hire.
Right, so why does non-job-related schooling
still raise your income?
Because even if it's irrelevant,
it still signals good stuff about you.
Right, it still signals that you're smart,
signals that you're hardworking,
and I think probably the one that's most neglected
is it signals that you are a conformist sheep.
Right, that you will submit to social expectations
and do what you're supposed to do
because when you're hiring a worker,
do you want someone who's sitting there
questioning the relevance of the job?
You want someone saying, well, I don't really see
what the point of doing this is,
I don't even know why we sell this product to people.
Well, look, that person might be right,
but do you wanna hire that person?
I do not.
Right, I don't wanna hire me.
I don't, so I go, I wanna hire my wife.
I didn't wanna work for my wife,
but I'd like to hire her, like so.
Like so, like when you say something needs to be done,
just like, I'm going to do it to perfection.
Not saying, but is it worthwhile?
No, you don't want that person.
Right, you said you want the conformist sheep,
the person that follows the rules,
does what they're told, conforms, complies.
Right, all these things are highly desired,
and of course, it's really hard to get through school
if you don't have this stuff.
You know, grad school, you may look around
and see a few people look nonconformist
in a few superficial ways,
but they're still pretty conformist.
I mean, look at me.
I got through 21 years of school,
and it wasn't by constantly fighting the system, right?
It was by strategically saying,
well, what parts of the system can I get away with breaking?
I'll break those.
But all the other stuff, well, what do I have to do?
Really?
And like sometimes I hear something,
oh, I have to do three hours of foreign language?
Yes, fine.
I'll do three hours of foreign language.
I won't like it, but I won't allow that dislike
to prevent me from doing all the work
and getting good grades.
All right, and then why not buy goods without a warranty?
A warranty is a signal of product quality,
because it's really cheap to put a warranty
for a product that nobody ever returns.
It's really expensive to put a warranty
in a product that people hate.
So if all your customers are satisfied
in saying I pay all the shipping costs,
whatever, any slightest problem,
get all your money back, no questions asked,
that's a great promise to make if everyone loves your stuff.
If your stuff is junk,
it's a really expensive promise to make.
And then like the nice paper on a job application,
just showing that you're putting in this extra effort.
I'm not claiming there's a huge return,
but it's like 20 bucks worth of paper.
So if there's a 0.1% chance of getting a better job
because you put in the better paper, isn't that worth it?
Like just proofreading your stupid resume,
how many people don't do that?
Right, like how hard is that?
It's hard enough that maybe a quarter of people didn't do it.
That's how hard it is.
And that's all that matters.
And often with signaling,
there's a certain very reasonable kind
of puzzlement at mankind,
because it's like, you're telling me
that there's some people who can't graduate
from any college program at all.
In all of George Mason,
there's not a single major that would just wave you through.
You haven't been able to find that major.
And yet you go and look at the data
and you see that only about a third of young people,
like a third of you have finished a college degree.
And you maybe say, how is that possible?
Wrong question to ask.
Right question to ask is,
well, a college degree puts you in the top third.
That pays off for me, good job.
And like, what is keeping the two thirds from doing it?
There's some majors that are so easy.
The standards are so low.
And yet they're not even doing that.
Right, and you have to sort of look around
at your friends who don't go to college.
And you're like, why don't they just go
and do the easiest stupid major,
which doesn't pay that much,
but compared to what they're doing,
it's still a good deal, it would seem.
But yeah.
I'm sure this payoff is there.
Ah, so that's a great question.
And actually, let me just back up and say
that next semester, I am going to be teaching
a cross-listed seminar on my education book.
So it'll be open to both undergraduates
and graduate students.
And the answer is, if you know for sure
that you will finish the program,
then even really crummy majors
from crummy schools are a good investment.
The main reason why college is a bad investment
for most people, in fact,
is most people just have a really low chance of finishing.
So if you're in the bottom fifth
of high school math scores,
conditional on going to college,
you have maybe a 5% chance of graduating in five years.
There's still the puzzle, yeah,
but that's given what they're doing,
why don't they just find the easiest major on campus
with the easiest teachers?
Why don't they go to the Rate My Professor website
and find which rates professors for easiness
and just do all the easiest professors?
I've noticed there is no ranking on Rate My Professor
for amount of job skills taught,
but there is one for easiness as well as hotness.
Okay.
I'd love to see where you are on this.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Hot tamales all the way for me.
Yes.
All right.
So, and then like, why do you have to wear a suit to work?
Well, wearing a suit, it signals conformity.
And why does it have to be so uncomfortable?
Well, if the conformist outfit were shorts
and a t-shirt and flip flops, like anybody can do that.
So, you know, like by making it an uncomfortable uniform,
it actually makes it a better signal.
Right, and then why are wedding rings so expensive?
Well, a wedding ring is a symbol, is a signal of devotion.
So, if wedding rings be suddenly became super cheap,
you'd have to figure out a way of getting something
that wasn't super cheap.
Make it out of platinum, but like add extra gems,
like do whatever it takes to go
and make it worth too much salary,
because that's what it takes to actually be convincing.
Yes.
Doesn't Robin Hanson have an example
where you place a bet that you collect
after a certain age or something to commit to like the-
That sounds just like him.
I don't remember that example,
but that's totally another way.
But as I was saying, like just as for a job,
a lot of what you're signaling
when you want to get a job is conformity.
And I think that is actually very general.
So, if almost everyone else in your society
signals marital devotion with a wedding ring,
if you come up with a different bet
that someone collects at a certain age,
that does signal that devotion in a sense,
but also signals that you're really weird
and that you either don't understand
or don't care about social norms.
And that does tend to reduce your marriageability
among superficial people.
Which is almost everybody.
Yeah.
And then you have tons of weapons
that you don't even tend to use.
It's like, don't mess with me.
I've got a giant arsenal here.
I'm scary.
So, bend my will.
Right, and then the peacocks.
Now, here biologists, totally independently of economists,
have like the general story is,
if you can survive with that tail,
you must be a really awesome peacock.
You must be fast and vicious
and you must have every other benefit.
A more specific one that came along later
is that it's a very strong signal
that you don't have parasites.
Because if a peacock looked like a pea head,
you might be running with parasites.
But if you have that lovely tail,
that would have been eaten away by parasites.
So that's a way of saying, look at me, parasite free.
You know you want to mate with me
and then we'll make peacock babies
and it will be great.
And you won't get parasites from me,
the babies won't have parasites.
It's gonna be great.
All right, so.
And of course it doesn't need to be conscious.
It doesn't need to be that the peacocks
are there looking and saying,
huh, a giant tail, a strong signal of parasite freedom.
Instead could just be that per everything else in Darwinism,
that if you prefer the tails, that you get better mates.
And if you have the tails, you get better mates.
And that's all that Darwinism requires.
You don't need any actual conscious understanding.
Just like so many other things like,
why is it that males are generally not attracted
to 80 year old women?
Well, most men don't actually have a theory about this.
So they just don't, that's just,
I just don't feel attraction.
But Darwinism has an explanation for the emotion,
which is, well, if your ancestors had that emotion,
then you would have wasted a lot of mating energy
on infertile women.
And therefore you would not have
a lot of descendants right now.
So who are we?
We're the descendants of the people
that were attracted to fertile women
and were not attracted to infertile ones.
Okay.
All right.
So, questions, questions.
All right.
All right, now let's just,
let me just give you a numerical example.
It's a pretty simple one,
but just to illustrate how these models work.
All right, so suppose that we got two kinds of workers.
So we've got good workers and bad workers.
Of course, you could do it with a continuum,
but then it's a lot more math.
All right, so we've got two kinds of workers.
We've got our good workers.
So good workers are worth 100K to me,
and bad workers are worth only 25K to me.
Okay.
All right, but it costs good workers
only 25K to complete school,
whereas it costs bad workers 50K to complete school.
Right, and there's many different stories
you can tell about that.
One of them could just be that bad workers
aren't very smart, and so they have to try more times
to finish.
Another could just be that people don't like doing things
that are hard for them.
Right, so we ever thought,
what is it like to be a C student for K through 12?
To spend 13 years having the adults in your life
tell you that you are mediocre at best.
Sounds very bitter, right?
So, and you may notice with the younger kids,
we try and make everyone feel good, right?
Say, oh, everyone did great.
Some people did especially well, right?
So try to go and make people feel good,
but just not doing that well is very bitter for people,
so there could just be the sheer emotional pain
of having to endure something that you're not very good at.
So there's lots of ways that you can think about it.
Or it could be a financial cost,
where if you're a good student,
you only have to go to college once.
You just pay your tuition four years in a row,
and you're done.
But if you're a not so good student,
you might be paying four-year college tuition
for five, six, seven, or eight years, right?
So normally the way that we report college completion rates
is by like five or six-year graduation rates.
So, like, well, what is the,
so for full-time students,
what is roughly the four-year graduation rate?
So this is for full-time students,
people who are only going to school for those four years.
So what percentage actually can finish a four-year degree,
do finish a four-year degree in four years, roughly?
About 40.
Yeah, so only about 40.
So the 55 number is for five years.
So five years, a four-year program completed in five years.
But with five years tuition as well.
And five years worth of foregone wages.
So this means that whenever you see a calculation
of the return to education,
or return to college rather,
that assumes that people finish in four years,
well, that's true for some people.
But for a lot of people,
you should be dividing by four, by five,
not four, or by six, or by seven, or by eight.
So, yeah, I think by six,
six-year graduation rate if you're full-time goes up to 60,
and then it really inches up after that.
So these are all things that would affect
the expected cost of going to school
based upon how good of a student you are.
Okay?
All right.
Now, suppose that as an employer,
I can tell whether you went to school or not,
but I can't tell how good you are.
So that is key.
All right?
And then finally, let's suppose that if you,
that if you don't work for me,
then you get 50% of your value to me.
So that could be like what you earn in self-employment.
So basically, suppose I'm the only employer,
and you either work for me or you're self-employed,
and if you work for yourself,
then you're not as efficient.
And so, in that case, a good worker makes 50,
and a bad worker makes 12.5.
Okay?
All right.
Now, in a single-equivalent agreement, what do we need?
Well, we need, first of all,
I, the employer, must maximize profits.
All right, pretty simple point.
But then, here are the signaling requirements.
Good workers must not want to look like bad workers.
Well, who would, right?
But then, there's the real catch.
Bad workers must not want to look like good workers.
It's like, well, of course bad workers
want to look like good workers.
But at what cost?
At what cost do they want to do that?
The cost has to be high enough
that they don't end up working.
All right, so what happens?
Well, we can go and think about a lot of silly strategies.
Like, I could try going and just paying everyone
the same amount.
So, suppose I paid everyone the average.
I can suppose it's like 50-50 splits here.
So, they're equally likely.
So, if I just paid the average,
the average productivity would be,
let's see, would be 62.5.
So, if I just went and said,
look, I'll hire workers for 62.5,
then who's going, let's see, what am I gonna get?
Let's see.
So, I paid workers 62.5.
Actually, I would get everybody working for me.
That, because these good workers,
they actually are only gonna make 50
working in self-employment.
But then I get a workforce that is,
so I get a workforce that's all the good workers,
all the bad workers, and I break even.
So, that doesn't sound like a very good deal for me.
Does it?
Right, well, we'll see.
So, we can find anything that would actually make a profit,
then we have a better deal.
All right.
Now, in equilibrium, a key clue here
is that the good workers,
it costs them less to get education.
So, of course, you'd expect the people
who can get education at a lower cost
are gonna be the ones more likely to do it, right?
Okay, all right.
So, you might think about an equilibrium.
Well, how about we have one where I go and I pay good,
and I pay educated workers,
I pay educated workers, say,
let's see, what would it be?
So, let's see.
So, if I want, so I want people to have education,
then I'm gonna have to go and pay the good workers
at least 75,000, right?
Yes, because they can make 50,000 without me
where they don't need school,
and then there's 25,000 tuition cost.
So, if I want to get any good workers,
I gotta pay at least 75,000, all right?
But if I pay 75,000,
then I'm also gonna go and get all the bad workers.
Right, so I don't like that.
All right, so, right, and of course,
if the bad workers won't want to work for me
for under 12.5,000,
because then they'd be better off self-employed.
All right.
So, what if I were to just go and offer everybody,
so I would go and offer everybody the 75,000,
and then the problem is that bad workers
would want to be educated, right?
Then bad workers would say,
hey, well, then I'm educated too,
and then I'm actually not getting educated workers,
or I'm not getting good workers.
When I buy educated workers,
I'm getting an average worker.
I'm getting 50% chance of good, 50% chance of bad.
So, how about this as an equilibrium?
So, I go and I offer good workers 75K, right?
And I can go and then offer the bad workers,
what do I offer?
I offer the bad workers 25K.
And then for the good workers,
what I'm going to get now
is I'm gonna make a profit of 25,000 off of each of them.
And for the bad workers,
for them, I'm just gonna break even.
Right, for them, I'm just gonna break even.
You know, I could go,
and I could cut the pay that I offer bad workers,
but then I just wouldn't get any bad workers.
Right, so the bad workers would rather be self-employed.
Oh, let's see, actually, hold on.
Let's see, if I cut the pay, ah.
Wait, if I cut the pay,
no, actually, if I cut the pay for bad workers anymore,
they'd want to get education and then pretend to be good.
Right, suppose that I went and offered 24,000K
for people who didn't have college degrees.
If I did that, then how much of a,
but I still offered 75,000 for people
that have the education.
Then, how much of a gain would a bad worker get
from going to school?
$1,000.
Yeah, so gross gain of 51 and a net gain of 50,
so they'd want to go.
So in that case, bad workers would want
to look like good workers,
so that's going to be the problem.
All right, so anyway, so my proposed Nash equilibrium
is precisely this one here.
Right, so let's see.
I guess, so you could do just as well, actually,
by offering bad workers, say, zero.
So let's see, actually, if you offer,
no, if you offer, excuse me.
You shouldn't actually say good,
you should say educated and not educated.
So offer educated and not educated.
Yeah, so if I were to go and offer
non-educated workers zero,
then the problem is that they would want
to come work for me, but they would want
to get education and come work for me,
and then I'd be stuck going and paying
these educated workers who aren't very good.
So I think, so this here looks like our Nash equilibrium.
Right, now we can look at the deadweight cost.
All right, so expected surplus per hire
is actually going to be 31.25K.
Why?
Because, remember, so half the workers are good,
half the workers are bad, right,
and for the good workers, the surplus is 100 minus 50,
because remember, 50 is what they can get
in self-employment, so there's 50,000
in surplus working for me.
And for the bad workers, there's going to be 25 minus 12.5,
25K minus 12.5K, so it's going to be,
well, I'm not gonna say bad,
50k surplus for these guys and
12.5k surplus for these guys and if we just go and multiply 0.5 times 50k
plus 0.5 times 12.5k
Then we get what then we get an average of 31.25k
So an average higher is a surplus of 31,250
right, but
In the signaling like equilibrium, we're only going to have a surplus of 18,750
Why? Because half the workers go to school and
In the model school doesn't actually teach you anything useful
So if half the workers go to school and pay a cost of 25,000 then we have to subtract out how much from total surplus
What's half of 25,000
Yeah, 12.5k minus 12.5k
Which then equals what we actually realize which is 18.75k
And then where did that where did the 12.5k go? Deadweight loss of the education
Deadweight loss of the education, people put all this energy doing a useless thing
Intrinsically useless thing in order to convince employers that the good workers are good and the bad workers are bad
And that's the idea
Okay, all right now in certain settings you might be able to actually set up a costless cash transfer as the signal
So something so
You might like that example where you go to like if I go and break my promise then you go and get some cash
but
That you know, so that might be an equilibrium too or if we go went and expanded the model to allow for other things maybe
But at least in this setup, there's actually just a inefficient outcome
And of course you say well, it's good to have some information
So, you know, it can be better than nothing and yet still there can be a lot of waste going on
A lot of waste relative to either a world of perfect information
But also relative to a world of symmetric and perfect information
So imagine that good workers didn't know they were good bad workers didn't know they were bad
In that case there'd be no reason for anyone to go and break their promise
There's no reason for anyone to go to school. You don't know whether you're good or bad
So you don't have any problem. You don't have any qualities to go and prove to anybody else
And in that case employers would just treat everybody like their average and then we wouldn't have to go to school
Yes, what's that? Yippee, yippee. Yes. Well depending upon whether you're on the supply and demand side of this industry
This may affect your view. Okay. Now, of course, this is just a model and
I have never actually met anyone and I certainly don't believe that a hundred percent of all education is just meaningless jumping through hoops
There's lots of things that you learn that actually do enhance your human capital in school
But there's also so many things that don't
There's so many things that don't
And the point of the signaling model in my mind and in my book is precisely to talk about all the cases where human capital
Doesn't seem like a very good explanation
Now you might say well if there's no one who really believes that this is the theory 100% of the time
Is there anyone who believes in this theory 0% of the time? And the answer is yes
I know a lot of labor economists actually believe that signaling is empirically irrelevant and that
The sole reason why education increases your earnings is because it actually improves your human capital
Now when I bring like it gives you job skills now
Whatever I've actually had a chance to talk to them and say well like what about foreign languages in America?
Like how can you say that?
Then they then this is the time the economists suddenly become big fans of psychology for the first and only time of their life
and they say well
Learning a foreign language expands your mind and it teaches you how to think outside the box and just improves you as a worker in so many
incalculable ways
Or so I assume I've never actually read any psychological research on any of this, but must be and
Then if you said well actually I've gone and read the psychological literature on this they don't find any evidence of that at all
What psychologists generally find is that learning is very narrow and that if you're lucky as a teacher students learn the material you teach them
Their ability to actually go and take a foreign language and use it to go and think outside the box in business
It's just wishful thinking
Right and that's where the economist. I don't believe that show me the articles
You can see you send them the links never hear from them again
All right, or does that prove anything?
so the people the people who study this have hundred years disagree with you and
Common sense disagrees with you, but you're gonna stick to your guns
You're lost I don't know what else I could do
Yeah, so Ashley a question
So there's a number so probably the one that's got the most attention recent years is the handbook of education economics
there's a piece by
Fabio manga and run and
Robert Robert topple that looks at both it looks at both positive and negative externalities of education and
Clay and claims not find either
so and
Right and and specific and specifically on the view this video
So the look of this this actually implies there are negative externalities of signaling right because it's a zero-sum activity
Right as it was actually negative some activity because when you go and you get more education you're making your you are
Getting extra income of yourself, but you're making everybody else look bad by comparison without raising overall productivity
Right so think about this so in this model does education raise worker productivity at all
Now yet it does raise individual income. How can something raise your income without raising social productivity?
Its redistribution yes the signaling model is a model of rent-seeking
That's one where you go and do something that's totally socially wasteful
But it let it improves your position and people do it
You know why do people do something that doesn't have society? Same reason people litter same reason why people talk too loud in the restaurant
Same reason the reason they pollute because the effect of themselves is that the negative effect is very small
And the positive X very big and that's all and human beings are selfish QED
Yes
Yes, yeah, actually lowers the pie because you burn up resources do you know in the signaling so yes?
So I actually negative some strictly speaking
Yes
Yes
But is our model of like you saying oh, you know you've always forgotten ways to stop
But is there a model of like at least higher level of higher education in college that it's really just it's a consumption good
I mean four years drinking five or six years drinking beer and you know using drugs
That that is that is a great question also
Here's what I'd say certainly do like it's very hard to argue that the actual education part of it is
Consumption for most people just look at attendance even when you want to even even when classes are getting when there's a great
So you know not graduate school graduate students. They either they know either
They were they really want to be here for one reason or another but go to undergraduate classes
Mason is totally normal so typical attendance in college classes about is about 60%
All right and notice
Generally you are free to attend any college class you want, but there's almost no one doing it for the consumption value
So I think you might say that the social aspect of school is consumption
Yes, yes, but it's not the actual education process that people think of as being the thing that is actually valuable
But the other thing is of course that you could be going and having that fun while making money instead of paying someone
How many people would go and pay for college out of their own pockets for the consumption value?
If you would get if you get if you could get started if the job that you're gonna get when you're when you're 22
You can immediately get when you're 18
So I'd say look you could like you could actually get more consumption value when you consider that you'll be a college student
You could get more consumption value when you consider that you'll be getting paid instead of having to pay
Right, so
Yes, you do have to do that
So in general people consider graduation to be a good thing on balance because whatever reduction fund you're getting
You're getting is made up for by the extra money, which also allows you to have more fun with less parental supervision
Also often enjoyed. Oh, you know something else that's very striking to me is that
Whenever I pulled undergraduates about whether they live on campus where you can participate in campus life or off-campus an apartment
Almost everyone says they want to live off campus
Which also seems to cut against the idea that like this on-campus living is really is really super fun for people
Again, I bet those answers do puzzle me a bit
Yeah, and I say was there a difference between only freshmen and old and upperclassmen and you know
There's some difference but even there like students seem to really like the idea of having their own apartments
Which if you had a job?
You would probably have
So yeah, so consumption value for a person, you know, I wouldn't totally dismiss it
But you know, I mean my view is it's mostly just because your parents are paying for it
That people are really in the other people are really interested in doing if you had to pay for this consumption value out purely out
of your own pockets
It's like you know
Like if you're just doing if you like if you had to pay for all out of student loans at market interest rates
How many people consider that a good consumption deal?
Sound like too great with you
All right. Now if you go and take my cross-listed seminar on my book
Which will be able to teach
Almost all of the economics of education but through the lens of a single book that filters it all
I think of it as a I think of the book in part is just a good introduction to education economics
Anyway, go over a bunch of the arguments for why the signaling model is so empirically credible
Not that it's 100% but that explains a lot
So to me the most convincing argument is just simply that
Most things most subjects are obviously useless or nearly useless and yet all subjects seem to pay
So there's two literature. You know, so there's the literary
You can just look at the basic facts about what subjects people study and when you just go and look at how many years people
spend on subjects of incomprehensible uselessness
Like in America foreign languages history like think about all the time spent on studying that like classic literature instead of business writing
Like Shakespeare you learn English as a spoken 500 years ago
And what job require what job and you're like actually uses that very very rare
So just the contrast between what we what we learn
But then there's a whole other literature estimate estimating the actual financial benefits in the labor market of all this education
And the punchline is that there's a lot of people who are just like
I'm not going to go into all this education and the punchline is that
While the payoff varies it seems to be positive for almost everything
so even art history fine arts
Anthropology all these subjects that your parents would be horrified if you're if you want to major in them
All of them do actually raise wages causally and substantially relative to just having high school degree
Art history is way worse than logical engineering
But they all have a clear payoff after you make all these physical adjustments that seem like it
They seem like you should make so says like even the seemingly most useless coursework in the world still still pays and pays well
Right so that to me is really the most powerful argument for signaling is just that and of course most of this
You experience firsthand through in all of your years in the education system
Yes, so like so many so many classes that you had to learn like why do I have to learn this stuff?
Because it's up here. It's going to be on the test
right this mentality, it's very strong and
It's to me that someone would deny it after spending
13 or 17 or 21 years in school like it was like come on
This is like believe like it's like believing in Bigfoot
It's like there's so much evidence that that you're wrong that this view is wrong
and you keep sticking to it
All right, so there's that so the book I spent a lot of time just going over
Like how the subjects that people actually study
But then I also have another argument. I put a lot a lot of weight on and that is
So in the human capital model do employers pay you for what you used to know or what you know now?
Pretty simple question do they pay you for what you used to be able to do or what you're able to do right now?
Yes, they pay you for what you're able to do right now
Now it is a very well established fact in educational psychology that students quickly forget most of what they learn
In fact there are many subjects where you now know as little about it as the first as you did on the first day class
Because you've forgotten it all
or nearly all
Right so how can we actually measure this?
Well usually like an edgy and like an education research what they do is they might go and
measure your learning at say the end of the summer or the beginning of the summer and then they measure at the end of the summer
And then that's their or they might even measure what how much you remember a year later
But in general there's not any long-term evaluation
So like you know there's never for most people there's never a time where they go and see how much of your material
From 10th grade you remember when you're 35
Nobody bothers doing that
So there's no data there, but I came up with a shortcut that I like and that is well
Why don't we just go and look at how much adults know about different subjects they spent years studying in school
And let's just make the assumption that they learned that 100% of what they know they learned in school
And then see how much is that 100%
For many subjects that people spent years studying that hundred they know if you give education credit for 100%
You're giving it credit for next to nothing
You're giving them giving it credit for a 50% chance of knowing there are three branches of government
Stuff like that
So on tests of civics history things like this
People like the average American adults can usually get about half of the very most basic questions
Questions so basic you might think it's impossible to not know the answer
And if you're a phd student you almost certainly could get 100% on these tests
But most people can't come close to 100% on even super easy tests
Right and then here's my view so let me go this way so most someone knows only half the letters of the alphabet
What do you call a person like that?
Illiterate not half literate if you only know half the letters you cannot read at all
Similarly I say if you only know half the most basic facts about American government or us history
You don't know half of what you need to know you don't really know anything
You are simply ignorant
You know for all practical purposes, you know nothing
So I say that's what you so even if you did think these subjects somehow were used on the job
They have taught almost nothing
Then there's also research on adult Americans reading and mathematical skills
Many of these are so poor
It's almost hard to believe how bad they are but a good rule of thumb is that
If you like whatever you think that a college graduate should be able to do in terms of reading and writing
That's about what someone with a with an advanced degree can do
Whatever you think that a high school degree for someone with only high school you should be able to do
That's about what the average college graduate in America can do
So, you know
This is just one random question, but I think it's very telling
So if you just go and ask adult Americans to express
1 1,000th in percentage terms. What is 1 1,000th in percentage terms?
Only about 10 of Americans can do that problem
adult Americans
30 of Germans can do it actually
So in some ways Americans are especially pathetic
But it's mostly it's just that
Americans are not that bad
It's just like there's a stunning level of either not learning the material in the first place or simply forgetting it because you don't use it
Because how often in real life
Do you have to go and express 1 1,000th in percentage terms?
Right. So besides this disconnect between learning and earning
I talk about a number of other arguments
So one of them that I find very convincing is the shared learning
arguments, so one of them that I find very convincing is the sheepskin effect
So yeah diplomas used to be printed on the skins of sheep
So sheepskin effect is another word for diploma effect
What does this mean? It means when you look at the financial payoff for education
Most of the payoff seems to come from crossing the finish line of graduation and only a small amount from the from the preceding years
In terms of the human capital model, this is very strange
So you will do we withhold the job skills for senior year?
Do we just make you waste time for three years and then finally senior year? All right, finally
Now we're going to teach you some job skills
At least you go to school in the United States
This is the opposite of our stereotypes because senior year for both high school and college is generally called goof off year
It's the year that you don't work hard and just sort of coast
But in any case seems really odd to think that it's the last year where they finally teach you the job skills
So if it really were about skills that it would seem like it should be that every year you get a
Percentage point increase and that's totally not what we see
So for high school, I mean, there's a lot of studies of this and there's plenty of dispersion, but still
The average study finds that over half the payoff from high school comes from senior year
For college average study finds that about 70 percent of the payoff comes from senior year
Years one through three pay almost nothing and then graduation pays a giant bag of money
Which is why it's what which is why it is sensible people freak out about low graduation rates
Because if you don't graduate then you've got almost nothing out of the whole thing
But remember tuition costs are proportional to years spent in college school
But payoff is not payoff has this big non-linear payoff at the end
Now the signaling model does not automatically tell you how much you're going to pay for a year
The signaling model does not automatically imply that there will be this strange payoff at the end
but
the conformity version does
So if a lot of what's going on with education is you're signaling that you're conformist
And if the social norms of our society say that you are supposed to finish your degree
Then if you refuse to finish that degree if you give up before short of the finish line
There is an enormous stigma and a self-justifying stigma because if most people believe
That only losers won't finish then on average it is the losers that don't finish
Right and think about someone that gives up in their like after their junior year
When 70 of the payment will be given to them if they just do one more year
What is the mentality of a person who gives up so close to the end?
What is wrong with them?
I really don't know but all I can see is in the data
Those people do very poorly. And yeah, so if any kid of mine was going to quit one year before
No
You are not quitting a year before we have paid for three years, maybe four or five years
You are finishing over my dead body. Do you give up now?
Right and this makes perfect sense because of course you're so close just a little bit more work
How lazy are you? It's like it's not that I'm lazy. I just don't feel like it
I refuse to submit to all this
You will submit
I am not going to put up with this terrible attitude but like the person who gives up in their junior year. I am not going to put up with it.
just crosses their arms and says,
no way, enough is enough,
I refuse to finish my senior year.
Do you wanna hire a person that stubborn,
that big headed, that defiant?
I don't.
They're great friends, I love people like that,
they're fun, but I'm not giving them my money.
Yeah, Ash?
Yeah.
Is this, would this then be the only case
where a sunk cost wouldn't be a fallacy?
Well, so this is not a sunk cost,
this is one where the benefit is unusually high over time.
So, here's the thing is,
it does make sense to get to a movie,
think that it's not as good as you hoped,
and then not leave.
Because the marginal cost to you
of finishing the movie is actually smaller
once you're already there.
You've already paid the commuting cost,
you've already gone and paid the price.
So it might be you only need $2 worth of surplus
to justify staying in a movie
once you've already shown up there.
So similarly, here, as long as the value of your time
isn't 70, of one year,
isn't the discount of present value
of 70% of the payoff of college for the rest of your life,
then it would make sense to finish.
Now, assuming in general,
suppose that every year is equally costly,
but the first year you get $1,
second year you get $1,
third year you get $1,
and last year you get $7.
It makes a lot of sense to go,
and once you've already gotten to the last year
stick it out because the payoff is unusually large.
Yeah, you have a question there?
Are there, I'm just trying to think
about possible exceptions,
and I was wondering like, you know,
a nursing school or a-
Yeah, absolutely.
So like there are plenty of majors that earn more,
and in general, higher earning majors
do look more vocational.
Yeah, but not just that,
it seems like a nursing major,
I mean, yes, there's some costly signaling involved
in one's engineering degree.
There are actually a few times
when you might use something in class in your real life.
Yes, so the might is key,
but here's the thing is,
in general people often think that if a subject is hard
and they don't know about it,
that it's all human capital,
and they think signaling is just important
in all the fields they personally know,
but I found that whenever I talk to anyone in any subject,
no matter how technical it is,
no matter how vocational it is,
they always will say they had to jump through
a bunch of meaningless hoops
that were irrelevant to the job.
I'm not saying that's not true,
I'm saying, you know,
if the meaningless hoops to the actual information
in art history is maybe 99.99.01,
in nursing, if you had 10% of useful information.
Yeah, sure, totally believable,
and I'd say my only reason for doubting is that,
so engineering is a higher absolute return,
so it could be the signaling percentage is lower,
it could be the signaling percentage is the same,
but the human capital part is just more valuable.
Like when they are teaching skills,
they're much more valuable skills.
So I mean, I know that,
so my dad's a PhD in electrical engineering,
he said the main thing they did was proofs,
which are never used on the job by a practicing engineer.
I mean, not surprising,
like who teaches engineering PhDs?
Yes, professors of engineering,
and the professors of engineering don't generally,
they have some connection to industry,
but most of them are just professors
who are like other professors,
they like talking about abstract subjects
of no practical interest to anyone.
My dad never stops telling the story
about a seminar he attended in grad school
about the design of a non-realizable engine.
And my dad is a super practical guy,
stupid, non-realizable engine,
why in God are you figuring out
how to design a non-realizable engine?
And I'm saying, well, as a professor,
that sounds really interesting,
maybe there's some interesting lesson
that you can learn by studying the non-realizable ones,
and maybe it teaches you fundamental principles.
Ah, bah!
Right?
Right?
And it's all right, well fine,
maybe it is of no use to actually designing any machine,
but it's still important and intellectually interesting.
Right?
And that's not, in the business world,
not considered very important.
So I'm curious to know how widely accepted
these sorts of concepts and this idea,
especially the signaling idea,
is being accepted, not just within economics,
but within the education establishment,
and education scholarship, and among education PhDs.
And if they-
Which idea, signaling or human capital?
As far as the signaling idea,
the fact that we're basically getting a certification
or a license of some sort.
Yeah, so what I'd say is,
economists, strangely, are probably the most hostile
to the signaling model.
So not economists in general,
but specialists in labor and education economics
are generally very hostile to signaling.
In fields like education, sociology, psychology,
they're much more open to it.
Although what they're not open to
is drawing the inference that then maybe
we don't want to give everyone
the best education in the world.
Maybe we've actually created a horrible prisoner, Selena,
and we should cut back.
So that's sort of the policy implication
is very hard for non-economists to accept.
Economists are really quick to say,
well, sure, if we're signaling,
then yeah, we're really,
well, government is going and pouring fuel
in the fire of waste.
But then most economists can see backwards induction
and realize they'd have to embrace a very personally
and politically unpalatable conclusion.
And so then they, at least my uncharitable theory,
is they then say, oh my God,
well, we can't accept a theory
that would logically imply something so horrifying.
So there's that.
And also based on what you were saying
about how little is retained from one year to the next,
when you're looking at the growth literature
and with comparisons of countries
that have X number of years of education
and schooling and whatnot,
and I'm sure you might be doing that here in the US,
how applicable is that really
if we're talking about the US, the number one economy,
where you have 20, mid-20 somethings,
you don't know what the three branches of government is,
but they've had 12, 16 plus years of schooling.
Can we say that that's really robust
or is that gonna start?
Yeah, well, I mean, if you're a diehard human capital fan,
you could always just say, look,
it's really disappointing
that education doesn't improve people more,
but the important thing is that it improves you enough
to justify higher pay.
So saying, look, someone who is half literate,
well, not half literate,
but someone who can read okay is much more employable
than someone who can't read at all.
Right, and then that makes sense.
And so you might very well be willing to pay 30% more
for someone who can read poorly
than for someone who can't read at all.
But then again, there's the puzzle
of what about all these other subjects
that people get penalized for not knowing?
So, so, seems in effect to me
is one of the most compelling arguments
for the power of signaling.
Another one, just as you're alluding to,
so there are efforts to go and compare
the effect of education on individuals
versus the effect on countries.
And the big punchline out of this literature
is that if you raise an individual's income,
by race, if you raise an individual's education by a year,
income goes up by maybe 10%.
If you raise a country's income by,
the average income in a country by a year
only seems to go up by about 2%.
So in other words, the effect of education
on individual income seems to be about five times as large
as for national income, which makes perfect sense here.
It's almost all of it signaling
because if one person gets more education,
you look better compared to the other people.
But if everyone gets more education,
you just need more education to look good.
Now, a reply to this that some people have made
is well, look, here's the real problem.
Education in a lot of these,
a lot of verbal countries is terrible.
The teachers don't even show up.
So of course, it isn't really helping their growth very much.
But that would predict that in countries like India
that have these horrible education systems,
that the private return to education would also be low.
It's not.
So in India, where the teachers aren't even showing up,
it still looks like an extra year of education
is buying you an extra 10% of wages for the rest of your life.
But the national effect seems to be very small.
Another set of evidence that I really like
is there's a whole literature,
more in sociology than economics,
although some economists can do it,
on what's called malemployment,
or sometimes called overeducation,
or just called credential inflation.
And it's the idea that over time,
the educational credentials that you need to get
a given job have gone up,
even though the jobs themselves
are no more complicated than they were before.
All right, so you can look at this
and see that now it is totally common
for waiters to have college degrees.
All right, so what's going on?
Is it, well, it's the fancy restaurants,
they wanna have waiters with college degrees
who go and deal better with the customers.
Do you need four years for that?
Like, why couldn't you just do, like,
one year of waiter school or something like that,
if it's all about just being able to go
and mingle with high-class customers?
I mean, it seems much more like
now that we have so many people with college degrees,
some of them lined up not being able
to get a regular college-type job,
and so they became waiters.
Right, so there's a little literature on this.
Oh, yeah, and bottom line is that
when people have tried to measure,
or disaggregate how much of the rise in education
is explained by changing of the jobs that we do
into more cognitively demanding jobs,
and how much of it can be explained
or accounted by rising education requirements
within given jobs, the rough breakdown looks like
about 20% of the education rise accounted for
with more cognitively demanding jobs,
80% the giant remainder just that you now need
more education to get a given job.
You might need a high school degree
to be a garbage man now.
Things like this.
Now, of course, sometimes you may say,
well, maybe it's for government jobs
or jobs where there's an education requirement
for licensing.
That may be a little bit of it,
but we can actually go and look at all of the industries,
like private sector employment or unlicensed industries,
and we can still see, even there,
it looks like employers are paying substantial premiums
to go and get people with high school degrees
or college degrees for jobs that common sense says
are not college jobs,
they're not even really high school jobs.
And then there's one other literature,
but it's a little complicated, so I won't go into it,
but I'll leave something for the imagination
in case you wanna take the class.
All right, so bottom line is
the signaling model for education
seems to make a lot of sense.
Oh yeah, one other thing.
So I also have a bunch of appeals
to firsthand experience that I like.
So I've already kind of done one,
which is why is it that you worry about
failing a class, but you don't worry about
forgetting the material in the class after the final exam?
In human capital terms, that's pretty odd,
because from the point of view of employers,
there's no difference between someone
who forgot the material and someone who never knew it.
But in signaling terms, there's a big difference,
because if you did a class that you didn't really like,
got an A, and then forgot all the material,
you still prove something about yourself.
And as long as willingness to submit
to boring, pointless tasks is persistent throughout life,
the fact that this one person went
and did a bunch of these things before
and then forgot the material
still makes them more employable
than someone who just said,
"'Screw you, I don't wanna do that stuff, it's stupid.'"
Yeah?
If you've learned something once and you forget it,
you can learn it faster.
That's very true, and there's plenty of literature on that,
but what if you don't even use it on the job?
Yeah, so why is it that you don't worry about that?
It's like, I could always learn it again
if I ever need to know it.
Of course, I'm almost certainly never gonna need
to know it again, unless maybe one day
you're teaching your kid it's the same material.
It's like, oh my God, trigonometry.
Now I better teach my kids how to do it.
Just saying, well, how did it go again?
Yeah, so there's that one.
Another one that I like is that actually,
so let me do it this way.
So you might be signaling
if you bother to enroll or pay tuition.
Now what do I mean by that?
Well, if you go and try to go to a doctor
and you show them your health insurance card,
normally they want a second document from you right now.
What document is that?
They wanna see your ID.
Why does the doctor wanna see your ID?
It's the word you might be trying
to get some free healthcare.
All right, on the other hand,
have you ever been carded at a college class?
Has anyone ever tried to make sure
that someone isn't learning for free?
Never.
Never, right?
So why don't we have to do this?
Because almost no one wants to.
Almost no one on earth wants to come
and learn a subject for free, unofficially, off the books.
Why not?
Well, he's saying, I'll tell you.
What about at Princeton?
You know, one of the top schools in the world.
They only admit 7% of the applicants
who are already really great.
So you get turned down by Princeton.
Why not just go anyway?
Just move into Princeton, start attending classes.
No one's gonna make sure that you're supposed to be there.
And in fact, if you do feel, if you're compulsively honest
and you go to the professor and say,
I've gotta be honest, I'm not even supposed to be here.
I just love labor economics.
Is it all right with you if I study with you
and learn at your feet, unofficially?
The number of professors who will say, no, get out,
it's very small, very small.
Normally, professors, when they hear that,
get a little tear in their eye.
You want to learn what I have to teach
for no reason other than a love of the subject.
This has never happened before.
This is a great day.
All right, that's more the professor's reaction.
So why don't people just go to whatever college
they think is best in the world,
learn all the material, and then you don't have
to do enrollment, you don't have to pay any tuition.
Why not?
You don't get, yeah, there's no official record
you were ever there.
Now, sometimes people will say, well,
you don't get the feedback from the professor,
you don't get to interact with other students.
If you were, like, look, you can save $200,000.
I think you could meet some other students
to talk to, I mean, like, who do they care
if you're not officially there?
You don't even have to tell them.
And then, like, even, you could just tell the professor
and he'll probably grade your work anyway.
It's like, what does it cost me?
A few minutes, a few minutes, and it means so much
for this one strange lover of learning.
And even there, you know, or how about
you just don't tell the professor.
Whenever the professor says, you're not supposed
to be here, it's just a mix-up of the registrar.
Mix-up of the registrar.
Like, what professor's gonna go and pick up a phone
and start saying, I have a question about student 10013721?
He says that he's, you know, like, he claims
that he's supposed to be here, but nothing ever changes
no matter what I do.
What's going on?
Right, so no, no, professors don't have time for that.
They don't care.
So I'd say you could get an education
in every sense of the word if you really were willing
to go and just put in a little extra effort,
and yet almost no one wants to, right?
Now, this doesn't mean that the, you know,
so, well, let me just say, like, a thought experiment
I like is, would you rather have the Princeton diploma
without the education, or the Princeton education
with no diploma?
Now, I'm not sure which answer is right,
but just the fact that you have to think about it
says a lot.
It's not a no-brainer, as human capital theory
would say that it is, right?
I think I already mentioned how, you know,
here's another fun one.
Why is it that students so eagerly seek out easy graders?
Yes, because employers don't know
that you didn't work very hard for the grade.
Now, they do know if you're in a hard major or not.
That's one that people can guess at,
and also some classes sound easier than others.
So real analysis sounds harder
than underwater basket weaving,
but once you've picked your major and your subject,
then you want to find the super easy person.
Now, what about the possibility
that the easy person won't teach you very much?
That seems totally reasonable,
and yet how many people decide
to go take the harder grade for fear
that they will miss out in terms of human capital creation?
Very rare.
All right, so that is a quick version of my book,
The Case Understanding Against Education.
There's tons more.
I obsessively read because I don't like writing
about a subject when I don't feel really knowledgeable
about it, and education is so complicated,
and also it's so thoroughly researched,
there's just a lot to read,
because so many people are interested in education.
First of all, it's a huge industry,
and second of all, of course,
academics are navel gazers.
We're obsessed with our own industry.
So, all right.
Now, just some other examples.
So, healthcare.
Robin Hansen has a well-known paper
called Showing That You Care,
The Evolution of Health Altruism,
where he argues that a lot of healthcare
is actually about signaling.
This is one where I first heard it,
I thought he was crazy.
But over the time, he has won me over more and more.
So, one thing that he told me that I had never heard before
is that when empirical health economists
estimate the effect of medical care on health,
they find a much smaller effect
than most people would expect.
Much smaller.
So, we can sort of have the whole idea
that most of the rise in life expectancy
is due to improving medical care.
No one who knows the data believes that.
Which I just took for granted until he told me that.
So, there's that.
Just in terms of the actual payoff for health,
it's overrated.
So, that's just getting started.
But then he started pointing out how often people
will go and pressure you to get healthcare
even when medical science says
there's almost nothing healthcare can do for you.
Like if you have a virus,
what can a doctor actually do for you?
Like, give me antibiotics for my viruses.
So, well, they can mess up your antibiotic resistance.
That's what they can do for you.
So, yeah, so there's a lot of conditions
that doctors can't do much for.
You may even notice when you go to doctors
how rarely they can actually solve your problem
or do anything for you.
At least that's my experience.
I've had a bunch of different weird medical problems.
Nothing that serious, but like all in the vicinity
of unpleasant aches and pains.
And I have never had a doctor who has any help at all,
really, for any of this stuff.
You know, like, they're just useless.
For back pain, knee pain, foot pain, neck pain, right?
And so, in the end, what I did is,
well, so whenever there were any products available
at the pharmacy, I would just say,
I'm gonna buy every possible foot orthotic,
everyone, and try them all and see if anything works.
So that was very useful and cost less than one doctor visit
to buy every single foot orthotic in the entire store.
Well, not like the entire stock,
but like one of every product that was being offered.
And that did way more for me.
So, but then, Robin points out that health insurance
often seems to be part of some kind of relationship
where if you don't provide it, you're considered to be mean.
So like an employer doesn't provide healthcare,
you think they don't care about their employees.
If a parent doesn't take to the kid at the doctor,
they're a bad parent.
So again, it seems, and it does seem like people
have some sense of it would be embarrassing.
It would be shameful to them if they didn't provide it.
Now then, well, I mean, I thought more about this
when I actually went to the doctor,
noticed all the propaganda there.
And the propaganda is so much about caring
and loving people, not about numerous things like,
73% of the people who come with this problem can be cured
versus only 20% who go in the placebo group.
There's no propaganda like that.
It's always like, I love the doctor,
the doctor cares about me.
And like, even for stuff that it seems like
the doctor probably has nothing to really offer still.
And then you'll hear like, this I found striking too.
So how many of you go and mention a problem
and your friend will say, you gotta get that checked out
versus don't worry.
There's nothing medical science can do for you.
The second thing sounds like,
you know, like if they say it,
they sound like they don't really love you, right?
Although you might think,
well maybe they love me more than other people.
Maybe they love me enough to value my time.
Maybe they love me enough to want to protect me
against getting sick in a hospital,
which is a very common occurrence, right?
So there's a lot of research estimating
how many people die of diseases they catch in a hospital.
The numbers are always really large.
It certainly should be enough to always tip the scales
against going if you're unsure.
Well, maybe I should go, maybe I shouldn't.
But 10,000 people a year die because they went
and they wouldn't have died otherwise
because they caught a disease
from a sick person in a hospital,
which is where they are.
So worth thinking about.
Anyway, you can go and read Robin's paper
for more of the argument.
But over time, while I wouldn't say that I'm convinced,
I'm definitely more convinced than I was at first
and noticed a lot of facts that seems to fit.
And then I'll just mention one small but fun one.
Funerals.
So think about embalming.
This is a medical procedure we apply to the dead.
It's clearly not for the benefit
of the person that we're embalming, right?
Unless you believe in ancient Egyptian religion
and you think you can't go to the afterlife
unless you're unembalmed or something,
if you're unembalmed.
So why do we go and spend all this money on funerals?
It's a medical procedure for the dead.
So of course, you may say, well, we do it to go and show
that we cared about the person for closure.
But then you realize, well, but what happens
if you go and cheap out on a funeral?
And why do people not cheap out on funerals nearly as much
as they might like?
Like I know my dad, my dad's a cheap guy
and his dad before him was also very cheap
and didn't inspire a lot of affection.
But, and my dad actually very soon afterwards said,
well, people wouldn't talk.
I would just put them in a pine box, but if people talk,
so I got to go and pretend to be a loving son.
He didn't actually put it that way, but you've got,
you've got to go and get this $5,000 coffin.
People were expecting it, right?
So there, it seemed very much like he felt
like he had to signal devotion.
If he went and did what was in his heart,
people would have talked about what a terrible son he was.
Right, and it seems plausible.
This is common in funerals.
The people go and spend way more than they actually want
to spend in order to go and express their love.
So a lot of what you're doing is feeling this pressure.
I have to go and put a lot of money into this
or else I will be considered unloving and a bad son,
bad husband, bad whatever.
All right, so you judge for yourself.
But you know, I mean, I've always creeped out at funerals
by how everyone who dies apparently was a wonderful person.
Right, so it's like, he wasn't.
Right, and you say, well, what are we supposed to say?
How about the truth?
Like what's, like if we can,
if we only have five minutes of good truthing to say,
let's make it five minutes and stop.
That's how I feel.
And to me, there's just something so Orwellian
about making up a bunch of lies about a person.
You know, that's, but anyway, that's also me.
Probably another way in which I'm not a normal human being.
Right, that's.
That is a moving illustration right there.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes, well, yes, I once tweeted,
well, you can reverse and just say,
don't do, never do anything that would make someone
bend the truth at your funeral.
Just live a life so admirable that no one has to lie.
No one has to sit around making up stuff.
But most people don't do that.
All right, now, big question.
So if singling is a deadweight cost,
could government action make matters more efficient?
And the answer is yes, government could tax the signal.
Now, if there is some combination of useful good
and signal going on, then maybe there's a problem.
Of course, the same thing is true for any tax
on any negative externality.
You might say, well, what if this chemical
is dangerous at high levels, but it's helpful at low levels,
or it's good for some things, but bad for others?
And of course, the normal thing is you just try
to strike an average, right?
So, you know, like carbon dioxide, it's bad for warming,
but it's good for plants.
So put it all together, good for plant growth.
Okay, but anyway, the basic economics is you tax the signal
and then everyone could, for example,
get half as much education
and still get the same job offers.
So this is, again, this is basic economics.
With singling, there's a negative externality.
The negative externality is caused by the fact
that if you unilaterally signal more,
you improve your status and get more money
without improving the productivity of mankind,
and therefore, it is not only redistributive,
it is redistribution with a negative sum,
and with the tax, you would reduce
this negative sum behavior, which is, of course,
the whole point of Bergovian taxation, right?
All right, right, and again, so when I mentioned,
so in like the clearest cases,
it's actually this credential inflation.
So as the average number of years of education has gone up,
the average number of years of education
you need to get a job has gone up, too.
So since World War II, roughly, for any given job,
you need about four more years of education
than you used to have.
So basically, right now, jobs that used to go
to high school dropouts go to high school graduates.
Jobs that used to go to high school graduates
now go to college graduates.
Jobs that used to go to college graduates
go to people with graduate degrees.
Where's the negative externality here?
Well, as education levels have risen,
naturally, the market equilibrium has increased
the amount of education you're expected to have,
and what would be the point of the tax?
Rollback, just like the Reagan doctrine.
We're gonna roll back communism.
We're gonna go and roll back education.
We're gonna go back to a world
where waiters don't have college degrees.
We're gonna go back to a world where high school dropouts
can get all kinds of jobs
because they're a third of the population.
And you can't be so picky in the world
where high school dropouts are a third of the population,
but also, it's just not as scary
to hire a high school dropout
when they're a third of the population.
They're not that bad.
Whereas in the modern world,
you are very concerned
because who doesn't finish high school in our day and age?
Those people who have a bunch of different problems.
Really not very smart, really lazy, or really defiant.
You know, think about the smart person
who hasn't finished high school.
Anyone know a really smart high school dropout?
How many problems do they have?
Right, they are not good workers on average,
but of course, implicitly signaling model
is that there could be some people
who are awesome even though they haven't sent the signal.
But again, the problem is that you're judged
based upon average levels,
so by forcing the average level down,
you are changing the way that everyone is perceived.
So just imagine a world where you could be a professor
when you, after a year or two of a master's degree.
Like back in the 30s, there's people who would,
they go and they start a master's
and then they get hired as a professor.
They don't even finish their master's,
never mind the PhD.
Now of course, almost all professors are the PhDs.
Now this is an area where,
like isn't government, doesn't government make this?
So there's probably some accreditation thing
where if you have too many non-PhD professors,
you may have a problem,
but most of it is, you know, it's a,
when there's tons of PhDs going around,
you naturally raise the educational credentials required
because like we're trying to get people in the top 5%.
So if there's 5% of the people have degrees this good,
then we'll go and make that the cutoff.
My dad actually told me that when,
that he actually saw credential inflation
right during his own career.
So in his 30 years of an engineer,
the first job that he got hired for
is one where you only needed two years of college
and they hire you.
But 10 years later, for the very same job you needed
to actually have the engineering degree in hand,
then 10 years later, you needed the master's degree.
And when he's on his way out,
I think there was some talk,
maybe you need a PhD to go and do this job.
Right, and what's going on is just that
as you ramp up the prevalence of degrees,
you raise standards.
And as a result, we wind up having this rat race.
Right, people often say, well,
they're like, it's like socially unjust
to go and fight credential inflation.
Well, here, people are always thinking about
the person from a bad neighborhood
who worked their way up and got a PhD, right?
And like my best friend at Princeton
was a guy who grew up in a log cabin
that they built themselves in the Pocono Mountains.
Right, and like his mom burned all their furniture,
like terrible, terrible.
Well, he felt his childhood was great.
He had four brothers, they all had fun.
But anyway, almost anyone would say
he had an extremely disadvantaged childhood,
but nevertheless, he wound up getting a PhD from Princeton.
Right, and for him, of course, the system worked.
But there's a whole lot of other people in his shoes
for whom the system is way worse than it was in 1950.
Like who is worse off, you know,
like who has that background is worse off today
than they were in 1950?
How about people who dropped out of high school?
Back in 1950, if one of my friend's brothers
dropped out of high school,
then he's in the bottom third of the distribution.
That's not that bad.
He just goes and gets a regular job.
But today, if you have like that same person who drops out,
who just doesn't wind up getting any of the credentials,
right, is really in the bottom of the distribution.
Like very few jobs would even be considered.
So that's the difference,
is that when people think about
the social justice of the system,
they're always focusing on the upside.
People from humble backgrounds
who managed to rise through education,
they're never thinking about people of humble backgrounds
who are judged much more harshly
than they would have been in the past
because average education levels are so much higher.
See, I think we are out of time.
Yes, we are actually.
So I'm happy to take questions beginning next class.
