So hold back the tears so you can get the door back there.
Dr. Kaplan, I was promised chanting at some point
in this course, and we have to chant it.
Chanting?
Yeah, on the second year's message.
Was that actually promised, or was it?
Well, the second year said so.
OK, all right.
All right.
So today, we're going to finish week 14,
and then we will talk about the test,
and then I will take any questions in remaining time.
Some students have already begun showing up
in my office with questions about earlier exams.
Everyone is allowed to do the same thing
if you're so inclined.
You don't have to physically come to the office, though.
You can also call me, Skype, many possibilities, email,
of course.
All right.
So in the last class, we were doing the famous median voter
theorem.
Median voter model, which leads to median voter theorem.
And we start with this distribution of list points.
We usually draw it as normal, but it does not
have to be normal.
And we realize the first big piece of advice
is to move to the center, to moderate.
You want to moderate in order to get extra votes.
And thus, the first equilibrium condition
we see is that the Democratic platform must
equal the Republican platform in equilibrium,
or whatever the two sides might be.
And this is called convergence, where
they wind up being the same.
As I mentioned, especially today, many people
just consider this ridiculous.
I say it's because people lack international and historical
perspective to realize how, despite the great anger
that the two sides have for one another,
they are actually extremely similar in the broad scheme
of things.
When you think about this, suppose
that during the wars of religion in Europe,
you said Catholic and Protestant are basically the same.
Think about how many people would have torgued you limb
from limb for that.
But, well, aren't they basically the same?
Reverend Lovejoy of the Simpsons says so.
Not so.
He doesn't.
I mean, consider any of the other major religions now.
They're all basically the same.
So anyway, that's what I would say there.
But I agree.
Then there's a question, could they ever
both converge to something that is below the median?
This is a leading question.
Is there any way that could happen?
And the answer is no.
If they both converge to, say, the 40th percentile,
then one party could win for sure
by going to the 41st percentile and getting
59 plus percent of the vote.
So what we know is that they must be converged.
So it's not possible for them to actually
both be above the median.
So the one they converge to has to be greater than or less
than or equal to the median.
By the same logic, though, they couldn't both
be in the 80th percentile.
Then one could just move down to 79.
And then they would win with 79% plus of the vote.
If you're the puzzle.
Yeah, the second equation.
Yeah, so the second equation, this
is the one where, let's see, so you've
got to both be less than or equal to the median.
And you also have to be greater than or equal to the median.
And how can both those equations be true?
If you were exactly equal to the median.
So yes, so if you're both in the 50th percentile, what happens
if either one of you unilaterally
moves a little to the left, a little to the right,
you then lose for sure.
So therefore, we have the famous median voter
theorem, which is PD equals PR equals
PMED, which is the bliss point of the median
of the distribution.
Now suppose you happen to be the median.
Does this mean that if you change your mind,
the world changes?
You are human.
You are exactly the median person
in the world and the country.
And then if you wake up and you say, hey,
I've changed my mind about eating meat.
I'm a vegan now.
Since I'm the median voter, now the country will go vegan.
Is that how it works?
No, because when the median voter person changes his mind,
he ceases to be the median.
Man, so I was all powerful as long as I was normal.
But as soon as I became abnormal,
then I ceased to be all powerful.
So it's not that great of a kind of power,
because the kind of power you only
have as long as you remain exactly median.
Yes?
Does it change with electoral rules?
Sure, well, if you had a rule saying
that foreigners could vote, for example,
that would change the median.
And that, yes.
I meant, like, for example, if you have two rounds.
Oh, if you have two?
Like two successive, like, first of all,
you have one round, two laps.
Oh, two rounds.
Two rounds, yes.
Oh, yeah.
So that's a great question.
One application of the median voter model
that many people like is to say, well,
it explains why during primaries everyone acts extreme.
And then once they get to the general election,
then everyone stops acting extreme.
And the story there is when you're in the primary,
you're trying to get the affection of the median
Democrat or the median Republican.
Or in fact, it's even more than that.
The median of the people who are so committed,
they vote in primaries.
So in 2016, I think you have usually only about 10% or 15%
of eligible people voting in primaries.
So the people that will are probably
going to be very liberal or very conservative relative to even
the other people who identify with the party.
So yes, there's a common story about why
you go and act more liberal or conservative,
or act very liberal or conservative in the primaries.
And then once it comes to the general election,
then you say, oh, yeah, I didn't mean any of that stuff.
There is a puzzle about why people
would go and elect someone that actually
appears to be unelectable.
Or why it is that people couldn't just
use every word you said in the primary against you.
Interesting question.
This is the famous median voter theorem,
and an extremely useful model, which
explains so much about the world.
Why is it that we didn't have gay marriage in 1900?
Why?
You've got no idea.
Why did we not have gay marriage in 1900?
Median voter disapproved it.
Median voter really did not want it.
Median voter wouldn't have understood
what you're talking about.
Well, of course marriage should be gay.
We should all be gay all the time.
All right.
And whereas now, why is that?
It's not just the US.
It's a huge list of countries that have done it.
And the median voter model says, now, what's happened?
What's happened now?
Yeah, morally.
The median voter median of a median person changed his mind.
Whether it's decay or progress, the median voter model
doesn't care about those labels.
Just cares about what wins.
So this explains the reason why the redistribution too, right?
Yeah, sure.
So I mean, you know that the middle is the richer people.
Yeah, sure, sure.
And actually, if you take my graduate public choice class,
we talk about that.
So the simple version where it's just poor people
vote for redistribution, rich people vote against
is so wrong.
It's ridiculous.
But the general point of why do we have redistribution?
Because the median person wants redistribution.
Oftentimes, it turns out the median person is quite well off
and is a net payer.
But still, they vote for it.
So you could potentially say that just because the median
voter wants something doesn't necessarily
mean it's a good idea.
Well, you're preaching to the choir there, yes.
In fact, I think I prefer the other rule.
If they want it, it's probably a bad idea.
I mean, it's more predictive if you're comparing different times
within a country.
If we were to compare America now to Sweden now,
then this loses a lot of its predictive power.
But if we were to compare America in 1900,
when a lot of people were disenfranchised from voting,
to America now, that's a lot more predictive.
Wouldn't actually have been that many disenfranchised in the US.
And so, yeah, you have to go back further.
Go back further, like 1820 or something.
Yeah.
So in my public choice class, we get a little bit of this.
By the way, this lecture is a commercial for that class.
So if you like this one, you can do it for 14 weeks.
But wait, there's more.
That's right.
All right.
So, and you have so many other cases
that you can go to apply this to.
Why does the US have a death penalty, but let's see,
yeah, Canada does not, right?
Well, the median voter in America
likes the death penalty.
Median person in Canada does not like it.
All right.
Now, of course, if you know a lot of public opinion,
you will start finding deviations of this.
For example, according to the public opinion information
I've seen, the median in Britain does favor the death penalty.
But they don't have it.
And the usual story is that the Oxbridge people who
run the country consider it uncouth to have a death
penalty.
And they are not populous enough to have a referendum on that
yet.
And if there were, then maybe that would happen.
Certainly with Brexit, among the actual elite
probably would have had very low support.
And then it got turned over to a referendum.
So interesting case.
All right.
OK, and so you can apply this to so many cases.
It's really endless applications.
Doesn't mean it's true, but it's at minimum a very useful
starting point.
Like, the United States is the one developed country that
doesn't have universal health care.
Well, what's the likely explanation for that?
The United States is the one developed country
that has a median voter who does not want universal health care.
Yes?
How does this work when you apply it
to parliaments that have proportional representation?
Ah, so that's a great question.
So as I think I was mentioning last class,
it is normal, though not universal,
for parliaments to split down into two voting blocks,
two sides.
And then as long as that's going on,
then this model still works OK.
If there's genuinely three groups,
then the model doesn't work very well,
or at least theoretically.
And actually, just like with perfect competition,
the median voter model seems to work a lot better
than it should, because even in cases where the assumptions are
clearly wrong, the model still seems
to be quite predictive in both cases.
So there's no.
All right.
Now, let's see.
I see there's some weird error in the lettering,
but you can still follow.
All right.
Now, of course, this began with the assumption
that voters actually know what policies the parties favor.
And when people looked into the question,
how much do voters actually know about this stuff?
Well, remember the first theory?
Suggest that people are going to balance out
the marginal benefits and the marginal costs
of acquiring additional information about what's
going on in politics.
Remember that?
But then, not to spoil the whole story,
but just as a rough approximation,
what do you think the probability is
that one individual American's vote determines
the outcome of a presidential election?
Yeah, approximately zero.
There's a lot of dispute about whether it's
like one in 10 million or one in a Google.
All right.
So there's active debate on that,
but everyone's basically saying that it's approximately zero.
All right.
So what this means is that the expected amount
of marginal benefit of getting more information
is also almost certainly zero by extension,
because what good does it do to learn something
if you can't change anything on the basis of the information?
Suppose you knew everything about politics.
Would that mean that people would listen to you?
I mean, you might sit around trying to leverage it
into more attention, like I'm going
to predict everything that will happen for the next three
years, and if I get it all right,
then will you listen to me?
And probably people say, well, he
may be very good at predicting the things that
can be described, but he's terrible at everything else.
So it might be something like that.
So anyway, so we got positive marginal cost
of acquiring political information.
What folks saying explains why there's
positive marginal cost?
Time is money.
Time is money, son.
Time is money.
So if you got positive marginal cost
of getting political information and approximately zero
benefits, this would seem to predict
that people would optimally acquire
how much political information?
None.
People would know nothing.
And this is the origin of the famous concept
of rational ignorance.
So if knowledge gives you no practical benefit,
and then again, why is it not?
Isn't it good to know what good policies are?
Only if people listen to you and they don't.
You may have noticed this.
Have you ever figured everything out
and then people didn't listen to you?
Ever have everything worked out in great detail?
And you go, I have figured it out.
And the world doesn't listen to you.
Even on something where the answer is just so clear,
so non-ideological, it's like, well,
the amount of money that we spend on foreign aid
is not half the budget.
Oh, you lie.
Liar.
All right, that kind of thing.
So anyway, the concept of rational ignorance
is a natural byproduct of this analysis,
saying that the decision not to acquire information
is rational when you're not getting anything out of it
and time is money.
Now, literally, of course, this is not true.
Because almost all Americans know the name of the president.
And a very good number also know how many years he serves.
And they also know the name of the country.
We know that.
All right, and then we start running low on things
almost everybody knows.
So knowing the name of the vice president,
that's something we're usually down to 75%.
And then go a bit further, like knowing
that each state has two senators.
Now, this is a rule which has changed how many times
in American history?
Zero.
And is this a really hard to remember number?
Like 230,117?
No, it's the number two.
And are you taught this number often in school?
Yes, I was.
And yet, half of Americans don't know the answer to that.
All right, and this has been found in many surveys.
So going back a long time.
And by the way, it was never any better, as far as I can tell.
So the early surveys go back to the 30s.
And you say, well, back in the old days,
when public schools really taught students,
well, the good old days must precede the 30s.
Because we have to go back to a time when it is data free.
And then we can believe anything we feel like believing.
But during any measured time, things
have never been noticeably better.
Doesn't Wiseman challenge this by saying that?
We'll get to it.
Don't worry.
We will get to it.
Basic facts first.
And then, let's see.
Oh, yeah.
My favorite one is possible.
Well, maybe the senators is close to my favorite one.
But just knowing which party controls each house of
Congress, that usually gets up to just a little bit over 50%.
And now, what would random guessing get you?
50%.
50%.
So how important is it to know which party controls which
house of the Senate?
How much does that explain about what's
going on in American politics at any given time?
Enormously important.
And yet, most people manage to not know this.
Yeah?
I mean, is it enormously important
if you take the median voter theory seriously?
Ah, good question.
Well, yeah.
So I guess the only thing is the median voter model
presumes that people actually know what's going on.
So they can actually punish or reward people
for doing what they want.
So people really, like, if you combine the median voter
framework with complete cluelessness,
this would seem to mean that the president could
do something bad, and then maybe people get angry at Congress
because they belong to the opposite party.
This might mean that you might want to deliberately
cause a disaster in order to, or not just not divert one, say,
in order to put the other party into a bad light.
I remember back in 2010, my dad, who
was a very strong conservative Republican, just saying, look,
I don't want the economy to brew this year.
He told me that.
I do not want the economy to brew this year.
All right, now, figure that out of people that are,
people who are saying that are a small subset of people
who are thinking it.
So maybe that would cause perverse incentives
if you have some divided government.
Or even, it doesn't have to be anything else.
It wasn't actually divided in 2010.
Well, in 2000, running up to 2010.
But there were enough people on the other side
to stop any kind of bipartisan thinking going forward.
All right.
OK, anyway, so empirically not exactly true,
but it's still not very far from the truth.
And this is the kind of thing where political scientists
usually begin by assuming that people are maybe
half as interested in politics as they are.
And they look at the data, and they come away
shell-shocked, and like, this has got to be wrong.
It's got to be wrong.
And then after looking at the data long enough,
like, hmm, I guess it's not wrong.
All right, that's weird.
Whereas economists who generally don't know the data all
that well say, yeah, this is what I expected.
Of course, why would people be paying any attention
to this stuff?
What's in it for that?
OK, now, the medium-motor model makes
no room for special interests.
Voters just get what they want.
And you can't go and buy a building in Washington
and spend $10 million and then get what you want instead
of what the medium-motor wants.
But there are a lot of people who
have argued that special interests are important.
You might wonder, why are they building buildings down there?
Why do people walk around and see all the weird buildings
that are in DC?
Once a guy came out who was from the American Beef Council.
I don't know what he told me now.
There's actually two different beef lobby organizations,
the American Beef Council and the Beef Council of America.
I've got to be an agent.
They're terrible.
We are totally doing business for beef.
Both groups have their own buildings down there
doing something.
I don't know if they have a whole building for themselves.
But beef is a big product, right?
So it wouldn't surprise me at all if they had a skyscraper.
But again, it was skyscrapers, four-story buildings.
Do you know what their different visions for beef are?
Yeah, the one who was talking to me
was the more pro-market beef vision.
And the other one were the more regulation-oriented beef
folks.
Beef interests.
So anyway, the idea of special interests
is you've got some small group behind the scenes that
undermines the will of the majority somehow.
And how is this possible?
Again, the usual story goes back to rational ignorance again.
Special interests are not rationally ignorant
because they have a lot riding on a particular issue,
such as beef.
And they have all kinds of detailed knowledge.
And there's a reason to have that detailed knowledge
because they are able to actually change beef policy.
So regular voters are not informed.
They have so little riding on the issue.
What difference does it make to you
whether there's some small change in beef policy
personally?
But on the other hand, people who spend their whole life
in the beef industry, for them, it
can be the difference between profits and bankruptcy.
And there's even a slogan that goes along
with this, which is concentrated benefits, diffuse costs.
You may have heard of it.
So the benefits to the special interests are concentrated.
The few industries that are closely involved,
the fate of their business hangs in the balance.
On the other hand, for a typical consumer,
it's maybe a few bucks a year.
So if you're a kid, did you ever sit around thinking,
if I could just get every person on earth to give me a penny,
I could get away and what I was getting paymentback on?
giving me five million dollars.
All right, and it adds up.
It adds up.
You just go and rip off taxpayers,
every taxpayer a little bit every week,
then you can live in luxury.
All right, so here is a model that makes democracy
at least sound very responsive.
And here's one that makes it sound
like it's either going to be very poorly run
or unresponsive or maybe both.
So either it's in the hands of people who don't know,
which are in this power, don't know what they're doing,
or it'll be in the hands of people
who know what they're doing but only care
about their own very narrow interests.
Doesn't seem very good.
Now, there are quite a few political scientists
and economists who have admitted everything I've told you
so far about how bad the ignorance is,
but they still say that the electorate makes good choices.
Individuals are stupid.
The group is smart, or rather acts as if it is smart.
So what's the argument?
Well, it says, look, we all know
what it means to be ignorant, right?
What it means to be ignorant is that you do things randomly.
This is a key premise which appeals to a lot of people.
And then say, oh, that sounds bad
if voters just vote randomly.
It's kind of scary.
But elections are based upon aggregate opinions.
No one individual matters very much in elections.
So you have to go and take an average, right,
and look at things in percentage terms.
And then there's a basic principle.
So this is called the law of large numbers.
You've probably heard about it.
But it says that random errors tend to cancel each other out
in percentage terms.
Percentage terms is important.
And elections are generally won in percentage terms.
So, nice.
And what this means, according to people
who like this argument, is even if there's tons
of randomness at the individual level,
the principle of aggregation, law of large numbers,
ensures that the outcomes make sense anyway.
So, simple illustration.
Suppose that we have an election between Hitler, right,
and a normal guy.
Hitler versus normal guy.
And then you sit around interviewing people
waiting in line to vote.
And 90% of the voters literally know zero.
So when you go and say, who are you gonna vote for?
They say, well, just gonna do whatever the coins say.
Heads equals H for Hitler.
And tails, normal guy.
I'm gonna find out when I get there.
Right, and you start quizzing them.
Well, don't you know anything about this Hitler guy?
Just gonna flip a coin.
All right, and nine out of 10 people have that attitude.
Nine out of 10 people say they're just gonna flip a coin
four against Hitler.
All right, that sounds fairly scary.
All right, but suppose the remaining 10% know everything.
So they can recite Hitler's entire Wikipedia article
from memory as they have knowledge of every supply
and demand elasticity that is ever,
that is, was, or ever will be.
Right, so they've got it all.
Right, they've got every kind of knowledge.
All right, but then you say, well,
these one out of 10 people are great.
If only they were the ones who voted
instead of these people.
Right, instead they all vote equally.
Clearly, the people that know what's going on
are outnumbered nine to one.
Doesn't sound very promising
for a system of majority rule, right?
But here's the key thing.
Now, let's just assume for the sake of argument
that the well informed people would not vote for Hitler.
Sort of an awkward fact that German professors
and college students liked Hitler a lot,
but, you know, let's just forget about that.
Yes, I mean, it's not like they wrote a book or anything
detailing his plans, so.
I'm thinking, all right, so.
But, yeah, like, that's, it's true.
It's important history, but it gets in the way of the model,
so let's just go forward.
All right, so out of these people,
how are they gonna split up?
Well, as long as we got a reasonably large electorate,
then the law of large numbers says
that it's gonna be very close to 45 percentage points
voting for, actually, all right, I'll have to do it this way.
It's gonna be very close to, let's see, 99%.
Oh, yeah, still an extra, that's fine.
All right, very close to 45 percentage points
for each person, right?
Even the law of large numbers,
so it could be a little bit deviation,
but if it's a large number, then it's gonna be very close.
And then, zero of the informed people
who voted for Hitler, 10 for the uninformed,
and therefore, normal guy wins with 55% of the vote.
All right, and so, oh my God, all right.
We got lucky this time,
but actually, there's almost no luck in it.
The only room for luck would just be if, by some miracle,
people flip, like you go and flip millions of coins
and you get 51% heads.
All right, that would be surprising.
That would be really, well, I'd say 55% heads.
That would be really unusual.
All right, okay, anyway, here we did not get lucky.
We actually got the normal expected value
for the people that are flipping coins, all right?
And what happens?
Well, there's a general result here,
and the result is that the winner is whoever gets
the support of a majority of the well-informed, all right?
And that's interesting because,
suppose everyone's well-informed.
What do you need to win?
A majority of the well-informed.
Suppose the well-informed are only 10% of the population.
What do you need to win?
Majority of the well-informed.
It's like, wow, so an electorate that is pure gold
gives the same actual elected results
as an election that is only 10% gold and 90% lead, all right?
And this result has a special name.
It's called the miracle of acclamation, all right?
And it seems miraculous because it says
that a highly uninformed electorate acts just
like a perfectly informed electorate, all right?
So it acts as if it's perfectly informed,
not in the actual vote shares, but in the final winners.
The final winners are just who you would have gotten.
And indeed, in this model, there's
really no need to ever appeal to these people.
They just flip coins.
So why talk to the coin flippers?
There's no need to write a speech for people who flip coins.
The only people you need to write a speech for
are the people that actually are paying attention to
and understand this kind of thing,
like Mozart or the Bell Information.
So this is a story that accepts the facts
about individual ignorance, but then says,
don't worry about it.
Everything's going to be fine because those ignorant people
cancel each other out.
Yes, way in the back first.
Is this a result of a pure microeconomic model?
Sorry, sir, you need to speak up a little.
Yeah, I'm sorry.
Did you want to talk about a great big free market
problem, so that you can assume you're getting the true results
based on just 10% of the population?
And are they likely to be search costs or whatever
you're assuming?
Sure, sure.
But again, as long as 10% do pay,
you might say it's unfair, but as long as there's
enough well-informed voters doing it for whatever reason,
maybe they're just curious or maybe it's
civic duty or whatever.
Now again, if the free rider problem is so severe,
then the miracle breaks down.
And even if we were like 99.999, then you
might actually be a little bit worried.
Wait a second.
Who are the remaining 0.001% of the population?
Is it, say, the Hitler family?
So then you might be worried.
So according to this, the percentage or possibility
of me being in the 10% and changing the result
is a little bit higher?
Does that change it?
It does raise it, although, again,
based upon any normal calculations, it's still
approximately 0.
It might be 1,000 times greater, but you
can multiply something near 0 by 1,000 times,
and it's still near 0.
Also, this is assuming a closed system.
There's no foreign power trying to misinform the voters.
Ah, well, so here, we have the coin flippers,
and you can't misinform them.
They just flip coins.
I guess you could worry a foreign power might try
to insert bias coins in the system.
So they hand out free coins, which only flip heads.
Or maybe they're double-sided.
They're double-sided coins.
And again, the permitting for people,
they can't be in foreign power talks.
They're like, well, it's transparent propaganda.
I mean, it's interesting that they're doing it,
but it's not going to change my mind.
It's a person's wrongful.
Yes?
Just back in a few steps.
How can the odds of equality of the election
be less than 1 over voting population?
Ah, because, well, think about this.
Suppose that 90% of the population
is going to go and vote for candidate A.
What is the probability that there's millions of voters?
What are the odds that your vote changes anything?
Really, really small, right?
I mean, your argument has been used by people,
but again, as long as the election is close,
then that makes more sense.
But again, remember, the way elections work
is we don't go and randomly pick a person
and do what he wants.
We don't go and say, all right, who should be the dictator?
You.
That's not how it works.
Instead, what happens is we get everybody together.
And so that is the problem.
I'm assuming, in general, suppose
that you have the NFL is playing a bunch of five-year-olds.
Can you change the outcome of that game by switching sides?
No.
You can either join the NFL and just participate
in the slaughter of five-year-olds,
but it's not going to change anything,
or you can join the five-year-olds
and get slaughtered alongside them.
So any time that there's an imbalance,
normally there's an imbalance.
So that's where you get down to the really low probabilities.
It's true, if it were exactly split,
like if everyone were flipping coins except you,
then your odds of changing the outcome of the election
are a lot better.
And again, it could be as good as 1 in 20,000 or so in the US.
Again, because if, remember, like the bell curve.
So if everyone is flipping fair coins,
there's a very high probability that you're
right, that you're somewhere close
to the center of the distribution,
somewhere really close to 50-50.
You think about this.
Suppose that you arrive in a country where it's 50-50,
and then you vote, then you're the kingmaker.
So that actually, probability of decisive is 100%
when it's like that.
But anyway, the key thing to know is that the probability
decisive equation is nonlinear.
And so not what you say, but could be better than nothing.
Yes?
How compatible is the medium voter theorem and then
this area here?
Because it seems to me that if they are so compatible,
then it's really only be educated
through the people that are choosing.
Right.
So what you tell me basically is to say that,
you can think of this as being a special case, where
if 90% of people's preference is determined by whatever
a coin says, and then 10% is based upon a careful,
like an exhaustive study of the facts,
it's just a special case of the medium voter model.
But it's a hopeful one, because it
makes it sound like the world is governed by people
know what they're doing.
All right.
Ah, yeah.
So anyway, this is one argument for optimism.
Another one that people put forward,
so I think we should move on so that we can at least
get to the test.
All right.
All right.
Is that you can think about the politician-voter relationship
as being a particular kind of principal-agent problem.
So you've heard principal-agent problems before, right?
So the theory of democracy, again, is, wait,
who's the agent?
The voters or the politicians are the agents,
according to the standard democratic theory?
The politicians.
Yes, the politicians are the agents.
They're supposed to work for us, for the people.
And then who are the principals?
The electorate, right?
The electorate, they're supposed to be the principals.
So this brings us to a simple model
of whether politicians will actually do what voters want.
And it says that politicians will do what voters want.
If the benefit of doing what voters want
is greater than the benefit of shirking, right?
Where shirking is the politician doing what he wants to do.
There's many kinds of shirking.
There's the actual taking a bag of money
to go and rip off the taxpayers.
There's just voting your own views,
even though voters don't agree.
And then there's, of course, just not showing up,
because you're too lazy to get out of bed.
So all of these have been studied,
as you might guess.
But just think of shirking, the benefit of shirking.
This is the benefit of doing whatever the politician
personally feels like doing, which normally will not
be exactly what voters want, right?
That would be an unusual thing.
Have you ever known someone who says,
you know what I want to do today?
Whatever the median voter wants.
Sorry, not a common motivation.
Minus, minus the probability that you get punished
for going up for shirking,
times the actual magnitude of the punishment.
All right, so a politician does what voters want
as long as the benefit of doing what voters want
is greater than the benefit of shirking,
minus the probability of punishment,
times the severity of punishment.
Now many people look at this, very simple,
good quality here.
And it is, it's a very,
is any of the equations or inequalities
you'll ever see in economics.
This is actually one of the best ones.
Right, just like, huh, all right,
I mean, it's pretty hard to argue
with any of these pieces here.
It is almost a tautology, but it's a useful tautology.
It seems like a useful one.
Right, so many people look at this and say,
hey, wait, remind me what probability,
the probability of dizziness was again?
I can never remember.
It's approximately what again?
Zero. Zero.
And then say, wait a second,
we plug in zero for that,
then it means that politicians do,
you know, like do what voters want
when that is, when that gives a higher utility
than doing what they want.
And that all, again, almost seems
like that would never occur by definition.
Like, wait, so I'll do what voters want
if I want to do what they want
more than I want to do what I want?
Well, I'll tell you if that ever happens.
I think I'm gonna want to do what I want to do all the time.
And once in a very long while,
they will happen to be the same,
but it hasn't happened yet.
It would be a common reaction.
All right, so we have a lot of people look at this
and say, all right, this is the equation
that just shows why democracy simply doesn't work.
Why it's just one giant abuse of voter trust
over and over again.
But Gary Becker actually had a very simple observation
about this.
He just did a little bit of algebra,
which was actually, there's an Italian theorist,
back in his, Becqueria, centuries earlier,
who said virtually the same thing.
And he said, actually, I can think of something you could do.
How about we go and we make D greater than BS minus DB
all over B?
In other words, if we have this very tiny
probability of decisiveness,
which is causing all this trouble,
why don't we create an enormous punishment?
So enormous that it puts the fear of hell into politicians.
And they sit there trying to live,
saying, oh, can't do this, can't do that.
Voters might kill me.
Voters might have me flayed alive.
Or, of course, when you start thinking about
the lives of politicians,
you probably don't need to go Game of Thrones on them
to scare them.
So if you are a powerful politician,
how bad is it to go from being a powerful politician
to spending 12 months in an orange jumpsuit?
Yeah, it's like, oh my God,
I used to be the Speaker of the House, now I'm in prison.
And you say, it's not that bad of a prison.
It's not that bad of a prison, it's still a prison.
This is terrible.
Other people boss me around now.
It's humiliating.
Right, and what am I gonna,
so just imagine what it's like to be that successful,
and then to go down to just be,
not just even a regular pleb,
but to actually be a convict.
Pretty bad, right?
Right.
So for example, if the media catches a politician
taking a $1 bribe,
voters could say, I'm never gonna vote for you again,
and the politician's like, what's the big deal?
It's one measly dollar.
Who cares?
And, obvious answer is, well,
when we, if we took excuses like that,
you'd be ripping us off all the time.
We need to have these very harsh punishments
to compensate for the fact that we hardly ever find out,
so we'll catch you.
Right, and maybe if you were a kid,
if you had mean parents,
then you might, they might catch you
taking, stealing one cookie,
and then you're like, I gotta lose TV for a month,
and then you say, it was one cookie, right,
and your mean parents might have said,
we're punishing you for all the times
that we didn't catch you.
Right, it makes perfect sense in terms of incentives.
If heads, you get a cookie,
and tails, they say bad, bad, bad,
then, yeah, of course, you'd be stealing cookies all the time.
Does that happen here?
I'm not familiar with the political system here.
Isn't it hard to decide in this?
Well, sometimes politicians get harshly punished
for seemingly minor offenses.
It's highly irregular, though,
and hard to predict, like what would count.
And again, the things that you can punish
normally seem to be petty slights and scandals
rather than, say, breaking a major political promise,
which is not so harshly punished.
But you're mentioning jail, right?
No, no, it doesn't, you know, again,
like it could be anything that you don't like.
It could be jail, it could just be being thrown out of office
because you went and insulted somebody's mother.
You know, there's all sorts of possibilities.
You know, so you only like,
could be that your whole family name is ruined
and the voters will never vote
for someone named Mussolini again.
All right, so, in the 80s, in the 90s,
Mussolini's granddaughter was doing fine
at Italian politics,
and only her name was actually Mussolini.
She married first, got named Mussolini,
and then, but then, but still, yeah.
So this first inequality,
that would actually be a big argument
against term limits, right?
Because once you reach term limits-
Yeah, yeah, yeah, this has been a reason
not to have term limits
because it's harder to punish people, yeah.
So that's, this is one of the main arguments
against term limits is that it makes it hard
to prevent shirking, sure.
Okay, all right, so anyway, the main point of all this
is that theoretically, even highly ignorant voters
could actually control politicians pretty easily.
There is something in the toolkit
that would allow it to happen, right?
As to whether this actually occurs
is a very different matter, right?
And people are like, well, why would it not happen?
Well, suppose voters accept blatant excuses.
So it's like, well, there's a good reason
why those guys got tortured, and let me tell you.
All right, it's a funny story, actually.
And if by the end, people are laughing at laughing with you,
then fine, then you don't get punished.
All right, so if you say, I will never, ever, ever
raise taxes, and then you raise taxes,
and they say, well, but there are exceptional circumstances.
All right, well, then, sure, then there's a reason
to go and exaggerate and lie and that kind of thing
because you don't actually get punished, right?
You may even know families like this
where there's kids that break the rules
and then they make up a ridiculous excuse
and the parents go, well, okay.
And then the kids do bad stuff all the time
and the parents go, why, why, why is it happening to me?
All right, and then there's other parents
who say, look, this is the punishment.
Explain what the punishment would be.
You did it, you were caught, you were punished.
There's nothing you can do about it.
And sometimes there's one parent, say me,
who does the second thing, and another parent, say mom,
who does the first thing.
All right, so, and then there's what's called forum shopping
where you go and try to get punished by the person
that doesn't actually really stick to the announced
punishments.
All right, so questions?
about any of this stuff?
Good.
All right, now we come to Donald Winton.
So most people who criticize the economic approach to politics
dislike the economistic assumptions.
So they say, look, you are ruining
of the great subject of political science
and also political philosophy while you're at it
with all of these economistic assumptions, which
don't like those.
And further off, it adds on.
And then you have these anti-democratic conclusions,
which are bad.
You shouldn't have anti-democratic conclusions.
And only a bad person would have such conclusions.
In my book, The Myth of Roger Loder,
there are a bunch of quotes from people saying,
look, I've seen so much ugliness in democracy.
But far from undermining my faith,
it's made it all the stronger.
So what would you have to see to undermine the faith?
Nothing.
Nothing can undermine the faith.
This is a section on the uncharging market
fundamentalism.
I don't know any economists who are that bad.
I don't know any that see people starving in the streets
and say, well, free market works.
But other people say, look, I see endless corruption
and demagoguery.
But, ah, democracy, so great.
Anyway, now Donald Whitman, he was up to UC Santa Cruz.
It's a radically different critique.
And by the way, so Donald Whitman is my first nemesis.
He's my first intellectual nemesis.
Not an enemy, but a nemesis.
And I highly recommend cultivating
intellectual nemeses.
Because it's just you talking that's boring.
But it's you and your nemesis having
a high-level intellectual debate that attracts a crowd.
Yes, well, oh my god, it's a debate.
There's two people, each with interesting things to say.
And they're talking to each other in front of an audience.
That's great by comparison to the usual droning
of one solitary academic.
So you can think about promoting your career.
It's a lot like being a trial lawyer.
If you're the only trial lawyer in town,
there's no one to be against.
And you have no business.
But on the other hand, if another person moves into town,
then you could eat at the best restaurant in town
every day together with your esteemed adversary.
And you adjudicate day after day.
As my esteemed colleague has said,
he's a very smart guy.
Normally, I would agree with him.
But not this time.
And then the other person could go and offer similar honeyed
words while they say you're wrong.
So Whitman does not object to public choice's
economistic approach.
Instead, he says something much more painful,
much more wounding.
Public choice is bad economics.
You are deviating from standards of high quality
economic thought.
And I'm here to solve the problem.
As you might imagine, this causes great unhappiness
and dissatisfaction.
So what does he actually say, specifically?
He says he has standard public choice arguments.
Usual economics and politics, the kind that is especially
taught here at George Mason, the kind
that Buchanan and Tellick are famous for,
generally depends upon at least one of the following three
extremely dubious assumptions.
First one, extreme voter stupidity.
Let me get these articles close.
So extreme voter stupidity.
So Whitman says, look, your models
do not have simple, irrationally ignorant voters.
Irrationally ignorant voters would solve these problems.
What you have are morons.
You've got complete doofy who are voting,
something that is beyond any normal model
that we've ever seen.
And yeah, when you put people like that into the model,
then you can get all kinds of disasters.
But so what?
We put in people whose brains are drooling out of their heads.
Then democracy doesn't work.
Big surprise.
All right?
And then he's in the second assumption
that often gets worked in.
He calls this serious lack of competition,
or we can just say monopoly.
So basically, you're assuming that politics is not
competitive, and the two sides are colluding with each other.
What appears to be democracy is actually
just thinly veiled dictatorship.
And he says, come on.
That's ridiculous.
And then the last assumption he says gets worked in
is what he calls excessively high negotiations
and transfer costs.
We just say high transactions costs.
And Whitman says, as long as we just get rid
of all of these bad assumptions, the kind of assumptions
that economists are normally embarrassed to make in public
in front of their peers, then we just
go and apply standard microeconomics.
And we're going to conclude, as Whitman does,
that political markets work just as well as economic markets.
Or even more strongly, what he says
is it's going to turn out that we use politics when politics
is best.
We use markets when markets are best.
And politics is a fine system for deciding whether politics
or markets works best.
So a place for everything and everything in its place
is Whitman's view about how things actually
work in real democracies.
Is he saying that there's extreme voter stupidity
as a supermodel?
Yes, yes.
So is he saying that you need to assume less or just no
stupidity?
Well, what he says is that normal public choice models
build in extreme voter stupidity.
If you were then to say, well, how about we just
put in a little stupidity, then you would say, all right,
fine.
Then you can get a little problem in democracy
with a little stupidity.
But it's highly irregular to go and start calling people
stupid and anti-economic expression.
And he is right.
It is unusual for someone at the AEA meetings
to get up and say, here's my model.
Assumption one, people are morons.
All right, and then assumption two.
I mean, public choice isn't going to do that, but it is.
You see, what Whitman says is, well,
sure you don't openly say it.
You smuggle it in.
You smuggle it into the model, all the while saying,
oh, it's just rational ignorance that when you go and say,
give me a trillion dollars and I'll help you,
people go, oh, yes, milestone.
Good idea, milestone.
Whereas a normal rational ignorance agent,
when you walk past a used car dealership
and they say these are the best cars in the world
for the lowest prices, the normal rational
ignorance thing is to do what?
Remember the market elements?
What is the Akerlof model thing to say
when someone tells you everything's great
and you have no way of verifying it?
No, thank you.
No, thank you.
Can you prove that conveniently?
No?
Then I'm just going to assume the worst.
So normally, you don't have a model of rational ignorance
where people give all their money away
because other people emailed them and said,
give me $100,000 and I'll give you $1 million.
That goes beyond rational ignorance.
And yet, if you have no way of verifying it,
then just fall back on common sense.
What does common sense say to do when someone says
I'll give you $1 million for $1,000?
I don't write, I don't remember what the common sense
for these things is.
Yes, too good to be true?
So it probably is.
No, you do not get the money.
You're missing out, $1 million.
Just because you say it doesn't mean that it's true,
doesn't mean that it's even remotely likely.
No, no thank you.
Or really, just delete, delete, delete, delete,
hang up, delete.
That's what I do.
Took me a few years before I got to instantly hang up
on hotel marketers, but now I'm fully there.
Also on the do not call us.
Is not the last one completely unwarranted in Zelt
without transaction costs?
You wouldn't have a state.
So this is why, so again,
the thing I would like to say there is,
you don't normally go and say there's a problem
where transaction costs are high for any possible solution.
You may say that some solutions
and transaction costs are too high.
Sure, but it's a whole point of your institution
of economy.
Right, well you say yes, well we have states,
it'll be in order to make the transaction costs low.
Problem solved.
So yeah, well sure if you go and take away our main way
of dealing with the transaction costs,
then there's gonna be high transaction costs.
But don't do it, just don't make that assumption.
Not gonna do it, but this is what we're gonna say
with all of you bad people of public choice,
saying there's no way to solve anything.
You know what, there are things
that are getting solved all the time
if you just open your dogmatic libertarian eyes.
And you'll see, it's fun.
You're a bunch of complainers.
All right, so since the,
a good analysis according to Whitman,
a good analysis gets rid of all of these,
gets rid of any hint of these.
So you get rid of any covert assumptions like these.
And then he says that then you then apply
normal microeconomic reasoning,
you're gonna come up with a very positive view
about democracy.
Yeah, which does not mean that we should vote on everything,
but rather that democracy itself is the best way
to decide what to vote on.
So we will vote.
Should we vote on who runs grocery stores?
No.
Okay, great, then we'll have a free market in grocery stores.
Should we vote on which countries we attack?
Yes, all right, then we'll vote on that.
And therefore, all the political failure stories
that you're likely to have heard,
the stories that might have motivated you to be here,
you shouldn't be here.
Because those stories are wrong.
Right, and Whitman's view is essentially,
he's like, you know what's really going on?
There's a bunch of people at places like George Mason
with very strange preferences for political, for policy.
And they can't just come up and admit
that they're like people who like pickle-flavored ice cream.
Right, and so they have to come up
with an elaborate intellectual rationale
for how they deserve to win
despite the unpopularity of their product.
That's what Whitman says.
You know how you think that the system is bad?
The real story is that you are weird.
And the system works perfectly fine,
and it does what functional systems do,
which is put very little weight on a few weird people.
Right, so there's no pickle-flavored ice cream,
there's no libertarian governments,
and that's the system.
Too bad for you.
Now, why does he say this?
All right, let's just go through a quick version
and see where Whitman's coming from.
All right, so he says a lot of political figure arguments
or public choice arguments in general
assume what he calls extreme voter divinity.
And yes, those words are in quotes
because those are Whitman's words.
Right, now, he says these as fighting words
because he knows that people in public choice
are gonna get upset and say,
I never said people were stupid.
What I said was people are ignorant
or they lack information.
Not stupidity, they're just lacking in information.
But Whitman says, oh no,
I'm not gonna let you get away with that.
Really, well, really you are assuming
that they are worse than rationally ignorant.
They're actually fools.
They are fools.
Right, because only fools would act as you are describing.
Now, by the way, just as an aside,
you may wonder, can I be trusted
to accurately describe the views of my nemesis?
That's a very fair question.
I will outsource this to Donald Whitman himself
who in one of his earlier replies to me,
he begins the piece, brings tears to my eyes.
He says, look, usually when one argues with a critic,
you have to begin by explaining
they didn't understand what you said.
He says, I'm not gonna say that here
because Brian Kaplan has described my own views
better than I have described them myself.
I love you too, Donald.
You're a wonderful man.
I chose my nemesis so well.
You complete me, Donald.
Also, ever since, like, you know what?
Anyone who ever says I don't understand people,
my person I disagree with the most says I understand him.
So, there.
That's why you're trusted.
Because Whitman has given me seal of approval
for description of his views,
not for the actual accuracy of conclusion.
Right.
So, this brings us to Whitman's first principle.
He says, look, voter ignorance,
as long as it's regular coin flip kind of ignorance,
is not a serious problem.
Right, so why?
By the way, so the way to think about Donald Whitman
is he is very lawyerly in the way that he argues,
where he has many different defenses,
many different walls of protection around his core theses.
He knows you have to get over all the walls
to actually take the city.
Right, so, you know, like, if you're a lawyer
and your client is accused of breaking,
of breaking a vase, well, you know, like,
first line of defense is,
first of all, there never was a vase.
Second of all, if there was a vase,
it was, my client was never within 1,000 miles of it.
Third of all, if my client was within,
was close to it, it wasn't broken.
Fourth of all, if it was broken,
it wasn't broken by my client.
Fifth of all, if it was broken by my client,
he was asked to break it.
Sixth of all, if he wasn't asked to break it,
the vase can be replaced, you know,
can be replaced for a nickel, right?
And you just line up these defenses
because any one of this is,
if the jury agrees with any of the arguments,
your client wins, right?
So this is standard lawyerly procedure.
And this is what Whitman does, too,
is he has a bunch of lines of defense,
any one of which could be enough to go and say,
and say, look, democracy actually works out fine.
All right, first wall.
He says, the amount of information held by voters
has been underestimated.
Whitman does not really that much address
the basic facts I was talking about,
how few people know how many senators each state has,
but what he does is say, look, right,
just forget about all that stuff.
We don't even need to look into it.
Here's what you need to know.
Party labels are like brand names,
the drastic reduce in information costs.
So you need to know the ingredients
of a box of Wheaties to buy Wheaties?
No, you just go buy the Wheaties.
Do you need to know all the details
about how we have politicians voted
to go and get the candidate you want?
No, for most Americans, you're like,
well, is he a Democrat?
Then I want a Democrat.
Or is he a Democrat?
I don't want a Democrat, so just do that.
So that's very simple, very simple.
Just use the party labels as brand names,
which seems to be what, especially nowadays,
is probably the most common strategy.
Now, you've heard about like a third
of Americans are independents.
It is true that actually a little bit more nowadays,
maybe 40%.
Out of the 40% of Americans who say they don't identify
with the party, probably about three quarters
of them actually do, but reliably vote for one party.
They just don't like saying that they do it.
So the actual share of Americans
who are truly independent, where it's quite unpredictable
how they will vote, is maybe 10% of the electorate.
So important thing to know is that
there's actually a level of number of independents
that actually bring them out.
True independents, independent in their heart.
And then furthermore, Whitman says,
you know, we got an argument about how
their search costs and so on, don't worry about that,
because you don't have to actually pay the cost.
Information comes to you for free.
So politicians pay for the ads,
and then you just walk through society,
and the information just lands in your lap.
You don't have to do anything to get the information.
Right, and they give speeches, on and on.
So like, what would you have to have done in 2016
to have not known that Clinton and Trump
were fighting for the presidency?
What would have been required to have escaped
this information?
Live in a cave.
Live in a cave, yeah, the cave.
Basements would work.
Yeah, so, you know what, you could still watch TV
as long as you only watch the premium channels.
Yeah, so that'll basically save you no commercials.
All right, so a year later, the scripted shows
start mentioning what happened the previous year,
but you're okay.
Okay, all right, so second, informed judgments
can be made with very little information.
So he says voters have a lot of what are called
cognitive shortcuts.
So you don't have to go and study someone's voting record.
Just go to the people you trust and say,
tell me what to do.
Tell me what to do.
So like, if you vote for guns,
then you can just go and say,
well, who does the NRA endorse?
And if you don't like guns, who does Citizens
for Grand Control endorse?
And problem solved.
Okay.
Then he said third, this is going back
to the foreign powers corrupting the system.
He says, Whitman, were the deleterious
effective bias information been overstated?
Where deleterious is a fancy word for what?
Bad, bad.
The bad effective bias information been overstated?
So yeah, Whitman was ahead of his time
saying don't worry about,
don't worry about this stuff.
Don't worry about Facebook.
Blah, blah, blah, who cares?
All right, and so what's his arguments?
He says, first of all,
so ignorance does not mean systematic bias.
So he said, look, this miracle aggregation
shows that even if people are highly ignorant,
random errors will bounce out.
So say, I suppose 90% of people don't know anything.
So what?
Big deal.
All right, so, and now it seems kind of like
Whitman should be on board for my proposal
just to stop teaching high school civics.
But I don't think he would.
Whitman ultimately comes down to,
well, does the democracy currently do it?
Then it's doing it for a good reason, probably.
Like, if it doesn't seem that it's right, well,
then maybe there's a different reason
that we haven't thought about.
Or maybe you're wrong.
Those are his go-to stories
before he's gonna consider that the median American
is mistaken about something.
Right?
And so he has this quote, which is worth relaying in full.
So, quote, to be uninformed about a policy
does not apply to voters of biased estimates
as a mis-effects.
For example, to be uninformed about the nature
of pork barrel projects in other congressional districts,
which was a assumption that cropped up
in some earlier voter choice models,
does not mean that voters tend to underestimate
the effects of pork barrel.
It is quite possible to be uninformed
and exaggerate both the extent
and the negative consequences of pork barrel politics.
So basically, before Whitman,
there were some models that said,
here's my assumption.
Voters give their own representatives credit
for whatever pork they bring home,
like whatever government money they bring home,
but they assume that no one else
in any other district gets any pork.
All right?
And it's like, yeah, well, if you assume
that people have made the moronic assumption
that they're the only district in America
that gets federal money,
then you get a perverse result
where everyone tries to bring home money
and no one worries about whether other people
are wasting their money.
Amazing.
Right, that's quite a model for you.
Right, and then here's the really cute one.
What about the biased information?
That's gotta be a problem.
And Whitman says, no, it's not.
Biased information is not a problem.
Why?
Because if the information is from
a biased professional source,
voters will simply discount it appropriately on average.
So for example, suppose the media has a liberal bias.
We have a researcher, Tim Grossgloass,
who has amassed a great deal of evidence on this score.
All right?
But Whitman, you know, so again,
most people who disagree with Tim
would say, oh, it's not really true.
You're just right-wingers saying
the media has a liberal bias, no.
Whitman would say, you know what?
I think you're probably right.
The media has a liberal bias.
And in fact, it's so pronounced
that everybody's aware of it.
And therefore, it's harmless.
If everybody's aware of the liberal media bias,
then everyone turns on the channel and says, wow.
MSNBC says Trump is bad.
Surprise, surprise.
Wow, who would have imagined that they,
of all people, would say that Trump was bad?
And then they would change their minds how much?
Zero. Zero.
Wow.
You know, the clock that says that Trump is always bad
is ringing Trump is always bad.
So what?
All right.
All right.
All right, or similarly.
If you think that Russia is trying to elect Republicans, well, then are you going to see
an ad saying, well, probably Russian propaganda.
In fact, you might even go further and say, hmm, the only reason why Russia would want
to do this is probably not to go and make America better.
So maybe this is a reason to vote against people that have support for Putin.
Maybe that.
All right.
Okay, but anyway, bottom line, if there is a pronounced bias, then people will simply
not trust the source and problem solved.
So of course you might just refuse to watch it.
Or you could just hate watch it.
You sit there going, oh, I can't believe this stuff.
How many people watch Fox News actually hate Fox News and they just hate watching it?
So yeah, that's the story.
And it comes down to that same argument for why if you are rationally ignorant and you
walk past a used car dealership and they say these are great cars for great prices, you
don't say, oh, how wonderful.
In that case, I would like all of your cars, sir.
Instead, you will say, you will exert common sense and say, I don't have any way of verifying
anything you're saying and you have an incentive to lie and exaggerate and so I don't believe
a word that comes out of your mouth unless you give me something better than that.
You might say, you know what, a money-back guarantee would be more persuasive than all
of the adjectives that you could throw at me.
And it's the same thing.
As long as voters combine their ignorance with common sense, common sense, then democracy
is still going to be working just fine.
And you might not know what the bias is.
Then just don't believe anybody.
Believe only what you can verify firsthand.
If you really are that paranoid, you say, you can't trust anyone.
No one can be trusted.
No one at all.
And actually, that would be an interesting world.
Imagine that people voted just based upon looking around and seeing whether the world
was on fire or not.
On fire, vote against incumbents.
And not on fire, vote for.
That would be a pretty simple approach.
What if a certain percentage is on fire?
Yeah, yeah, a certain percentage.
That's what you think about with your own eyes.
And then Whitman said further, if there's any unresolved asymmetric information, if
there's any asymmetric information where the people in government know better than voters
what's going on, then the effect is not going to be to make government inefficiently large.
It will be to make government inefficiently small.
And this is where he's really twisting the knife against libertarian people in public
choice, saying, well, if there is a government failure, it's a failure that the government
is too small.
And this is just going back to the Akerlof-Levins model.
So the normal populist view of used car markets is that there's dumb purchasers and there's
crafty sellers, and the sellers go and say, oh, it's a great car.
Trust me, Grandma.
And Grandma says, is it really?
And they go, yes, Grandma.
OK.
And then she drives it off and pays all the money.
And then the car breaks down a mile away.
And then she calls them up.
They say, sorry, there's no warranty.
Easy come, easy go.
Bye, Grandma.
So anyway, that's the usual story, but that's not the Akerlof story.
The Akerlof story is of a Grandma with common sense.
You're just trying to see.
You're just tricking me.
What proof have you got?
Let me see the warranty, sonny.
Or maybe Grandma just says, at my age, I can't figure out anything anymore, so I'm just going
to stick with whatever I've got.
No, no, and no.
That's also a pretty good common sense approach.
Just say, look, what I have works fine.
And I can't tell whether you're trying to trick me, so I just don't believe anything
you're saying.
That's reasonable.
Better than being tricked, being duped out of your money.
Or you could, I just do whatever my son says.
I'm still waiting for my parents to get to that.
So anyway, just as it's naive to think that asymmetric information is good for used car
dealers, it actually makes their lives really hard.
Because if you were used car dealer, you wake up every day knowing that people will assume
your lie.
And you have to overcome that somehow, and it's not easy.
Similarly, apply the same model and model to government.
Suppose you've got a great government program, totally passed the cost-benefit test, but
you're dealing with voters who don't have the time to go and evaluate any of the evidence.
How will you sell them on your great idea?
It's going to be hard.
You say, look, I've got a new drug, it's going to cost $10 million, and it will save a billion
dollars in taxpayer money a year, just give me the money.
And then voters are like, well, how can we tell?
Well, I've got a report, it's only 200 pages long, and it's like you go and study statistics
for five years and then read the report, it will be clear to you.
All right, no, I'm not going to do that.
That sounds like something you would say if you just want the money.
No, no, no, really, like seriously, I mean, you just go and take the classes and read
the report, it's fine, whatever, no, no.
Right?
And that's the problem.
Right now, people sometimes say, well, you can't, the Akerlof model isn't really relevant
because you can decide not to buy a used car, but you can't decide not to buy a government.
Well, at minimum, you can decide to always vote for whatever promises less government.
Right?
And if people did that, what would democracy look like?
Just a giant auction to have government do as little as possible.
Right?
And that's just what every presidential debate looks like, right?
It is, look, my candidate says that we don't need government regulation of worker safety
or minimum wage, but we do need to have public schools.
Who's he fooling here?
I say we don't need public schools either.
Right?
And you would just go down the list, wiping out, like erasing government programs, and
say, look, I'm not going to waste money on education, bah, or the environment, bah.
Right?
And just go through all that.
Then maybe you're left with a few things the voters can't verify.
Roads, are you aware that roads actually do move you along?
Right.
All right, let's keep those.
All right, sounds good.
All right, but somebody in a new road, I don't know, maybe in a new road.
All right.
All right, now, if you actually watch almost any kind of presidential debate, it's normally
just people saying, here's a problem and I've got a solution, and then the other side says,
no, I've got, I raised a terrible problem, but my opponent only pretends to want to solve
it.
I really want to solve it, but it's going to take a lot of resources.
But we're a strong, rich country.
We can afford it, can't we?
Yeah.
Right?
We've got money for veterans, don't we?
Yeah.
We've got money for kids, don't we?
Yeah.
We've got money for the elderly, don't we?
Yeah.
All right.
We've got money for everyone we like.
Yeah.
All right, and that's much closer to an actual presidential election.
But anyway, Whitman will just look at that and say, well, obviously people don't feel
like they're getting ripped off.
Right?
You know, they go and hear politicians say there's a problem, here's a solution, and
they like the people who have the solution.
So that's not what a voter would do if they just thought that these programs were a waste
of money.
And you're not saying that you're right and they're wrong, are you?
Are you saying that normal people overestimate the value of government programs?
That you know better than most people what's worthwhile?
I didn't think so.
All right, then.
I said that.
All right.
Okay.
All right, so anyway, so Whitman's bottom line.
You want to get the standard conclusions about political failure, the kind of stuff that
says, oh, democracy, come on, it's just a Milwaukee disaster.
Ignorance is not enough.
Right?
And that's a good Whitmanian slogan.
I don't think he actually says it, but ignorance is not enough.
We need to have a more severe problem.
We need to have irrationality.
I'd like to think of this as just lack of common sense.
Don't just say that democracy works badly because the voters aren't informed.
Just call them a bunch of fools.
Say, over half of the public is lacking in common sense.
And then Whitman will say, yeah, fine, then you can get your answer.
Of course, you sound like a lunatic.
Right?
You're like, what kind of economist wants to get up in front of his peers and say, you
know what I think?
I think over half the population is lacking in common sense.
And now we've got a model explaining the effects of this total lack of common sense.
So that doesn't sound like a paper you're likely to see presented at the ADA meetings,
does it?
Even people who have done behavioral economics their whole lives don't want to quite come
out and say, you know what people's problem is?
Lack of common sense.
You want to say, well, they've got a bunch of particular little issues here.
You don't want to just go full anti-humanity and just say, human beings are intellectually
weak.
They are really, we'll just go with the source and rattle off the names.
They are doofy fools.
Not normal for economists to say stuff like this about people.
All right.
So in other words, you say they're stupid or rational.
In other words, that rational expectations fails for the general population, or at least
the electorate.
All right, so questions about this?
All right, good.
We'll move on to monopoly.
Okay.
All right, now we come to witness second principle.
Politics, like the market, is competitive.
How so?
Now we get concentric walls all protecting the, not the president, but protecting democracy
itself from the public choice onslaught.
An onslaught of a few hundred academics, but an onslaught nonetheless.
All right, so why?
First of all, reputation matters.
So like if politicians break promises, then voters hold it against them, and they do a
good job, voters reward them.
And even if you're only going to be in office for a few years, almost every politician wants
to advance.
They want to rise.
Even if you win president, you might want to become a Supreme Court justice afterwards.
Or you might want your wife, say, to become president, or your daughter to become president,
or your son.
Does this sound like any country you're aware of?
Right?
Yes.
It's like, I thought it was only in monarchies that relatives become leaders afterwards.
Like, no, well, if people want to vote for someone they've heard of, and you've heard
of the relatives of the previous leaders, so it's a perfectly fine system, right?
At least a common, a noted, an observed system.
Right?
And, you know, so like when a politician disgraces himself, also by extension disgraces all his
relatives, his allies, that kind of thing.
All right?
So, for the first few months of 2001, Bill Clinton was actually having trouble getting
speaking gigs, because he had brought some disgrace to the Democratic Party in his last
few weeks.
Anyone here have any slightest memory of what the disgrace was?
Midterm?
No.
No, that, no, that.
Yeah, it was over that, I bet.
No.
Were we talking about Whitewater, or what was that?
Ah, yes.
So, well, it's less than any of that.
So, the scandals were he went in and handed out some pardons that seemed so, yes, so questionable,
so motivated by just, by just, like, freeing the kids of donors, that it looked really
bad.
All right, so I think there's one case where there's like a guy giving him a lot of money,
and then he just sprang a son.
It was like, wait a second, that looks really, really close to a bribe.
No, no, it's not a bribe because I got the money years ago and then I freed him when I only had a couple weeks left in my bankruptcy.
It sounds like exactly what you'd do if you wanted to accept a bribe but wanted to be able to legally weasel out of the accusation.
So anyway, for a few months he was not getting good speaking gigs, but anyway, everyone forgot that pretty quickly, but that's the idea.
And then Whitman says, remember Gary Becker.
Whitman is not the kind of economist who goes and sneers at University of Chicago economists.
He's someone who enlists them in his army to deploy against public choice.
And he says, look, Gary Becker, how do you like him, don't you?
Well, he solved the problem, so what's the one point?
Well, I don't see what you're talking about. If this were really a problem, rational voters would just very harshly punished, proceed violations,
and this would make politicians very frightened of doing anything the voters don't want, and that would solve the problem.
So that is the story that he has in mind.
And if you say, what about that cruel and unusual punishment clause in the Constitution that would prevent us from, say,
having a full Game of Thrones style horrible torturous for bad politicians, and Whitman, of course, would ultimately have to say,
well, if it's there, it's there for a good reason.
But anyway, there's still something in a Whitmanian spirit of saying, well, if we're going to reform our democracy, let's give her that clause.
Well, I put an exception saying, well, politicians can't be punished in cruel and unusual ways.
Of course, if you literally read it, actually, as long as it is, so it's actually, I think, the Constitution says cruel and unusual, not cruel or.
Mike, is that correct? Is it cruel and or cruel or? It's cruel and?
It's kind of subjective, I think.
Well, here's the key thing. So logically, in order to be cruel and unusual, you have to be both cruel and unusual.
Therefore, if you just make it usual, then it's legal.
Looks like it's cruel and.
Yeah, what's that?
Looks like it's cruel and.
Yeah, yeah. So by the letter of the law, you can do, if there are common but very cruel punishments, they're totally fine.
All right. Now, that's not the way the Supreme Court has interpreted the word and in recent years in this case.
But who's to blame for that?
I don't know if I see this.
All right. So anyway, Whitman says is, look, you know, politicians can and have destroyed their whole careers over one little mistake.
Often they are saying the wrong word at the wrong time, the wrong person.
So some of them are just saying this, like saying something that was taken, that brought offense or it was taken as insulting.
People just brought it out. Right. And then sometimes there are statements where you might think that there would be no issue,
but there's a media circus around it and that's the end. And then that ruins the career of the person.
So the one that most confuses me was there was the Senator Trent Lott went to, I think it was like the 100th birthday party for Strom Thurmond.
It was only 95th. But anyway, it was way up there.
And he publicly said, you know, the country would be doing a lot better if we'd been listening to Strom here.
That's all he said. And then this was a big scandal and then Trent Lott resigned.
Now, to me, it's like either you go to his party and say something nice about him, and if he's a 95 year old politician,
what nice thing will you say about him?
You're going to say, look, he's a great tennis player, but he's a terrible politician, but I love him anyway.
I mean, of course you're going to say something nice about him politically.
So I'm really, look, I think either you would want to get rid of anyone who attended his party at all
and just say attending it is the sign of evil.
Or you would say, look, of course, if he's there, he's going to say something nice about his politics.
But that didn't happen. It didn't work out that way.
Now, the unusual thing about Trump in 2016 is he had many statements,
any one of which would normally be enough to tank a candidacy, but didn't seem to hurt him.
So maybe it turns out that you can say whatever you want, and if you just say, yeah, that's right.
I said, sorry, not sorry.
You just say, yeah, sorry, not sorry, people.
Maybe that's the solution for anything.
Maybe you need to go to Trump at his party and eat all his food, don't say anything nice,
just cost him money, break a vase on the way out.
Yeah, maybe he broke something.
Yes, if you were to break the vase there, she would say, this is the mockery of America.
All right, so that might work.
All right, and if you see sort of like the scandal of the year of the day on Twitter, that kind of thing,
you know, like you're tweeting a topless picture of yourself, what was it?
Mark Weiner?
Anthony Weiner.
Anthony Weiner.
Or I'm walking the, what was the Rocky Mountain Trail, what was the trail?
The Smoky Mountain Trail.
All right, these kinds of things.
All right, then Whitman goes on and says, look, political races are at least as competitive as markets.
So, you know, so first of all, so politics is full of political entrepreneurs.
A phrase, by the way, created by George Mason's very own Richard Wagner,
who has the same name as the famous composer.
All right.
Yes, but pronounced differently, yes.
Anyway, full of political entrepreneurs who don't have power and want it.
And if you don't have power and you want it, what is the standard thing to do?
Well, step one, standard gesture, point at the person who currently has power.
Look at him over there.
He's terrible.
Why?
He's doing something unpopular, and it's this thing.
You don't want to have that guy be in power.
It should be me who has power.
Right, and then you add on to, look at what he has done to you.
I would never treat you that way.
I love you, American people.
All right, so that's the standard way that you try to get power.
It's by pointing at people who have power and saying they're terrible and then saying, how are they terrible?
Because they think something, they could have done something unpopular.
Sad.
Yes, very sad.
Okay, now, of course, if you do have power, you don't want this to happen to you successfully,
and so you want to preemptively avoid anything unpopular.
So the most that they can do is say, he's brought us prosperity, which has then led to corruption of our children.
All right, that's all you got?
Children are corrupt because we're rich?
Okay, that's not too great.
All right, and then Whitman goes on and says, high rates of re-election prove nothing.
Quote, the main reason for high rates of income and success is they are the best.
That is why they won in the first place and why they are likely to win again.
Was that a tweet?
Yes, let's say, no, that's a direct quote.
It's a good effect with new Twitter.
Anyway, the basic point is, look, if voters keep voting for someone over and over again,
that's a sign that they are satisfied customers.
So Whitman could have been even stronger, and he said, you know what really ruined democracy?
It wasn't working if there was 0% re-election.
This would be like every time voters elect someone, they say, wow, we made another horrible mistake.
Let's get rid of him.
And the next guy, my God, it's nothing but one horrible mistake after another.
Just like if you're Costco and people are allowed to return a product and get a full refund,
what is the sign that the product is good?
If no one ever asked for the refund,
what would be a sign the product is bad?
If everyone wants the refund, what is a re-election rate?
It's a chance to get a refund of sorts.
And so high re-election is actually a sign that democracy is working well.
Now, you said, well, what about like Russia?
That's when we said, well, it's not actually democracy.
It's just the traffic's democracy.
So, yeah, in reality, if you have 99% re-election rate,
that probably means that it's just a dictatorship with an election.
So like what if you include gerrymandering or something like that?
Yeah, so gerrymandering is interesting.
We don't have time to go into it or what it is, but you can talk to me after the break.
class if you're curious.
And then he says, you know, similarity platforms proves nothing.
And so, you know, in markets, you see all the firms are charging the same price.
Like every gas station charges the same price for gas.
This is normally taken as a sign of what?
Competition.
You know, everyone's charging the same price.
Probably competition, right?
Everyone's charging the same price for IBM stock or for pork bellies.
Competition.
And he says, similarly, in the median voter model, what do parties do?
They converge.
So you see they're the same.
This is a sign of democracy actually being competitive.
Right?
In fact, again, Whitman could have said, you know what would be a real sign of black competition?
If the two parties were totally different from each other.
This is a sign that neither party wants to go and moderate in order to go and get more
voters.
And why would you not want that if there's no hope of winning anyway for one side and
the other side has no hope of losing?
So anyway, you know, so like an example, an example of this in a democracy that Whitman
might acknowledge as a brief period of dysfunction.
There was a long period in Britain, basically from around the time that Thatcher got elected
to the time that Tony Blair got elected, where the Labor Party was very stubbornly sticking
with socialism despite everything.
And it was controlled by the far left wing of the party, seemed to have a stranglehold
on the party.
And then they just wouldn't moderate.
And then they just kept getting beaten really badly, you know, something like five elections
in a row.
And then finally Tony Blair came on and said, look, new labor, let's throw the Marxists
out of the party.
And now we're going to go and get with the times.
Soviet Union's gone.
Boo hoo, people.
And then let's, let's go and like I say, we, and actually I was against it all along and
let all true members of labor work too, right?
Right.
Okay.
So why don't we go and take our break now?
And then continue.
Door, door, please.
Thank you.
All right.
So we now have an hour and seven minutes to wrap up with this trailer for Public Choice.
All right.
So I hope you see full class.
It is the great public, one of the crowning stars of George Mason is Public Choice.
And we must never forget that.
The founders have moved on.
Their vision lives, will live on through us, all of us.
Hopefully.
Okay.
All right.
And although also will be approved, which they would have wanted.
They wanted us to approve it.
All right.
Now, so continuing with competition, there are people in Public Choice who say, yeah,
well, but there's all these barriers to entry in democracy.
You know, like anyone here ever worked for a third party?
Usually there's one or two in a class.
All right.
Well, we have to go and get 50,000 signatures just to get on the ballot.
The regular parties don't have to do that.
So they have all these advantages, and they have fat cats, give them money for advertising.
How is a poor third party ever going to compete in a world like this?
Not fair, not really competitive.
Right?
And what it says is, oh, boo hoo.
These barriers to entry are usually minimal.
And in fact, the barriers we have are, it's a very good idea that we have them.
The real reason third parties can't win is because voters do not like them.
Voters disagree with them because they don't form their platforms to win.
They act like it's a philosophical society.
They sit around saying, what does our philosophy say?
All right, great.
Let's put it in the platform.
Whereas a winning party says, what do people want to hear?
What does the median voter think?
And they put that into the platform.
Or at least, what could we kind of sell the median voter on?
At least that question is raised.
Will this fly?
Can we get away with this?
All right.
So it's not because the system is against them.
An example that very nicely illustrates Whitman's point here.
So in the early 2000s, there was the California gubernatorial recall election.
And key part of that.
So part one of this is, should we recall the governor?
And that passed very easily.
And now, second phase, which all happens simultaneously, is if the governor is recalled, who should
replace him?
The current governor is not legally allowed to run for recall.
So he's off the menu.
And under California law, how much money did you have to pay to get on the ballot to be
one of the candidates in the California gubernatorial recall election?
So you could become governor if the current governor is recalled.
How much money did it cost, roughly?
1,000 bucks.
1,000 bucks a person to get on the ballot for a state that had over 30 million people
in it.
All right.
And so how many people do you think wound up paying that 1,000 bucks to get on the ballot?
500?
There's about 150 people.
All right.
Almost all of them were complete joke candidates.
Gary Coleman, the star of Diff'rent Strokes.
There was a noted actress who will remain nameless, who was there.
And so on.
All right.
All kinds of ridiculous candidates that were punchlines.
There were really only two that received any significant share of the vote.
Arnold Schwarzenegger and a guy named Bustamante, Bustamante, who I think was the lieutenant
governor under the previous governor, Ray Davis.
All right.
Now, California, to make it even more fair, and to get the barriers to entry even lower,
said, you know what's really unfair?
Alphabetized names of candidates.
That's not fair because some people's names are with A. So they did random order, which
meant that California voters had to search through a list of 150 names to find Schwarzenegger
and Bustamante.
All right.
And I think this is a case where Whitman, who was a California resident at the time,
would have said, all right, that might be a case of democratic failure.
But it's a good case because it shows how the system normally is fine because that,
like every other ballot, has a bunch of rules to prevent the ridiculous California sideshow
from happening.
So like one election in the whole country in 100 years is a circus.
All the others, though, have some sensible rules.
And again, if you were saying, yeah, but money, money's not fair.
Again, Whitman is not a normal populist going and saying, oh, it's good.
Instead, Whitman is someone saying, well, you know what?
If you're running for office and you can't find a single millionaire who likes you, that's
because you're a loser.
Real candidates can persuade millionaires to like them.
It doesn't matter how liberal you are or how weird you are, there's going to be some billionaire
who likes any serious candidate.
The reason why you can't get it is because you're not a serious candidate.
You're a joke.
You're pathetic.
All right.
Sorry.
Reality check.
All right.
Whitman's actually a nice guy.
Nevertheless, the simple enough.
But I don't think you would disagree with this as just a clear summary of what he's
saying.
Okay.
And then third.
Now, this is one where I think you say Whitman's actual work is weak on this, but there's been
better evidence to come along.
So the empirical evidence shows a strong link between voter preferences and legislative
behavior.
Since then, there's been quite a few better papers.
There's one by Martin Gillins where he actually did assemble about 3,000 surveys where you
could clearly link the survey to a subsequent policy outcome and then use public opinion
to predict whether policies would actually be enacted.
And the results do confirm a pretty tight correlation between popularity and adoption.
There are some results that Whitman wouldn't like.
For example, there is a big status quo bias that Gillins finds where if a policy is moderately
popular but it already exists, then it's very likely to remain on the books, or moderately
unpopular.
So if something has like 45% support but it exists, then there's about an 80% chance the
policy continues.
And on the other hand, if there's something that has 55% support but it doesn't exist,
there's only like a 20% chance it gets adopted.
But still, there's that.
And then furthermore, just think about this.
In terms of the voter model, if we were to go and take the model literally, so here we've
got voter support ranging from 0 to 100%, and then here's the probability of adoption.
There, 50th percentile.
All right.
So take it literally.
If you believe the median voter literally, what are the odds that a policy with 0% support
is adopted?
Zero.
Zero.
How about 10% support?
Zero.
How about 25?
Zero.
How about 49?
Zero.
All right.
50th percentile, a little unclear.
But anyway, and then once you have 51%, what does the median voter model say?
100.
So yes.
So taken literally, the median voter model predicts this extreme step function.
The evidence does not find that.
I think women would probably say, well, first of all, you have to remember that these surveys
are a very important measure of what voters really want anyway.
So given that the survey has noise, you shouldn't really expect to get something like that.
So you might say that.
In terms of the status quo bias, that's one where you may say, well, maybe when the people
answer the survey, they're sort of ignoring transition costs.
So we added a bunch of, like, you shouldn't ignore transition costs.
Why should you not ignore, or why should you pay attention to transition costs as a rule?
Because they are costs.
Because they're costs.
You know, whenever someone says, like, Linux is better.
Once you've mastered it, it works much better.
Yeah, well, how hard is it to master it?
Yes, a few years.
Well, I don't want to spend a few years.
So, I mean, how much better could it really be?
Okay.
So anyway, so women's bottom line is this.
In markets, economists are usually skeptical of stories about collusion.
Not that they never admit them, but in general, if someone says, you know what's going on
in world oil markets?
All 70 countries of Brazil oil are all working together to keep the price up.
And economists are like, yeah, that doesn't sound too likely.
Or like toys, or whatever the product is.
Normally when someone says there's a giant conspiracy, of course, partly economists would
say, well, it's antitrust.
But more fundamentally, it's like, look, that sounds really hard to deal.
Okay.
All right.
So anyway, so economists are normally skeptical about collusion.
So why would they be less skeptical in politics?
How would this grand electoral conspiracy be maintained?
Right?
So do you really believe that the Democrats and Republicans are actually in a covert conspiracy
to prevent us from considering any other party?
And they amicably run the country as a monopoly?
And they sort of like say, well, now it's your turn to win.
Okay, we'll play a loser.
So it's only fair.
Right?
Does it seem like they're cooperating with each other?
No.
I mean, I can't hear you.
Does it seem plausible that they can maintain a conspiracy like that without more leaking
out?
That was a little hard.
There is a South Park episode where it turns out the entire 2008 election was part of a
secret plan to heist the Smithsonian.
Right?
It turns out that Obama and McCain are actually both part of the same gang of park thieves.
And they're great best of friends, and their teams all work together.
Anyway, does that sound...
That's funny because it's absurd.
It seems, in fact, that out of people who run for...
People running for major offices, it seems like they have a genuine personal contempt
and atypathy, at least antipathy for each other.
So of course, the Smithsonian, suppose that a major party candidate just suddenly died
a month before the election.
Now the other party would officially say what?
Oh, my God.
I may not have agreed with him, but I respected him.
But what are they actually doing?
You may say, how do you know what people do when other people aren't around?
Human nature.
Shakespeare would agree with me.
So come on.
Of course, that's what's going on.
That's what people are like.
Isn't it?
Someone that you really have a strong antipathy for just drops dead in a way that's super
convenient for you.
The only thing, the only fear is, is someone going to accuse me of having done this?
Because I totally didn't.
All right.
Yes, and if you just get, like you said, one good side of this, if you go and read the
history of any pre-democratic country when it wasn't very important for the public to
think you were a nice person and to see what horrible things were routinely done all the
time, and then say, did human nature suddenly change just because we switched to a new system
of government?
Or did it change the incentives of power hungry people?
And now they really want to act like they're nice.
But they're the same power hungry people they always were.
Come on.
What else can be true?
Or Steve Pearlstein would hear you and say, don't call them power hungry, call them ambitious.
But sure, ambitious like Michael Corleone.
Right?
And that's right.
Okay.
Yeah.
I just told my six and eight year old the story of Chappaquiddick at a six to eight
year old level.
It really works, actually.
It's a great story.
It's very funny.
And it teaches a lot about what people are like.
So if you don't know the story, it's a good story.
There's a movie.
You just watch the movie.
There's a few complaints about the accuracy of the movie.
It's red and light.
But the basic story seems to be.
All right.
And then last.
All right.
The high transaction cost story.
All right.
So a very common public choice complaint is, look, transaction costs prevent us from bargaining
to the better equilibrium.
All right.
So yes, there's more efficient policies.
And again, more efficient always means more Calgary X.
More Calgary X efficient policies.
But we can't get from here to there because of the transaction costs.
So using this story, look, there's a special interest that blocks reform, harmful to an
interest, and it's too hard to buy them off.
Last example would be, what's efficient?
To go and keep bad teachers on the payroll for their entire life or to fire bad teachers?
Which one sounds like a more efficient policy?
Fire bad teachers.
All right.
But normal story that you'll get, not just from public choice economists, from almost
any observer of the education system, why does that not happen?
Teachers unions.
Now, why don't we just go to the teachers unions with a big bag of money and say, here's
a big raise, but in exchange, you have to agree that we can get rid of bad teachers.
Too hard.
Right?
Basically, if the teachers took this deal, this would basically be a concession that
they have been ripping off taxpayers for years and obstructing the education of children
and so they wouldn't take the deal.
And Whitman says, that's ridiculous.
That's ridiculous.
It's not that hard to buy people off.
So political bargaining can eliminate any remaining significant inefficiencies.
And in fact, why?
Well, democracy's designed to have low transaction costs.
That's the whole setup.
So first of all, majority rule is way cheaper than unanimity.
And remember, in markets, you need unanimity.
Like if there's 20,000 people building a skyscraper, roughly what fraction are there
voluntarily?
100%.
Right?
Maybe the plumbers' families are being held hostage, you make them do the plumbing or
something like that.
But no.
Normally, markets have 100% voluntary participation rate.
And whatever you think about democracy, it's way cheaper in terms of transaction costs.
To say, you know what?
51% of people want to do this.
Therefore it is done.
And when the minority says, but I don't like it.
Too bad.
Tough luck.
Sorry.
That's really sad.
Here's the world's smartest fellow I know.
I'm going to say, oh, well, democracy ignored the interests of the people or the minority.
So what?
All right.
So it's a way of saving transaction costs.
And if anyone ever tried to get a group of 20 people to agree on a restaurant, right?
So if it's unanimity, if every individual can block the entire thing, then you're probably
just starved.
There'll probably be one vegan and one carnivore.
So and then like the, I can't go any place with meat, I can't go any place that doesn't
have meat.
So then I guess we will all go hungry.
The other thing, majority rule for whatever its flaws would get you to a restaurant somewhere.
Right?
Okay.
So anyway, majority rule is cheaper than unanimity required by markets.
And then furthermore, representative democracy, right?
Which kind is America, representative or direct?
Representative.
Yeah.
What is the world's most prominent direct democracy?
Classical Athens.
Where?
Classical Athens.
Classical Athens.
Yeah, maybe.
I mean, I guess you only get, so I was thinking of existing ones, currently existing ones.
So Switzerland has a lot of direct democracy, but it's still not a direct democracy.
So the answer is nobody knows because it's just so down there.
All right.
So representative democracy, whatever you think about it, it cuts down on transaction
costs.
Imagine everybody, every single bill, every American could vote on it.
It'd be a pain in the neck, right?
So instead of having actually now up to like 330 million Americans, we just have a few
hundred congressmen and senators bargaining.
And then remember, actually in reality, you don't even have those hundreds of people bargaining.
There's a smaller subset of politicians in Congress who actually forecraft legislation
and these are the committees.
Okay.
Right.
So the answer is, you know, log rolling can turn efficient but unpopular policies into
efficient and popular policies.
Real easy.
So if the, so basically Whitman would say, yeah, like if it really were true that there's
a few bad teachers and they're messing with the system, that's inefficient, and, but we
want to get good teachers, then we would just say, let's make a deal.
Here's a bag of money, get rid of the bad teachers and end the problem.
And we solved it.
Right?
And if you say, yeah, but that doesn't happen, then Whitman would say, well, like the obvious
answer is actually it's not inefficient to have these bad teachers.
Right?
Like how can that be?
Well, maybe, so, like here's actually a story I almost believe.
It's like, here's the main problem with firing bad teachers.
Bad teacher is a teacher who takes risks.
And do you know how boring education would be if there were, if every teacher refused
to take any risks?
So I mean, I often think of this, like whenever I write a blog post that gets negative feedback,
there, you know, there, there's a, like there are people that are involved in the blog that
are like, why do you have to write that?
Like, well, if I only wrote stuff that I was really sure no one would get mad about, it
would be completely boring.
Wouldn't it, isn't it better that I go and stick my neck out and sometimes write something
that gets people excited, other times gets them very upset, but I can't, they say, well,
just only do the stuff that excites them.
I can't do that.
I don't, I can't predict people's reactions well enough.
And if you just say, and if you just say, look, you're fired if you go and write anything
that upsets people, then all I could do would be, you know, like put in the, write about
the weather or something.
So now, realistically, I don't think the teachers that are getting fired are there just for
being too controversial.
They're probably, things like biting students, like I don't know, but, you know.
But even there, you might say, well, like if students know that you get fired for any
alleged biting, then there's, then there's a reason to go and lie.
So maybe that's the reason.
You know, so you can sit around spinning these stories and women's ultimate answer is always,
look, if you're so smart, you've got it all figured out, I suggest that you go and mail
copies of your, of your blog posts or your articles to the people in Congress or to the
local school board, and they will no doubt be very fascinated by the superior brilliance
of your intellect.
And if you say no, they'll be like, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no.
Well, I guess that's that maybe your superior intellect is not so superior.
Maybe you don't really know it all. Maybe you're just a regular person.
And you should participate in the democratic process if you want things to change.
Alright. So, questions about this? Yes?
So, are collective actions, is that a cause for this person, for Whitman?
Well, Whitman would say, look, democracy is a way of solving collective action problems.
And I would say that it works great. It's a great system.
So, you know, because the main thing is when you vote, you're voting for policies for the whole society.
So, Whitman would say, yes, well, you're going to consider the cost and the benefits for, you know,
least of all, so he would actually still think of people as voting selfishly.
But still, like, if everyone can vote, then everyone can represent their interests.
And there's bargaining. Also, never forget the bargaining.
Bargaining is caused by a person's own cost.
So, bargaining is caused by this. That's why we have markets.
Yes, but we can't bargain over the level of pollution of our society, like with markets.
You need to have a government with the power to actually say what's going to happen.
Otherwise, then there would be a huge collective action problem.
If the only way to get pollution down was to go to your neighbors and say,
here's some money, please drive a less polluting car.
Yes?
You can trick people?
Trade with people, sorry.
Trade with people, yes.
So, you said you were going to repeat that?
So, in the sense that you're trading votes.
You're trading votes or you're trading policies.
And so, a lot of the times, it's obviously not as effective or efficient as if you had a currency with which you could actually exchange.
Yes, so Whitman would say, well, I can see the logic of that, buddy.
And if that's so great an idea, why haven't democracies already done it?
Why hasn't a politician come along and said, you know, the whole problem is that this is all based on trading votes.
Why don't we go and monetize the votes?
And, you know, of course, what do normal people say about what would happen if you could sell your vote?
Forget economists.
Just think about what normal human beings would say.
Only rich people rule our country.
And they will basically just treat it like their piggy bank or, you know, they'll treat it like a watermelon.
They'll eat all the fruit and throw away the husk and wear the husk.
So, that's common view.
I think we have a saying.
Well, you figured out that's wrong, huh?
Wow.
All right.
He is sarcastic.
It's nice to be sarcastic.
You know people like that.
A nice, sarcastic person.
All right.
And now we come to an idea near and dear to my heart, rational rationality.
It's the music of the question.
But Whitman relies very, very heavily on this rational expectation assumption.
Right?
So, not that people and voters aren't stupid.
They satisfy the rational expectation assumption.
And remember, the rational expectation assumption is what gives us this result here that the well-informed actually rule the world.
Despite a rule of democracy.
Right?
But why should we believe the rational expectation assumption is true?
Why?
Who says it's true?
What's the evidence that it's true?
All right.
When I first started working on this idea, my thinking was, well, first let me admit, I never thought there was going to be good evidence for the rational expectation assumption.
But I thought there was going to be better evidence.
Certainly more, like at least a larger stack of evidence.
When I first started writing the book, I was like, wow, there's almost nothing.
Almost no one has bothered to empirically test this.
So, very little here.
Of course, it's all behavioral economics, but not normally framed as I'm testing rational expectations.
Only you can think of it that way.
All right.
And similarly, I went and tracked down the original articles and found a few arguments, but the arguments were not very good.
It seems like almost no one would consider them very good arguments.
One of my research ideas is this.
We're already used to the idea that people weigh the costs and benefits of getting information.
It's already a well-established idea in economics.
All right.
Now, maybe people could weigh the costs and benefits of rationality itself.
Or, in other words, since I was saying you think about rationalities being common sense, maybe common sense could be sensitive to incentives.
Maybe people could have a lot of common sense when there's strong incentives to have common sense and very little common sense when there's weak incentives to have common sense.
So, that is my idea.
So, just as it might be rational to be ignorant, it could also be rational to be irrational.
All right.
Now, by the way, if you remember, you've heard of a guy named Jeff Friedman.
I guess now he works for the Scandin Center.
And I published some stuff in his journal, Critical Review.
He actually has, you know, he philosophically rejects both concepts.
So, Jeff Friedman literally does think, you know, he said this in credits, he said,
rational ignorance is a philosophically unsound concept and you can't use it.
All right.
Why not?
Why does philosophy say no one is ever rationally ignorant of anything?
Well, because in order to decide that something is not worth knowing, you would first have to know it.
And you could never, and that can never occur, right?
So, you would have to first know it and then say, hey, this is worthwhile, and then not know it anymore.
But like, so it could never be the case that you just say, look, this book isn't worth reading.
How can you find out if a book is worth reading?
By reading it.
Right now, when I ridicule this and say, by this logic, you can never hang up on a telemarketer,
you can never delete spam email, you have to go and listen to the whole sales pitch, read the whole thing,
send the money, because otherwise how do you know that it is a waste of your money?
Until you've heard the whole thing.
Right?
And Jeff was not very happy about this, which in my mind is a, you know, a knockdown reduction ad absurdum of what he's saying.
And then, of course, you know, so then you have similar arguments about rational rationality,
saying no one ever rationally decides to not be rational.
How do you know?
Many people do.
Right?
Again, especially if you just think about it as how, what level of common sense do you want to have today on this issue?
Do you want to have the high level of common sense, or do you want to have the low level of common sense?
All right.
In other words, what I say is you think about irrationality as being a normal good.
Now, the constant normal reaction to this is, well, all right, fine, you could model that way,
but why would anyone want this dubious good of irrationality?
And here's my main story.
Well, if you are a totally Vulcan rational, totally Vulcan, totally rational person,
then you risk having to change your mind any time new evidence comes along.
And for most people this works.
Most people have a list of sacred beliefs that can change their lives,
and if you're totally calm and open to argument, you might have to switch your belief very drastically
just because someone has better arguments than you expected they would have.
All right.
So, anyway, see, the big reason why you would want to be irrational is you bribe the judge.
Right?
If you are irrational, then you don't have to worry you're going to lose any of the beliefs that give meaning to your life
because the judge is corrupt, namely the judge is your own mind.
So you aren't going to go and evaluate your own beliefs as a Martian would or as a Vulcan would.
Instead, you evaluate it like your best friend would.
Like if you were accused of murder and you say, well, I'm also the judge, I didn't do it, and I know that.
I rule as a matter of law that I'm innocent.
So, in general, so people derive comfort, security, and a sense of identity from their belief structure.
So, of course, traditionally it was religion.
Traditionally it was religion.
So, again, like throughout most human history and around the world today, if you want to go and make friends,
do you go up to someone and say, what's your religion?
And then go, well, that's stupid.
Wrong.
Ridiculous.
Right?
That's not a good way to make friends anywhere.
Right?
And why?
I mean, you might think that they would then say, really?
It's wrong?
I've always thought animism was the true religion, but it's not.
Or Zoroastrianism.
Why do you like saying that?
You say, no, actually it's not.
Turns out the real religion is Methodism.
And here's why.
Wow, thanks.
This is not a conversation that occurs very often on Earth.
Right?
And why?
Because religion gives people the sense of comfort, security, identity.
So, I was just at a funeral.
I heard a lot of this stuff.
And I didn't want to make people cry.
So, I did not say, that sounds made up.
Right?
Yeah.
And even when it's stuff that sounds really made up, like, we believe the soul goes to heaven after 40 days.
Immediately.
About 39 days, 40 days.
Right?
Sorry for your loss.
It's the better thing to say.
Rather than saying, how do you know this?
Right?
And you say, it's in the Bible.
It's not in the Bible.
Think about that.
The Bible says, Jesus spent 40 days on Earth.
Doesn't say everybody does.
And Jesus spent 40 days on the other end of the Bible in a body.
So, this is completely wrong.
It's based no basis in anything.
But, don't say that unless you want to make everybody cry.
Which when I was a teenager I was a bit, but now I'm not.
All right.
So, this is a big reason.
So, when I was writing the book, one of my favorite books that I came across is a book called The God That Failed.
This is a book which is a collection of autobiographies of former communists.
Actually, former Stalinists, specifically.
All right.
So, it's like 15 biographies, or autobiographies, autobiographies.
And not one of the autobiographies did someone say, I was really happy to learn that Stalin was actually not a great guy.
I was really happy to learn that something other than communism, the answer is, I'm a curious person and I always like to learn new things.
No one said anything like that.
Instead it was one tale of woe and misery after another.
Like, I just wanted to kill myself.
Or like Arthur Kessler, who went on to be a famous novelist.
He said, it was like giving up Stalin was like emotional harakiri.
It was like taking a sword and stabbing it into your own belly and stirring it around.
That's how bad it felt to stop believing in Stalinists.
These are normal human reactions.
It's like, look, these beliefs matter to me.
They're what gives me my identity.
You attack them, you attack me as a human being.
This isn't just some neutral search for truth.
It is, oh yeah, so by the way, I did it again.
I accidentally switched from religion to politics without mentioning the transition.
But yeah, it's a very easy transition.
So common observation is politics replaced religion in the 20th century.
The kind of person who would have been a priest became a demagogue in the 20th century.
Yes?
What do you think about Jason Brennan's thing on Hobbit's rule against the Vulcans?
Yeah, it's all fits.
But it's not even just that you stick to your beliefs, you stick to straw man ideas about the other side.
Yeah, of course.
Yeah, well, that's one of the easiest ways to stick to your beliefs is to think everyone disagrees with you as an idiot.
Right.
Yes?
This is kind of specific to the book, but wouldn't it be more comforting if you were a communist
to find out that all the problems you observed were just because of this one weirdo who somehow was in charge of what's like,
when Khrushchev says actually all these things were Stalin's fault and he's dead.
Well, remember, these are people who changed their mind when Stalin was still in power.
So that's the key.
So once I actually got an email from a communist, I did a lot of work in grad school on the atrocities of communism.
He said, look, fine, there were a lot of atrocities.
Those all fixed in 1956 when Khrushchev went and said, we're really, really sorry to some of you.
Especially people who were in the Communist Party.
That was the real tragedy is when Communist Party members suffered.
That's the worst thing that could happen is for a loyal communist to suffer, right?
Right?
All right.
Now, something else you can pile on is to say, look, rational thinking is often hard, painful, discouraging work.
So you ever work on a math problem for an hour and you get it wrong a bunch of times and finally you get something that kind of looks like the right answer?
Then you go, yep, that's the answer.
I'm done.
Right?
Now, reasonably, you have to say, well, given that I messed it up a bunch of other times,
maybe I worked on this for one more hour, I would find that this kind of answer is wrong, too.
But it's just so discouraging to do this kind of thing that a lot of people would just preemptively say, I've got it.
Solved.
Recognition accomplished.
I've got the answer.
Just the whole mindset of what you have to do in order to become accurate.
So, again, I talk a lot about Phil Tetlock.
He's someone who actually has a lot of great empirical work on what are things you do if you want to become accurate.
A lot of it is pretty simple.
Again, most of it is common sense.
Don't say things are impossible or certain unless they're like 1 plus 1 equals 2.
So for any interesting question, stop saying it's certain or impossible.
All right?
And here's another one.
Say what would count as you being right or wrong before the events pass.
Try to be as unambiguous as possible.
So you then aren't tempted to go and wait for whatever happens and say, oh, just as I predicted, once again.
All right?
So you didn't say what would count as winning.
You waited to see what happened and then did what Tetlock calls self-scoring.
Self-scoring where you go and referee your own match and say, wow, I win.
I'm the winner.
I'm also the player.
But I'm the player, I'm the referee, and I'm the winner.
Wow, that's amazing that you won when you are the referee.
Big surprise.
So what is a good thing to do?
Well, minimum, like publicly say, if the unemployment rate goes above 8.5 percent, then I am wrong.
Otherwise, I am right.
Even that's not as good as actually betting with someone who disagrees with you because when you go and say that 8.5,
it may make the goalposts so easy for yourself to pass.
So I have a Keynesian friend who said, look, the fact that inflation stayed low during the last recession shows Keynesianism is right.
And I said, yeah, but I'm not, at least you're kind of Keynesian and I predicted exactly the same thing.
So how does that show you're right?
Again, the right thing for him to do, what it would have been to have done, would have been to find a person that he disagreed with
and work out a list of disagreements.
And then say, we have hammered out a deal where two people, both of whom noticeably disagree,
have worked out a list under which only one will be right in the end.
And we are now publicizing for credibility.
Of course, there's a big downside to doing that kind of thing.
Egg on your face.
If you do anything that would allow you to be unambiguously right,
it will also automatically allow you to be unambiguously wrong.
People don't like that.
And then, again, very basic things like don't be a single theory to explain everything person.
Admit that there's a lot of theories, all of which have sub-use.
There's a bunch of words that you can just drop from your vocabulary if you want to get better.
Drop the word inherently.
Drop the word necessarily.
These are terrible words if you want to go and predict anything.
But remember, as you were saying, that necessarily, look, I don't say it's necessary.
I say it's going to happen.
I don't say it's necessary.
I don't know of any way of empirically checking whether something's necessary.
So let's not bet on that.
Let's bet on something that we can see.
And then, an indirect reason is also important.
The way that other people treat you may depend upon your beliefs.
So right now, suppose that you were to announce that you know that you disagree
with all of your current controversial political beliefs.
How many friends would you lose?
You go on Facebook and you say, I used to believe the following ten things.
I now believe none of them.
And first, most people usually think it's a joke, right?
Check to see if it's April Fool's.
And then you go and say, look, and here's why.
How many friends are you likely to lose?
Of course, no one here would have kind of low friends that would get mad at you just for
irrationally updating reviews.
But other people have bad friends that will get angry just because they change their minds
and won't give you the benefit of the doubt and won't say, since we are friends, I know
you're well-meaning and a reasonable person, so please share your arguments with me.
But a lot of people don't have friends like that.
They're stuck with regular human friends.
Now, what is the price of rationality?
So at first glance, it may be hard.
But then you realize a lot of things in economics, we talk about the price,
there is an invisible price like the price of safety on the job.
You don't actually go to your employer and say, I'm going to pay you something to go
and make the job safer.
Instead, what do you actually do in the labor market for what workers actually do?
Like how do we actually work out safety, regulation aside, but besides that, how do we work it out?
Tacitly.
Work it out tacitly.
Yes, so, yes, you have compensating differentials.
So employers know, look, if the job is dangerous, I'm going to need to offer more money.
I can go and make it safer, and then I can offer less money.
Or similarly, workers could say, look, I'll work here, like I'll work under these conditions,
so I'm not going to work under those conditions, and I'm not going to have to pay any more.
All right.
So same way you think about the price of rationality.
Here is a price.
We think about it as the dollar value of the bad material consequences you have as a result
of being irrational, and the quantity, the amount of deviation from rational expectations,
and the spa-regular old demand curve.
So when the price of rationality is high, which it often is, like if you're a doctor
and you believe I'm such a great doctor, I'm better drunk than other doctors are sober,
costly belief, right?
Like they destroy your career.
So the price is high, and certain people at least consume less, maybe not at all.
I think I mentioned betting to you guys.
I'll mention it again, because it can't be uptension, on or not.
There are so many people who say ridiculous things, and then you challenge them to a bet,
where if what they were saying were genuinely true, they should want the bet.
Someone says, it is definitely true that Hillary will win the 2008 election.
There's some problem with that.
I've never said this.
You disagree.
You're just a fool, because you don't understand that Clintons will not allow themselves to lose.
The end.
If you really believe this all the way down, if someone said, fine, give me 1,000 odd odds,
you would say, sucker, sucker, I'm going to take all your money, right?
And you would say, fine, I'll go and bet you my house against $1,000.
How's that?
But in fact, of course, almost no one goes and takes these bets, which you might say
just shows they were lying.
They seem out there to be pretty good actors to be lying when they are making these grandiose claims.
Instead, they are letting their emotions run away with them.
Right?
They're saying, there's no way that's possibly going to happen.
Does he believe it?
But the moment he's speaking, yes.
And yet, if you ask him to put his money in his mouth,
then common sense will engage.
And then he realizes, well, when I say it's absolutely certain,
I mean it's like 75% likely.
Oh, that's pretty different, isn't it?
Is your assumption of rationality,
I may be mischaracterizing this, so this
is why I'm going to refrain you from this correctly from wrong.
Is your assumption of rationality
the ability of making accurate predictions?
I mean, so when I say rational rationality,
essentially just responding to incentives.
And in particular, having rational expectations
about the underlying costs of the economy.
I'm sorry, then.
Then the definition of irrationality.
I understand the rational part, the irrationality part.
Yes.
So the irrationality is just deviating
from rational expectations.
And the rationality part is acting
on a rational understanding of the costs
when you decide how irrational you're going to be.
As exemplified by a bet.
So when there's no bet on the line,
that's where people go and say really ridiculous things.
On the other hand, you offer to bet,
and again, that's where suddenly people say, wait a second,
I could lose a lot of money on this.
Well, not if you're right.
Yeah, well, probably.
I don't know.
That, right?
But a bet is a form of testing, a prediction, right?
I mean, a bet is a form of testing.
Yeah.
Yes.
Well, let me know.
This is going to be a little bit late.
Is it a high standard for rationality?
Is it a high standard?
Yes.
Yes, because that's scientific.
I mean, that's how you judge scientific theories,
whether they are testable or not.
Yes.
Well, why is that a high standard rather than just
being the right standard?
Because sometimes not even science does that.
Because what?
Because sometimes not even scientists does that.
Well, aren't they being bad scientists then?
Of course.
I mean, I don't know, maybe I'm wrong.
Like, Bopper?
He actually had a really extreme version where he said,
if you make a theory and it's shown a single time to be
wrong, then your whole theory is wrong.
This is pretty silly because people make mistakes in labs.
So no one really actually throws out a theory
because one human being claims they found a mistake
in the theory once.
Yeah, you might have seen that.
So if you're curious more, so Tetlock
puts a lot of work into coming up with how would you go and see
whether someone's right or not.
So you want to start off with unambiguous questions
so we can get a definite reading about whether someone's right
or wrong.
And then, of course, you want to do a lot of questions
so you don't just say you're wrong
once so you don't know what you're talking about.
Because anyone can make it have bad luck, right?
So you want to have a larger sample of questions
so we can see what your overall accuracy is.
And so if you read further, there's
something called the Brewer score
that you could use to go and basically adjust
for the difficulty of the question, things like that.
Yes?
You had a question?
Pardon me.
No, that's good.
OK.
All right.
All right, so anyway, so sometimes the price
of rationality is high.
Like when someone says, hi, hey, let's go bet your house.
Sounds like fun.
Let's bet your house.
All right.
Yeah, when I did have my 10 to 1 bet against Tyler,
he would only bet his $10 into my 1.
I did want to raise the stakes considerably.
But he was not amenable to that.
All right.
Anyway, so possibly you'll consume it all.
It doesn't have to be.
But maybe when the price is high enough,
then you'll be a totally calm, reasonable person.
Maybe you will be a Vulcan in an area
where a lot is on the line.
But on the other hand, when the price is low,
that's where you'd expect that people would become irrational,
especially if there's a lot of emotion that's
attached to the belief.
I mean, like what kind of emotion?
Like when someone dies, what would make them feel a lot
better?
Obviously, the person was just alive.
They can feel better.
But what would make them feel better
if you can't actually resurrect them for real?
Then say, well, they're alive in an afterlife.
That makes people feel better.
And you notice there's a whole lot of religions
that have doctrines like this.
Doesn't mean they're wrong, but it's a little suspicious.
People believe usually exactly what they kind of hope.
So people believe to be true what they hope to be true.
And notice, those are very different things.
I hope I'm the world's smartest man, but I don't believe.
That's Robin.
OK, so another thing that I think of in this concept,
so say I'm racist against Mexicans, right?
And I vote for a border wall, but I still
go eat in Mexican restaurants.
Yes, sure.
So that's another example.
Yeah, that'd be good.
So we haven't quite gotten there yet.
Yeah, sure.
We'll check.
Yes.
And to be fair, someone could say, well, look,
Mexicans have ruined our country, but they've got good food.
And as long as they're ruining our country,
I'm going to eat the food.
Right?
But the reason I would say a better standard
is someone saying, Mexicans ruined this country,
and then they live in an area with lots of Mexicans.
And it's like, well, if you think they're so terrible,
why don't you move to Idaho?
It's like, well, I shouldn't have to.
Yeah, I'm not saying you should have to.
I'm saying that if your own view were right, you would want to.
You would already have done it.
You haven't.
So you don't really believe what you think you believe.
What do you say you believe?
Or at least you believe it very superficially.
It's a very shallow thing.
The cost isn't high enough.
Yes.
So actually, we should move on, Sarah,
so we can get to our last topics.
OK.
All right, so anyway, so when the cost is very low,
you expect people to consume more.
And when the rationality is completely free,
then you might expect people to just
believe whatever crazy nonsense makes them feel best,
whatever that might be, right now.
Now, remember what we said about the probability sizeness before?
Approximately zero.
So what is the actual cost to you
of having some crazy political views?
Well, suppose you go and vote for the opposite of everything
you want.
What generally happens to you?
Nothing.
Nothing.
Well, the same thing that would have happened to you anyway.
Right, yeah.
Stuff happens to you after elections.
The problem is that the same thing
would have happened to you regardless of what you did.
Regardless of how you voted.
So if you could vote for the opposite of what you want
and the same thing would happen anyway,
then you could obviously turn your common sense dial down
to zero.
Turn it down to zero.
And for every single political thing,
just go and get hysterical, right, and get angry,
and start screaming.
And you'll end with wish fulfillment
at the highest level of thinking that the world works exactly
the way that you want it to work.
So you like the minimum wage?
Well, then that must be the labor demand elasticity is
which one, high or low?
Quick, think fast.
All right, now this is one where it's
funny because what do people know
about labor demand elasticity?
It's whatever it needs to be to make the minimum wage not
have a discipline effect.
That's whatever it might be.
I don't know.
High, low, I don't know.
That I don't know.
What I know is that everything's fine.
Why?
Because I like it.
Because I like it.
And what about something you agree with?
Same thing there.
So I'm a big advocate of drug legalization.
But whenever drug legalization advocates say,
the laws just don't work.
People still use drugs.
The stupidest thing you could possibly say.
The laws against murder don't work
because there's still murder.
Isn't the relevant thing the change?
You don't know how much use there
would be if the drugs were legal, do you?
How many studies have you ever read on what
the actual elasticity of drug demand is?
None.
Why?
Because they're using fantasy to decide what elasticity's are.
It's like, how do I want the law to work?
Well, then that's how it works.
So yeah.
So when you get to the point where
people that agree with you are every bit as embarrassing
as people that disagree with you,
then you have reached a high Teplock level
of intellectual purity.
Might have made a few tons of it.
But you will be proudly alone staring
in the mirror saying, the person who looks back at me
is a rational human being.
I am a Vulcan.
A lonely, but rational human being.
All right, so given the typical probability
to actually change the outcome of election,
it essentially locks down the cost of political beliefs
at zero.
And therefore, people go to the intersection.
And then we get the front page of the newspaper.
We get Facebook.
We get Twitter.
We get Twitter.
To a person who has read Teplock,
it's just a giant display of disgraceful, horrible
cognition on all sides.
Of course, if you don't agree with me,
that's what it looks like to me.
It's like, disgraceful.
It's like, this is terrible.
I don't care whether you agree with me or not.
This is not how a human being learns anything
by getting angry at people.
If you really wanted to learn stuff,
you might try being really nice to people who disagree with you.
What's the benefit of being really nice to people
who disagree with you?
They will want to do what with you?
Talk to you.
And when they talk to you, they might tell you
something that you don't already know.
And then you could learn things.
And so on.
You have to go follow William Shatner with this.
All right, so the expected price of voter rationality
is basically zero.
So we should not be surprised if voters hold highly
irrational beliefs.
That can be surprising otherwise.
And remember the empirical work that I did on systematically
biased police-fed economics?
To me, this seems very nicely consistent with it.
So we get stupid economic policies
because voters have stupid economic beliefs.
And yet, when they're actually acting on their own behalf,
their views are very different.
How many times did voters say, it
doesn't matter what it costs.
We should just do what's right?
How many people consumes on this basis?
How many?
You do?
Why would economists not be rational?
So that is a very good question.
So of course, one possibility is they are.
Another possibility is that economists
are the small subset of people who
have tried to calm down and have a fruitful conversation
about these issues.
And while we fall far short of perfection,
still we're doing a lot better than other people.
That seems normally true to me.
So even when I talk to economists
who have big political disagreements,
normally they don't say things like, well, let's see.
Oh, yes.
You might even think this is far outside of economics,
but it's not really.
All people are equally attractive.
What?
Because there's somebody for everyone,
so that makes everyone equal.
It doesn't.
But anyway, so when I talk to economists
with very different views, then they're like, duh.
Of course it's ridiculous.
So we can have a conversation about 1,000 things
we agree are ridiculous that normal people would believe.
So that is my big story.
Oh, yeah, Sonia does this slightly distracted.
So it's very common for voters to respond
to rhetoric along the lines of, we will pay any price,
bear any cost.
But if you were to go and try to sell someone
bananas on that basis, it's like,
how much do these bananas cost?
It doesn't matter what the bananas cost.
Bananas from like potassium, they
are important to a childhood.
All right, no thanks.
So when you're spending your own money, cost always matters.
But somehow when voters are spending taxpayer money,
that cost does not matter.
And why do people say that?
Even it sounds really good to say it doesn't matter.
It is like believing that when you die,
you're not really dead, and that everyone
gets to be back with their families again,
and in happiness for eternity one day.
Which could be true, but it sure sounds like just what
people want to believe.
Sounds like what you hope is true.
And the pets, will your dogs be there?
Definitely.
All your beloved pets will be there in heaven.
They don't go to dog heaven, a segregated heaven.
It wouldn't be heaven if your pet dog wasn't there.
Not the mean dogs.
They're somewhere else.
Now, rationality as political evolution.
We got to the level of being slightly rational,
but we'll do it.
So you may have noticed a pure technical tone to many things
that I've said about people's beliefs,
and I will confess, as guilty as charged,
I am a puritan on these matters.
But as an economist, we don't just
count the pure technical pleasures,
we count the assorted pleasures as well.
And what this means is that if we
say that people enjoy believing that perfectionism is great,
then that enjoyment gets counted as a social gain.
But this doesn't mean an additional outcome.
Why?
This is a case where voters get the full psychological benefit
of their rationality, but they pay only an infinitesimal
fraction of the cost.
So basically, each voter is subconsciously thinking,
I can believe whatever I feel like,
and it won't really change the outcome.
Just like when an environmentalist drives.
Subconsciously saying, yeah, well, it's
really a shame that we got global warming,
but I need to go and get to Marshalls to buy some clothes.
So that's just what's going to happen.
Now, if enough voters rely on systematically biased beliefs
to decide how to vote, then disastrous policies
can be adopted.
Then you might say, see, there is a cost.
But remember, is there a marginal cost?
Like, suppose you voted against Hitler in 1933.
What did you get?
Hitler.
So what good did it actually do for you
to go and vote against him?
It could have labeled you an enemy.
Yes.
In fact, if anything, you're actually
risking your own neck.
Maybe you'll be found out.
But the key thing is that everyone in Germany
went and suffered because he won that election.
I have a longstanding debate with Pete Betke about this.
Pete is often said, Brian, you think
that we get the government we deserve.
I said, no, Pete.
I think that we get the government they deserve.
Very different.
We deserve great government.
But we don't get it.
And again, it's the same logic of just
like all voters can be better off if they all polluted less,
all voters can be better off if they were more rational,
if they started more common sense.
And yet if one person unilaterally changes,
what happens?
They are inconvenienced or burdened
or they don't get the psychological enjoyment,
but the outcome doesn't change.
So you think about, say, protectionism.
The usual public choice story about protectionism
is just that there's special interests that
are ripping off the public.
The big puzzle here is that protectionism is super popular.
Most people are protectionists.
So my story is that people like blaming foreigners
for economic troubles.
It is fun.
It's enjoyable.
It's pleasant.
Who do they not like?
Who would not be fun to blame for our troubles?
Like veterans.
Someone said, you know who's really screwing America?
Veterans.
The children.
Yeah, the children screw up America.
Or how about like the elderly?
Elderly Americans.
Now, the elderly one, that's like if any group is screwing
up America, it's the elderly.
But nevertheless, what kind of a human being
would say such a thing?
Yes?
I would blame the elderly.
Yeah.
But what kind of human being would say what you and I just
said?
A mean, horrible, terrible, rotten, un-American human
being.
All right, I think people don't want to be that.
On the other hand, what kind of American
would say that China is ruining America?
A patriot.
A patriot would say that.
OK.
All right.
And then empirical sports.
So again, if you go through the data that I presented,
the public is much more pessimistic about foreign trade
than economists are for everything else.
But you see, the real puzzle is why
is a policy a lot more redactionist than it is?
One response is 2016 is the world catching up
to equilibrium.
I'm still not convinced.
You know, like 20% chance of that.
But in like action, so it was already a year ago
there was rumors out of Trump's going to pull out a NAFTA.
And I'm like, wait, the president
can just pull out a NAFTA?
Doesn't he need Congress for that?
No.
No, they didn't know that.
All right.
And I looked up, yeah, actually, that's true.
But anyway, so made some threats,
and then nothing happened.
Really not much.
OK.
And now we come to my critique of Whitman.
All right, so I'd say, actually, on two out of three,
I think he scores some very good points.
So yeah, it's like saying that democracy is a big monopoly
and the parties are actually in collusion with each other.
So it's pretty silly.
Like, it's one thing to say there's not much competition
for dog catcher or something like that.
But for like important issues, there
are armies of people who are desperate for power
and would do almost anything to get it.
So they're competing.
They're competing through by hook or by crook,
with any method they can get their hands on.
Like, what would it take before they would say,
oh, no, it's too far.
Too far.
All right, so the monopoly story doesn't seem,
it seems very weak.
And again, this high transactions cost one,
I think Whitman makes some very good points there.
It's just a matter of high transactions cost one.
We just say, all right, fine.
Let's go and bundle a bunch of policies
together to get the transactions cost down.
Or let's go and delegate more power
to a smaller number of people to overcome the transactions cost.
And I say, this is the one where Whitman is totally wrong,
which ruins the rest of his arguments, which
is that the key actors in his model of the voters
are nothing like what he talks about.
They're not people with rational expectations.
They're not people who just have a problem with ignorance.
They're people who turn the common sense dial down
to near zero.
And when you do that, then you get endless nonsense.
So Tyler would point out that's a little bit,
that's hyperbole two.
It's not endless.
High levels of nonsense.
But technically, endless just means that it hasn't ended yet.
So I don't think, and also a prediction
that it's not going to end.
The nonsense will continue.
50 years from now, if you're still alive
and you open a newspaper, you think everything will,
it'll be online, but whatever, a hologram.
But anyway, whatever the technology is,
when you read the stories, it's going
to be people arguing about stupid stuff
with ridiculous arguments.
Right?
So 50 years, there'll probably still
be hungry children in the world, but people
arguing about someone being offensive to it.
That's what people want to argue about.
That's what you think is important.
This is the way you think you acquire truth,
is by getting angry at people for offending you.
So what I say is Whitman's right that the main public choice
arguments assume extreme voter stupidity.
But that's fine.
That's fine.
We should assume extreme voter stupidity,
because voters are extremely stupid.
Or to be precise, like my dad, even smart voters
act very stupid in politics, because they're
turning the common sense dial down to a very low level.
So when my dad is doing business,
he is cold as a cucumber.
But when it's politics, then it's
like, I'm really angry about something
that I heard about today.
You're like, not a thing I'm angry about.
And it's something that's got to be done about it.
And you're like, you're so weird.
He's angry that an engineer in California
can't afford a good house.
He's not upset about high price of housing in general.
An engineer should be entitled to a good house.
My dad was an engineer, so he was a beaver about the proper hierarchy of the world.
I was tempted to say, well, what should be done for this engineer?
Should there be a program to give sub-slave houses to engineers?
They're like, what are you talking about?
I know he said, yeah, you should let people build more houses.
No, you should let there be more traffic.
Well, what do you want from me?
Anyway, even smart people lose their intelligence, they lose lots of IQ points when they deliberate on political and non-questions.
They approach them in this very religious way.
And so I say voter rationality is two things.
It's plausible in theory because the cost is so low, and when we go and just do very simple tests, we can see huge amounts of it.
So, looking pretty good.
Now, Whitman likes to go and offer a challenge to critics, and he says, tell me the asymmetry between politics and markets.
Why aren't they basically just two different ways that people get what they want?
With similar efficiency properties.
Why would it be that shopping for policies is worse than shopping for groceries?
And my answer there is there's a big asymmetry, which is incentives for rationality.
So in markets, people at least try to use some common sense.
They don't know everything, in fact they often know very little, but at least there's common sense.
Normally.
And not forgetting, but for other stuff.
So I'm not saying common sense is always operative, but in general, consumers have common sense, and I do play the game when I go to the grocery store,
of just eavesdropping on people talking.
Even people who I think would do terribly on economics exam,
they're very subtle comparisons, saying this one looks better, but you get more per ounce.
If you only look at it like that, you only look at the more expensive, but you get more per ounce this way, so actually it's cheaper.
Or saying yes, this one is ten cents more per ounce, but the quality is much better and it lasts longer.
Comparisons that are so much more thoughtful than anything they would ever make for any government policy.
I mean, I can't imagine a person like this saying, look, the Iraq war was better for Iraq, but worse for Syria.
You never hear an old person say, make a distinction that fine or subtle.
You might say, that's not that fine or subtle. Exactly.
But just to get to that level, of saying, look, three out of the seven affected countries are worse off.
I think that's a good deal, because those are lower population countries.
What kind of person would say such a thing?
And yet it's a totally reasonable point to make.
So anyway, markets ignorant actors are still at least trying to do the best with what they've got.
In politics, they scarcely try.
So in markets, if someone says, I have a great idea, I can't really explain it to you, but give me all your money,
and you'll find out how great it is after I get your money.
You will say, no, no money.
In politics, if someone says, hey, I want a trillion dollars, I'm going to fix the health care system, it's going to be great, trust me.
You'll find out how it works later.
Okay, yeah, sounds like a good deal.
No, it doesn't.
I refuse, that does not sound like the kind of pitch that would win over a reasonable person.
What, do you want children to die?
No, I guess I have to do whatever you say, because I don't want children to die.
Your plan.
And then I go on and say, this rational rationality story explains why, contrary to Whitman,
you can't go and fix society by mailing your articles to politicians.
You know what happens when they get it.
Say, will this help me keep and gain power?
No, throw it away, who needs it?
What's the point?
Rather, politicians cater their prejudices, they don't try to educate them,
and voters like candidates who share their confusions, they don't want patents for real life.
So now, let's quickly go over and talk about the test.
Main things to know about the test.
First of all, it is cumulative.
You're responsible for everything we've done in the class.
It will be weighted towards the second half, so about one-third for before the midterm, two-thirds after.
I like to do questions that have a little piece from each part of the class combined.
So I think those are fun, and see whether you really understand the material.
The book, the final, is still open book and open notes.
So remember that.
The best way to study is still to take all exams under time pressure.
So we recommend that.
In terms of the content, again, still basically the same as before, roughly 50% from lecture, 30% from homework, 20% from readings.
Remember there are readings.
You are free to read the readings.
That's perfectly fine.
But you cannot use an electronic device, because that could put you into contact with someone else.
So not allowed.
You may print your hard drive if you want.
You may read a dictionary, any books, anything you want, all fine.
Let's see.
Anything else to know about it?
Yes, and then, you know, so I will be around.
I'm sorry, I'm going to go to the notes.
I'll be around the notes.
So most days I will be around.
So you can start by the office, or you can email me to make sure that I'm going to be around for questions.
I'm happy to be able to give people guidance on questions.
I won't write full answer keys for all exams.
But if you, certainly if you go and try and send me your answer, I will tell you whether you're on the right track.
And if you're also just saying, I'm hopelessly stumped, I don't know where to start, I will take pity and find you a job.
I will take pity and find you a start here.
Yes?
Two hours for the length for this one?
So I'm 95% sure that's correct.
Yes, actually, hold on.
In my calendar I have the correct time.
So if I check the calendar, it will say.
Yes, two hours, exactly.
So our 720 to 2.
Oh, actually, hold on.
There's one error there.
Actually, the final start is 730, don't they?
So let me change that, actually.
So yes, it would be 730 to 930, not 720.
There's a weird thing where final goes from 730 to 1015, but you will stop working at 930.
Probably a few people would get anything right in the last 45 minutes anyway, a marginal 27.
Anyway, you want more time for the question than you did on the chart.
Let's see, other questions?
So let me just email myself that blank slide.
Good.
All right.
So other questions about the structure of the test?
Questions about the structure?
Yes?
So it would be, are you going to have similar length?
Yeah, yeah, very similar length, same length.
So if you look at final exams in the last few years, it will be the same length as this.
If you go back many years, there used to be longer exams, but no one seemed to want longer exams.
So I figured why make them longer.
Let's see, other questions about the contents of the structure of the exam, the purifying questions?
All right, everyone happy with that part?
All right, let's see.
And I've got time for one substantive question about anything we've done in this class.
This is obviously not your only chance.
Yes?
I was looking over, again, if you're just the systemic bias that these people have,
and, you know, like the anti-market bias.
But it also seemed that people had an anti-government bias.
It seemed that they were more pessimistic about taxes, more pessimistic about deficits, more pessimistic about regulations.
And I think it was the fourth one by Cameron.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But so do those cancel out or is it?
Yeah, yeah, I mean, like those are fair points.
And, again, like so, like in the write-up, I acknowledge those as the other guys.
So, again, I think of those as reflecting pessimism rather than being anti-government.
So, again, the normal reaction people have is, so there should be less government.
That's not a normal reaction.
It's more just like, you know, we're not getting the government we pay for.
But, again, like it would be very usual for someone to say, therefore, let's go and give them less money because they're wasting it.
But, yeah, so, I mean, I think it would be, you know, so I don't know if anyone has actually bothered to go and flesh out that argument.
But when I was writing it, I was thinking, yeah, that could be someone who thought a reasonable argument.
Someone could be someone I think.
Again, like ultimately, I just, I don't think so, but maybe.
Yeah, so, you know, there's, so, yeah, so I guess I'll just leave it there.
It's a very good point.
Someone could definitely do something with that.
All right, so, again, I went around to take your questions through all formats.
And, so, the exam is, of course, on, let's see, what day is it?
Monday the 14th.
Monday the 14th.
So, that will be the last time we get together.
But, of course, don't be strangers.
And if you like today's lecture, then sign up for Miller Choice.
Roger Miller Choice.
