We were going over preference heterogeneity.
I was talking a bit about my paper
on personality in economics.
So does anyone here have a personality?
All right.
There was a period in the 60s when personality psychology
fell out of favor in psychology.
And there was a common view that personality was a myth.
Based upon some experiments where
it was very hard to predict people's behavior.
And then finally people noticed that there was just
a lot of randomness if you just take
a larger number of observations and average them
and as you'd expect, there were in fact personalities
that people have.
It is kind of amazing to me that someone would ever doubt that.
So there are many things that personality psychology
sheds some light on, or so I argue,
sheds a lot of light on occupational choice.
So whatever stereotypes you have about what personalities
tend to be in what occupations are very likely to be true.
So salesmen are extroverts.
Librarians are introverts.
Very true.
You've got a ranking about 500 occupations,
salesmen will be very near the top.
Librarians will be very near the bottom for extroversion.
Then you have things like the trait of agreeableness,
where you'll see that people involved in say,
preschool education tend to be highly agreeable people.
Like they're nice.
On the other hand, economists tend
to have very low agreeableness.
We're nice in our own way, but not considered nice
by a great many people.
There's also Alan Blander's book, Hardhead Soft Hearts,
which is interesting.
So Hardhead Soft Hearts.
The book is interesting because he is playing off
a stereotype, which is that either you've
got a hard head and a hard heart,
or you've got a soft head and a soft heart.
And what personality psychology says
is that there is, in fact, a large gender
to gender correlation.
So people who think logically also just
tend to be very cold.
On the other hand, people who care about people
don't care very much about the best way to do it.
Which is a bad word to live in, but that's our world.
So of course, there's no rule that you can't be both.
But on average, this is, in fact, what we see in the data.
And it might also explain why it is
that people don't trust or people are overly logical,
because they seem like they don't care.
Would you want Mr. Spock to be a preschool teacher?
Well, on one hand, he's very accurate in assessing facts.
But on the other hand, if a child died,
you say, well, Captain, 10,000 children died today.
Why is this one any different from any other?
That kind of reasoning would not be
someone you would probably want to have as a child care
provider, I think.
And then things like writers tend
to be high in openness, policemen
tend to be low in openness.
Let's see, four.
And then another one is the trait that
is called conscientiousness is a general predictor
of good job performance.
If you've ever taken the Myers-Briggs test,
there's the trait of judging versus perceiving.
This is essentially trying to cover up some ugly truths
with some misleading names.
Judging equals conscientious.
Perceiving equals not conscientious.
What jobs do you want the not conscientious people for?
Really, you would just rather avoid them if you could.
Of course, they're fantastic friends.
I love my unconscious people that I know.
In fact, conscientious people can be quite boring.
If you have concert tickets for the last minute,
don't call your conscientious friends.
They will say they have to work or they have to study.
They can't come.
But if you're avoiding people, then you probably
want the people who don't jump at the opportunity
to see a concert on a weeknight at the last minute.
Then there's also been work on things
like the personalities of criminals.
And these are some very obvious yet interesting results.
So criminals tend to have very low conscientiousness
and very low agreeableness.
So they are mean, lazy, defiant people who don't follow rules.
Not so surprising.
But in a way, what really was surprising
is that you can go and take measures of these traits
from fairly young ages and then predict outcomes decades later.
So there's a paper that looks at personality tests that are,
these are paper and pencil tests.
You just fill out a form that you take around the age of 18.
And then they see what you can predict when people are 30
or 40 or 50.
And you can predict a lot of stuff.
You can predict divorce.
Who are the people who get divorced?
Let's see.
Yeah, it looks like you've got a few.
Oh, I'm going to guess people who aren't conscientious.
Yes, low conscientious people get a little.
The conscientious people tend to have higher divorce rates,
noticeably so.
Right people follow the rules and expectations
and don't consider everything a special, exceptional circumstance
that doesn't, so the rules don't apply to them.
They tend to stay married more.
Agreeable people tend to stay married more.
People who are just nicer.
And also people who are less neurotic.
People who just have fewer negative emotions,
they also tend to stay married longer.
You can use it to correct suicide.
So there's lots of things you can do with these tests.
Can they explain everything?
No.
Let's see, what's another field that can't explain everything?
Which one?
Let's see.
We may have some shared interest in this field.
Economics.
Economics, yes, also can't explain everything.
OK.
So anyway, so preferences only explain everything,
and the preferences are not equally measured.
Now, since I wrote this piece, one Nobel laureate in economics
has gotten very interesting personality,
that's James Heckman.
And he's written many papers, co-authored
with lots of other people.
I think it's possible that James Heckman has single-handedly,
well, that's the only way to do it,
but papers with James Heckman as one of the authors
probably constitute 80% of all papers in economics
on the subject.
But he's been doing very well publishing
on this theme, which paves the way for others.
He never cites me, but of course, what matters
is that the ideas live.
It doesn't matter if I get credit, right?
So questions about personality.
Plenty more to do here.
Economists still don't have that much interest
in the general topic.
One thing that's closely related,
so I was doing a bunch of erruptions on crime.
So in the National Longitudinal Study of Youth,
they actually have administrative data
on whether you were in prison when they interviewed you.
And they track people down.
So they hunt you down, and then if they find you in prison,
they go and code you was in prison when interviewed.
So we've got actual administrative data
on when you're in prison.
And then they also had a bunch of self-reported information
about your behavior in junior high and high school.
Key thing, the behavior in junior high and high school
was reported when you were in junior high or high school.
And then decades later, we come back
to see whether we can predict how many years you spent
in jail based upon your behavior as a child
or as an adolescent.
And it turns out those behavioral measures
are the best predictors that exist of adult criminality.
Still hardly perfect, but predictors like,
did you ever use marijuana?
When did you start using it?
Have you ever had sex?
When did you start having sex?
Have you run away from home?
Why did you run away from home?
Have you ever been suspended from school?
When were you first suspended at school?
We put all this stuff in of just general defiant behavior,
which you may say the behavior's great, but I'm just a messenger.
This behavior predicts other stuff.
Doesn't mean it causes it.
Again, once you take personality seriously,
the obvious story is there are some people who
are just defiant people who don't want to follow rules.
And they tend to break a lot of minor rules
when they're in adolescence.
And then in adulthood, they tend to break more serious rules
and then end up in prison, sometimes for a long time.
All right, so questions about that?
Yes?
Is there any research about cultural influences
on personality?
Because I hear the pieces a lot about the Scotch-Irish people
who live in Kentucky, West Virginia,
just fighting and being defiant and things like that.
Right, right.
So there's a very well-known paper
by two of the best-known personality researchers
who claim that these cultural stereotypes are
one of the few stereotypes about personality that aren't true.
Although, here's a key thing.
These are all sub-eo.
These personality measures are always self-reported.
So if you are reporting relative to what your culture is like,
then this will actually mask all effects,
which could still be there.
So sort of the amazing thing is that usually it
works really well, despite the tendency of people
to rate themselves relative to some subgroup.
For example, are stereotypes about gender and personality
work, even though it's probably reasonable to think
that men are rating themselves kind of compared
to other male personalities, women
are kind of rating themselves compared
to other female personalities.
So whatever group differences you see are probably bigger,
and probably noticeably bigger, than what's reported.
Because if people do report themselves relative to a base,
and of course, this is also true for things like happiness.
So for example, you see East Asians
tend to report low happiness.
Now if, especially, this is clear,
it's actually in East Asia.
But anyway, so a Japanese report being unusually unhappy,
considering how rich they are.
Now if people in Japan measure their happiness compared
to other Japanese people, and if Japanese people in general
aren't very happy, then the fact that we
see this difference in happiness might say they're really
unhappy.
And Latin America is exactly the opposite.
Latin Americans say they're really happy,
especially if you go and adjust for income.
Then wow, they're so happy down there, despite everything.
And then if there's some kind of a cultural adjustment
where you look around and you see,
well, I'm only smiling half the time,
normal people smile 3 quarters of the time.
Then you might go and say, I'm pretty happy,
when if someone from that person in Latin America were in Japan,
they might consider themselves super happy.
All right.
So moving on then.
But plenty more to do on this stuff, certainly.
And Heckman has been the icebreaker for future research
in a way that I have not been.
So you can follow in Heckman's wake
and do it better than he did.
And honestly, in some ways, it wouldn't be that hard.
So I have looked at some of his data.
And I'm just going to say, basically,
he's done a lot of work with the National Longitudinal
Study of Youth.
And he looked at two particular areas.
He did the National Longitudinal Study of Youth, and he looked
at two particular variables, which, as far as I've seen,
are some of the least predictive variables in personality
that we're seeing.
And he does some very fancy techniques
to sort of squeeze a little bit of prediction
out of some highly unpredictable variables.
But there's much better data sets out there that say more.
And even in the National Longitudinal Study of Youth,
we have all these adolescent behavior measures,
which you can think of as being kind of like personality.
All right.
So moving on.
Expect-utility anomalies.
So remember, expect-utility theory
puts some definite restrictions on choice under uncertainty.
Many of these have been experimentally falsified.
So even though the theory says that people
act in a certain way under uncertainty,
we put their actual tests, and they confidently do not.
So one of them is people seem to be risk averse over utility
rather than wealth.
So remember the way that we actually
model risk aversion in the expect-utility framework.
We do something like utility equals square root of wealth.
Remember, that indicates what kind of a utility function?
Risk averse, risk neutral, risk preferring?
Risk averse.
Risk averse.
It's a risk averse utility function, right?
So the way that expect-utility theory thinks about risk
aversion is that you're risk averse over your wealth states.
But in experiments, you can ask people things like, well,
suppose you could either have a happiness of 10.
I'm trying to get people to do it correctly.
You either have a happiness of 10 with a 70% chance,
or happiness of 5, but otherwise 0.
Or you have a happiness of 5 for sure.
Which one would we take?
Well, we'd do it 0.7 times 10 plus 0.3 times 0 equals 0.7.
And then 1 times 0.5, that could be your happiness, equals 0.5.
So under expect-utility theory, every person
would choose a 70% chance of being super happy
with a 30% chance of being super miserable.
But in practice, people seem to have risk aversion over that,
too.
And even very local risk aversion,
where people want to be sure that they'll
be pretty happy each day.
Well, what if on this one day, you
had a 70% chance of having a great day,
but a 30% chance of having a bad day,
or we could have a mediocre day for sure?
A lot of people will say I have a mediocre day for sure,
even if based on their own rankings,
it seems like their average would be higher
if they took the gamble.
All right, so people seem risk averse over utility,
not just wealth.
People often seem risk averse relative
to a reference point.
Risk averse relative to a reference point.
So for example, suppose that Bill Gates plays a low stakes
game of poker.
There's a lot of experimental evidence that at least most
people, maybe not Bill Gates, we don't know about him.
He has better things to do than me in his experiments.
But most people, even though they're billionaires,
will do things like betting cautiously
to avoid losing money, which in expect-utility theory
makes almost no sense, especially
if that same very rich person bets a billion dollars every day
in the stock market and is losing tens of millions
or gaining tens of millions of dollars every day
without even caring.
But then in this game of poker, it's like, oh my god,
I can't lose.
I can't lose this game of poker where you're
paying for a dollar a hand.
And this resonates a lot with me because the older I get,
the more people I know who have plenty of money,
and yet I still see these people getting really worried
about getting a parking ticket for $20 and things like that.
Like, you gamble with money, it was sums of money way bigger
than this all the time.
But it's like, well, I just don't
want to have to be out of pocket on this ticket.
But you're spending $100 worth of time
in order to avoid a ticket that, in the worst case scenario,
might well cost you half that.
It's like, well, yeah, but I don't
want to be out of pocket, this mentality.
And again, what does even that phrase, out of pocket, mean?
It's not really well-defined in normal economic terms, right?
I don't want to be out of pocket.
What does that mean?
Well, out of pocket means relative to a reference point,
where I have a certain amount of starting money,
and it would just be terrible if I ended up
with any amount of money less than that.
Now, another thing.
So remember how I was telling you
that in expense-utility theory, the way that things work
is you go and you take probabilities,
and you multiply them by outcomes.
So probability times utility of the outcome.
And what that means is that the difference
between a 2% probability and a 1% probability
is no different than a 1% probability and a 0%
probability.
In the real world, it often doesn't work this way.
In the real world, people pay a lot more
to go from 1% to 0% than they do to go from 2% to 1%.
And there's plenty of people that will pay basically nothing
to go from 2% to 1%, but will pay a ton to go from 1 to 0.
There's contraband expense-utility theory.
So again, think about if your odds of dying of cancer
were $2, in the next 10 years, we're 2%.
How much would you pay to bring it down to 1?
I don't know.
$100, $100.
But then, suppose you got your source at 1%.
You could bring it down to nothing.
That's when people might actually
max out their credit card to go and get rid of it.
And would it matter if you spent time
going into all the gruesome details of how bad cancer is?
I think it would matter a lot more for that one
than for that one, if you give them all the horrors of it.
But then they'll say, well, 2% to 1%,
but I could still have all those horrible things,
so what's the point of paying all that money?
Whereas 1% to 0%, well, then none of that could happen to me,
so it's worth a lot of money.
But in each case, you're reducing a horrible thing
by 1 percentage point.
So in terms of the logic-expense-utility theory,
those two things would be equally valuable to you,
but that's not how people act.
And if you just think about the way that public policy makes
these ridiculous efforts to go from a really small probability
down to zero, which they can't even do,
but they can pretend to do so.
So worry about getting the risk of terrorism
down from its incredibly small level to zero.
How many trillions are spent in this futile effort?
Well, many trillions, when you add it all up over the years.
All right.
So and then, last one.
So the LA paradox, this is one that you
get to do to prove on your homework.
But I'll just go and give you the original numbers
and probabilities to give you an idea about what
you're going to be proving.
All right, so associated with Nobel laureate,
I think actually Creole found it.
I think he did actually come up with these exact numbers
as well, the paradox.
Maurice LA won the Nobel Prize, I think actually partly
for this.
So imagine you got the following choices of gambles.
So you've got 27,500 with probability 0.33.
You've got 24,000 with probability 0.66.
And then you've got zero with probability 0.01.
So that's the first possible gamble.
And then second possible gamble is 24,000 probability 1.
So you have to choose one of these two gambles.
So which one do you think a large majority of people pick?
24,000.
Yeah, 24,000.
That is the popular pick.
I think at least 2 to 1.
Then we've got another possibility.
Suppose we have 27,500 with probability 0.33.
We've got $0 with probability 0.67.
Let's see, that's gamble one.
And then gamble two is 24,000 with probability 0.34.
And then, let's see, 0.34.
And then, let's see, where were we?
Hold on.
Yeah, 24,000 with probability 0.34.
And then 0 with probability 0.66.
So that's your other possibility.
And then you're choosing between these two ones.
Now, for these two ones, which one does a large majority
people pick?
First one.
Yeah, the first one.
Now, if you're paying attention, it
sure seems like this has a lot to do with this thing here,
where people are really valuing going down from a 1% chance
to a 0% chance of something.
But they don't care very much if they go from a 34% versus a 33%
chance of something.
And that's right.
Now, using expected utility theory,
and you will do this on homework,
you can prove that if expected utility theory were true,
everybody would either do, let's see,
everyone would either do a second,
everyone would either want both of these or both of these.
And no one would do this one and that one.
But in fact, about a third of people
want to do this one and that one, which is weird.
Or just shows the expected utility theory is wrong.
And again, intuitively, I think you can pretty well
see what's going on, where there's a 1% chance of nothing?
Oh my god, that's terrible.
I've got to get rid of that 1% chance.
That's so terrible.
So OK, fine, I'll just 24,000.
That's pretty much as good as 2,700.
OK, good.
It's absolutely sure everything's going to be good.
All right.
Now, over here, this one is like, oh my god.
Well, I'm probably going to get nothing either way, right?
But this one, I just give a yi-yi-yi-yi-yi-yi-yi-yi-yi-yi.
So probably nothing either way, but just a 1% chance more.
of getting nothing and then I can get a way better price.
So you'll get to prove this yourself,
but that is the LA paradox.
All right, questions?
Yes?
When you say choose, I mean, is it,
in what sense is it choose like this?
So normally these are hypothetical responses
where they just say if you have a choice of these two,
which one do you want, choice of these two, which one do you want.
It is used literature, so I don't know
if any actual experiment where they're giving people 24,000
or $27,500.
So it seems like you could, I mean,
you do like all the experimental stuff.
If you took a few zeros off the end of it,
there would be a possibility to see where.
Yeah, so, I mean, like,
what's actually done experimentally is taking zeros
off and then redoing it.
And, you know, like, you do get this,
you do get the LA paradox.
I mean, like, in the course of the game, I mean,
it wouldn't surprise me if you could bring that,
bring this down to 27 and a half cents, 24 cents,
and still if people had two hours to play this game,
they'd be like, oh my God, I'm only with nothing?
Instead of 27 and a half cents?
So, I'm someone who plays a lot of games,
and I see people getting all worked up over losing a game
where there's no stakes at all.
I can't lose, can't lose.
I've seen people actually pay real money
to save their position in a game where there's no money involved.
It's like, I will pay you to go and move your unit there.
It's like 20 bucks.
Hmm. All right.
Okay. So, questions, questions?
Yes?
So, one of the books that mentioned
when he presented this is just be something
like a bombshell and nobody cared.
What he did present it, is it actually used anywhere?
Well, so, in risk analysis, like in the real,
when you're looking at how people assess risks,
then I don't know if they actually,
if they actually cite a lay, but the general point,
the people seem to put a lot of value in getting rid
of really tiny risks.
And also just the way that the rhetoric
of eliminating a risk appeals to people so much.
The way that you sell a warranty.
You say, look, you will have no danger at all.
Everything will be like,
you are guaranteed to have no liability.
It's like, well, what if you go out of business?
Well, then I guess you have a liability.
So, it's not really guaranteed, is it?
Well, it's guaranteed as long as you don't get a business.
It also means it's not really guaranteed.
So, there's, but the way that people try to frame things
in terms of you will have no possibility of anything wrong.
Think about the way that auto insurance companies
or not auto insurance, auto rental companies try to get you
to buy their insurance policy.
So, if you have your own insurance,
you can use that, right, normally.
But once you say that, the standard marketing technique
for a rental car agency is to say, what?
They ask you a question.
Does your policy have a blank?
Starts with a D.
Does your policy have a deductible?
And yeah, $500.
Well, our policy doesn't have a deductible.
So, you realize that if you get an exit,
you'd have to pay the deductible.
The very deductible I have to pay if I got
into an accident in my own car?
Yeah, I realize that.
So what? I mean, if I didn't want a deductible,
I wouldn't have bought a policy with a deductible
in the first place.
I mean, then I would go and have a policy
with no deductible all the time.
But you want me to go and get a deductible
for the next three days on the chance that I might have
to pay $500 while driving this car.
Exactly. Right?
And this, they use the sales technique all the time
in my experience.
I want to say half the time.
Half the time I turn down insurance.
They ask me whether I got a deductible and try
to sell me that way.
And I assume the reason why they use that sales pitch is
because it's the most effective one they got.
People are saying, you realize, so this way,
if you could crash the car, destroy it,
and you walk away, you don't know what to do.
All right.
But I could have bought a policy like that already,
and I didn't want it.
And why didn't you want it before?
Because it's more expensive.
And you know what?
Those, the policy that you're paying to the auto insurance
or to the rental car company is way more expensive per day
than an oil policy.
So it's especially crazy to do it.
And on top of it, does it really, does this really get rid
of all the risk of an auto accident, a rental car,
if you have a policy that covers all damages?
You could die.
You could be maimed.
They only have everybody to sell.
They aren't even really actually moving the risk
down from one to zero.
But they try to create the illusion of it
because people love that idea so much.
All right.
All right.
Yes, yes.
Although, you know, the very fact
that they are selling it to you suggests they've got some
actuaries and calculated the moral hazard
and they determine it's not that, no big deal at all compared
to the very high price per day that they are charging you.
All right.
So moving on.
All right.
One of the biggest results in behavioral economics
and one that behavioral economists never stop talking
about, hardly ever stop talking about,
is that people are loss averse.
Loss averse.
All right.
Now you may say, well isn't everyone loss averse?
Not in this technical sense.
Not in this technical sense.
So in particular, in basic consumer theory,
preferences and endowments are totally separate.
So you have a utility function which doesn't have any reference
to what, to your initial possessions.
All right.
But the idea of loss aversion, again in this technical sense,
is that losing something that you started with is worse
than never having had it at all.
That's the way loss aversion works.
So if you get a box of candy for your birthday and then you drop
it in the mud, you'll feel worse
than if you didn't get a present.
That's the idea.
You know, if you have an, if you,
if your car gets a nice new paint job
and then it gets scratched, you feel worse
than if you just didn't get the paint job
and the car was scratched all along.
All right.
So that's the idea.
And again, so loss doesn't mean that you don't,
it means that you don't like losing things
that you currently have.
In other words, your utility depends in part upon the match
between what you currently have
and what you think you ought to have or what you started with.
Okay. Which is again a pretty intuitive idea.
And if you know small children, this makes perfect sense.
Because, you know, as I think I mentioned,
but worth repeating, if you want a child to throw a tantrum,
a great thing to do is to give them something nice
and then let them play with it for an hour and then say, okay,
it's mine again.
Now it's mine again.
You lose it, you know, I'm taking it away from you.
And that kid will be way more miserable
than if the child had never given the thing.
If you want to reduce the risk of this,
there's no guarantees here, but if you want to reduce the risk,
you very clearly tell the child, this is my toy.
It belongs to me and to me alone.
But I'm going to be nice and allow you, a non-owner
of this good, to play with it for a small amount of time.
Then I'm going to ask for it back.
You must give it back to me.
If you complain, I will never give you anything
like this again.
Right? And then you reduce your risk of a tantrum from like 99%
down to maybe 40%.
All right?
So it's a big game, but still, like the whole sales pitch is
to try to convince the person that though they are playing
with the toy, it isn't their toy.
Yes?
This is one of the techniques of the stoics.
Good, yes, great analogy, the stoics and Epicure.
Things that are not in your control,
you identify as not your own.
Right, right, yes.
So if you have a cup that you love, you say, this is my cup.
It's going to break at some point.
Yeah, that's very good.
It's just here for a time.
And it's also very much in the philosophy of Epicurus.
So today, Epicure means someone
who really appreciates fine wine and stuff like that.
But Epicurus was nothing like that at all.
Epicurus was someone who advised everyone
to lower their expectations to the minimum level
so they'd be happy all the time.
Like every day, basically you expect, well,
every day you say, well, look, my expectation is
to not be horribly tortured today.
And every day it doesn't happen.
You're like, hey, this is fantastic.
It's all like I got way more than not being horribly tortured.
I had meals.
I had a conversation with friends.
I went for a pleasant stroll.
And so we get the same idea
where if you just make your expectations really low,
then they're easily met.
And then so much of happiness is not about absolute levels.
It's about disparities between what you think you're entitled
to and what you've actually got.
Okay. All right.
Anyway, this insight that people are loss aversion is the root
of the main theoretical innovation
of behavioral economics.
All right.
What do I mean by this?
I mean a new theory.
Normally, behavioral economists are just people poking holes
in the standard theory and saying, you know,
that theory doesn't work.
Ha ha. And there's another theory that doesn't work.
And another one.
It's got five different holes.
All right.
Now, it's easy to sit around poking holes in theories, right?
But much harder to come up with a new theory
that accurately describes the world.
Normally, behavioral economists just realize how hard that's
going to be if they don't do it.
But there is a theory that behavioral economists are well
associated with, which is called prospect theory,
where they actually do try to explain the data that they got.
And we're going to see how successful they are.
All right.
So prospect theory.
All right.
So the idea of prospect theory is that we get rid
of this regular old expected utility curve.
And notice, does that look kind of like that one?
Yes. All right.
So this is your usual risk-averse curve,
where if you go and draw a line between any two points,
the curve is above the lines,
indicating that people prefer a sure thing to a gamma.
Right? Indicating that if you could have the expected value
of this chord here, you would rather have the expected value
rather than take a probability of a certain chance of that,
a certain chance of that, which is the same average value.
Okay? All right.
Now, that's the normal thing.
What prospect theory does is get rid of that curve and replace it
with an NS-shaped curve.
So that's classic prospect theory.
What's so special about this curve?
All right.
Well, the idea here is that that is like your status quo point.
That is, so that point there is the status quo point.
So that's where you start off.
That's sort of like the amount of wealth that you take
for granted that you feel entitled to.
And then what it says is that for amounts of wealth above what
you take for granted, then you have normal risk aversion.
Right? You see how it is that same concave shape?
So it says that if you have a chance to get extra stuff,
if you have a chance of getting more stuff,
then you're risk-averse, and then you'd rather be certain
of getting the extra stuff, of getting an average
of the possibilities to take your chances.
But below the status quo point, below this point
where you define your expectations,
that is the other way around.
Here, at this point, you'd rather actually take the gamble.
You'd rather actually take the gamble.
So this says that if there is, that if you're, if there's a,
if you're going to lose money, you would rather go
and take a gamble where you have a chance of losing a ton of money
but another possibility of not losing anything,
versus just taking a, an average loss for sure.
So in prospect theory, you are risk-averse above the loss
point, but you are risk-preferring below the
loss point.
All right.
So what's the point of this?
Well, this is to say things like, well, sure,
when someone is going, has a chance of getting a game,
then they're going to want insurance,
then they want certainty.
On the other hand, for a loss, people will take big chances
because they don't want to lose anything.
Right? And it's really important not to lose anything,
so they would take, you know, so you'd either lose $1,000
for sure, or you could have a 50% chance of losing $3,000
and a 50% chance of losing nothing.
And someone with, who satisfies this prospect theory,
would like that second gamble.
They'd be interested.
He's like, so then there's a 50% chance,
what 50% chance I won't lose anything at all?
Awesome. Okay, I want to take that.
And then, of course, they really don't like it
when they lose $3,000, but still, they want the gamble
where they have a 50% chance of not losing anything.
All right.
Now, this is the simple version of prospect theory.
Now, if you're thinking about it for a little while,
and again, this is the kind of thing where people came
up with this really smart, and it takes so little time to come
up with seemingly devastating objections
that you wonder what's going on,
and I don't have any good story for that.
But let's just take a look at this curve.
Prospect theory, supposedly the great theory
that shows how wrong expected utility theory is.
And prospect theory says that people risk a person gains,
but risk preferring over losses.
And therefore, what do you want to,
well, when do you want to buy insurance?
Do you want to buy insurance for gains
or losses according to prospect theory?
You want to buy insurance for gains.
All right.
Now, let's think about all known forms of insurance.
Fire insurance, is that for gains or losses?
Auto insurance, gains or losses?
Health insurance, gains or losses?
Life insurance, gains or losses?
Every kind of insurance that I've ever heard of and bought
like virtually is actually for the kind
that prospect theory says people don't want insurance for.
All right.
And then on top of it, there's also another puzzle.
How about gambling, casinos, lotteries?
What are those?
Gains. And what are people doing when they go to Las Vegas
or when they buy a lottery ticket?
Is they are acting risk preferring because, of course,
the reason those casinos exist is because they don't pay
as much on average as you put in.
So far from being a more beautiful theory,
it just creates two giant new categories of error.
So it's weird that anyone ever found this remotely plausible
to me anyway.
I don't know why it ever had any appeal.
All right.
Now, I'm a crock.
Now, of course, I'm not the only person to notice this.
And as a result of this total and humiliating failure
of simple prospect theory, there is advanced prospect theory.
All right.
Advanced prospect theory does get rid
of these problems in the following way.
All right.
It says, all right, look, we are wrong to try
to make this a two-dimensional model,
to make this a simple model here
where there's just a set of square point above and below.
Really, what we need is what is called the four-fold theory.
The four-fold theory.
All right.
The four-fold theory says that people are all the following.
First of all, risk aversion gains with high probabilities.
So this says, for example, that people, that, you know,
that if you are coming into an inheritance, say,
people would go and buy insurance to make sure
that policy where they have a 90% chance
of becomes 100% chance.
So basically, people will pay to, you know, will pay to get rid
of a small risk so that they know they're getting a gain
for sure.
All right.
So let's go do that.
It says people are risking gains with low probabilities.
So this says that people will buy lottery tickets
and go to Las Vegas.
All right.
Then, they're risk averse and loss of low probabilities,
so that's why they buy normal insurance.
And then finally, they're risk seeking and loss
of high probabilities, so that's why, say,
people might pretend that their car was stolen rather
than admit that they crashed it
so the ride doesn't get mad at them.
Right? So like, well, it's pretty likely that she's going
to go and get mad at me if I admit that I crashed the car.
So I'll make up a lie, which actually is probably going
to fail too, but I'm just going to go and take this chance
of completely escaping all dissatisfaction.
All right.
So that is the fourfold theory.
It's gotten a lot of attention.
Now, remember, this is supposed
to be an empirically testable theory.
Now, when you look at this fourfold,
let's look at the simple one.
That one is not so hard to figure
out how you test empirically, right?
Because it says, look, people are risk preferring
if they're in games and they are risk aversing games,
risk preferring losses, then all you need
to know is what their status quo is.
So where do they start?
And then you know, and then we look at what happens
when a change happens, and it's pretty simple.
But for this fourfold theory, we need to know what counts
as not only gain or loss, but we also need to go
and define the cutoffs for high versus low probability.
And notice, from the description,
I would say in a practice, outside of a lab,
it's pretty easy for someone to just call something high
or low depending upon how they need it to work out.
Right? So like is a 20% chance of a loss a high
or low probability of a loss?
I don't know.
I haven't seen anyone who likes prospect theory go
and say what the cut point is for which theory applies.
So this actually is much closer
to a theory that explains everything.
In a lab, of course, you could set it up to make sure
so that there's one probability is higher than the other one.
So if someone is risk averse in one probability,
then they better be risk averse
in an even higher probability, for example.
So you can do that in a lab.
But in the real world, what does this really say?
I mean, to me, it's just sometimes people risk averse,
sometimes they risk preferring.
And I don't see that it adds that much more.
All right.
All right.
Questions?
Questions?
All right.
Then last topic, intertemporal anomalies.
All right.
So remember current capital markets?
All right.
I'm going to ask Scott Burdick.
I don't know if you remember current capital markets.
Sure.
Yes.
I have a question actually.
Like we were saying that if you were
to test the simple prospect theory,
isn't that like the status quo point
for each different individual?
Like they're also like very subjective.
You can't really.
That is another good point.
So again, of course, in a lab,
you can just say the status quo is whatever amount
of money we start.
But I would say that with, you know, certainly with kids,
like with younger kids, I have a very good sense
of what they consider their starting point.
So, you know, like if they've never touched a toy before,
they don't think that's their toy.
If they bring a toy with them to your house,
they think that's their toy.
For adults, I mean, so think about your ability
to predict whether an adult will feel, will say, hey, that's mine.
Or, you know, so I feel like I have a pretty good,
I can make pretty good predictions about that.
And often it will not actually fit legal rules.
So, you know, things like, hey, that's my parking spot.
I don't see a name on it.
And yet people will consider something their parking spot.
And in fact, I think you have a pretty good idea
for when someone will consider a parking spot their
parking spot.
So, I mean, like there is a subjective element.
I don't think it's that hard.
But, like that could just be me.
I could be wrong on that.
So maybe there is more subjectivity.
If it were that subjective, people would be getting
into shouting matches at worst very frequently.
Because if there was some disagreement
about whether the stuff in your wallet is yours, that would be,
like whether that phone is yours.
If I were to say, hey, I don't see your name on this phone.
It's like, it's in the phone.
In the phone?
What does that mean?
It has to be, no, no, no, it has to be engraved
on the phone or it doesn't count.
Right? If I'm like, yeah, I could have these theories.
But I think all, everyone here would disagree with the theory
that your phone must have your name engraved on it
in order for it to be yours.
And otherwise, it's finders keepers.
Right?
Yeah.
You can't actually do that.
You can't.
I actually agree with that.
Yeah, so some people agree with it,
but the rule is not if you don't agree with it,
then anyone who agrees to have it and claim it as their own phone.
All right. So, moving on.
So, intertemporal anomalies.
So, supposing you have perfect capital markets,
we don't in the real world, but if you do,
then basic microeconomics is a very simple theory
about how people discount the future,
which is everyone will just use the rate of interest.
Because if you have perfect capital markets,
and if you were discounting an asset at more than the interest rate,
what should you do?
So, you know, like suppose you have an asset,
which is good for $1,000 in a year,
and you discounted it 7%, but the market interest rate is 5%.
What should you immediately do?
Sell the asset.
Sell the asset. And how much money will you get for it?
Like $950, but you valued it like $930.
So, you made an instant profit.
All right. So, that's how perfect capital markets work.
So, anyone that has a value different from the market interest rate
should either go and sell it if they discounted it
at a higher amount than the market interest rate,
or they should go and buy more if they discounted it
at less than the market interest rate.
Very simple. Right?
And even if you got imperfect capital markets,
there are often some definite predictions
of intertemporal choice about what people do, as well as you.
Now, microeconomists have found a number of anomalies.
All right. So, first one.
This is possibly the clearest cut case in all,
certainly in all the intertemporal anomalies,
maybe even in all behavioral economics.
All right. There are a lot of people who have given a choice
between being paid over 12 months or over 9 months,
starting now, will actually say,
I want to be paid over 12 months.
If there's any positive interest rate, this makes no sense. Right?
Because what has a higher present value?
Yes. You got money today, so getting paid over 9 months
is a higher present value than getting over paid over 12 months.
George Mason, when I arrived here, gave me this option,
and I did what economic theory says people do.
So I asked to be paid over 9 months,
so I'm still being paid over 9 months.
About 15 years ago, they got rid of the option,
grandfathering in people like me.
And when they were asked, why did you get rid of it,
what do you think they said?
Nobody chose it. No one chose it.
No one chooses it except for... Economists.
Yes, people making lots of money.
I'm a little nervous that if I looked into it,
a third of the economists might have made the wrong choice.
So the math people don't do it either?
So I'm just repeating the story
that I've been repeating for years.
So I would be curious about whether the math people do it, actually.
Based upon math editions that I know, who aren't economists,
I think they would do the normal thing.
They'd say, let's math.
This is... life.
Alright.
So anyway, that seemed...
And of course, what are the normal human thing to say
about why you want to get paid over 12 months
rather than 9 months?
I might run out of money.
Well, there's a really easy fix for that.
Don't spend more than 1 twelfth of your annual money per month.
It's really hard.
But I might go and be tempted to do the wrong thing.
Don't give in to temptation. Do the right thing.
Very simple.
But a lot of people seem to be so discussful of themselves
they don't want to do that.
Alright.
Now another very similar thing, actually,
and on a much larger scale.
There are a lot of people who deliberately receive tax refunds.
Which reminds me, actually, to avoid a fine on my taxes,
I need to increase my withholding.
So I'm doing the sensible thing,
but if you do it 2 years in a row,
then it's no longer sensible.
If this makes no sense to you,
then you probably are having too much money withheld from your taxes.
But anyway, so the way that it works
is that if you go and have more money withheld from your taxes
than you owe to the government at the end of the year,
then they go and give you a tax refund.
And isn't it wonderful to get a tax refund check?
It's so much fun. I got my tax refund.
You can sing a song.
But of course, there's something you could have done
to have not received that refund.
What can you do to not receive the refund?
Reduce your withholding.
You reduce your withholding.
And when you reduce your withholding,
when do you get the refund?
Earlier.
And how much interest does the government pay you
when it gives you your tax refund?
0% nominal.
0% nominal interest rate.
Furthermore, actually, what you really want to do
is owe the government money every year
because the rule is that if you owe more than 10%
of your tax bill to the government two years in a row,
then there's a fine.
So you don't want that.
The fine is noticeable.
But basically, the smartest thing is actually
to alternate back and forth
between owing the government a ton of money
and only underpaying and only owing them 9% of the bill.
And you just want to oscillate back and forth between that.
That's the idea.
And that way, the government is always giving you
essentially an interest-free loan every year,
varying between a ton of money,
basically you can just pay them the very bare minimum.
The government won't allow you to pay nothing.
You can't go and indicate that you want negative withholding
or something like that, so that's not allowed.
You can have a very low amount of withheld,
and then you switch over, and then you go
and you want to withhold more so you don't get fined.
But you always want to owe the money.
This is basic tax theory.
But again, most people would be horrified of this idea.
But I don't want to be one of you
writing a big check at the end of the year.
But if you do it this way, you will have all the money
you need to write the check plus some interest.
Write a negative.
Remember, the government gives you 0%,
not a little interest.
You can do better than that.
So weird, but that's how people seem to be.
Other cases, people seem to have discount rates
and excess interest rate.
So there's at least some evidence
that when people buy major appliances,
they don't put as much weight as they should
on future energy savings.
So that one is a little bit harder.
And actually, yes.
This last week, a decision was made
that we needed to replace all of our windows.
And this was after I said,
okay, well I would do it if the energy savings
according to neutral sources were actually substantial.
And then I looked it up,
and since we already have double-tane windows,
the windows are not actually much better.
But I was vetoed.
So we are getting some way or so,
like almost all our windows replaced
at enormous cost, and it's a poor investment.
But it's a good investment in my future.
So, all right.
So, of course you can always have a strategic theory
if you have a couple where one is doing it
because the other one wants to do it.
But then there's a question,
well why does the other one want to do it?
Okay.
All right, and then furthermore,
there's some evidence that people have
different discount rates for gains versus losses.
There is a classic experiment involving,
I think these are both hypotheticals,
but still I will say that they do resonate.
So the experiment where they asked people two things,
one of them was,
if you either get electroshocked right now
or get electroshocked in a week,
which one would you rather have?
And the normal answer is actually shock me right now.
And again, on the theory that I will be nervous all week.
On the other hand, there's also one saying,
if you could get a kiss from your favorite movie star
right now or in a week.
People generally say in a week
because they want to spend a week
thinking about how great it's going to be.
Just, ah, that could be so cool.
All right, so, all right.
Now, so there's that example.
Then there's another striking one.
And this is one which is on the surface less strange,
but it's weird, it gets very weird
the more you think about it.
All right, so discount rates seem to vary
with total waiting time in the sense that they actually,
your discount rate predictably changes
if you let some time pass.
In other words, people will predictably change their minds
if you give them some time.
All right, so the kind of thing where
if someone will predictably say,
I want to get a bathtub without the features,
and then in a year's time you say,
look, very likely that you will regret the choice.
You're saying 90% of people regret the choice
in which they got more features afterwards.
All right, so the classic example is
if you ask someone to, like they say,
look, you can either have something today or tomorrow,
they put a high weight on getting it now.
But if you say you can either have this item
in 365 days or 366 days,
then people see very little difference
between waiting a year or a year and a day.
Now, here's the funny thing about passage of time.
In one year, what will have happened
to that choice of 365 days versus 366 days?
It will have turned into a choice between
today and tomorrow.
And at that point, there is a predictable tendency
for people to want to go and pay some money
to go and get rid of the last day's weight,
a weight that they were perfectly happy
to accept one year earlier.
All right, so this implies what is sometimes
called a dynamic inconsistency.
It's tempting to say this shows that people are transitive,
but it's actually stronger.
People are irreflexive.
Irreflexive, so remember the reflexive property preferences.
If A is preferred to B, then B is not preferred to A.
Right? Pretty obvious.
And yet, this says that the simple passage of time
will, on average, turn people from people
who prefer not weight over weighting
into people who prefer not weighting.
So, like, if it's, you can either see the new
Star Wars movie in a year or a year and a day,
and you have to pay 10% more to see it in one year,
fine, I'll go see it. What's the big deal?
It's one extra day.
But the day the movie comes out,
oh my God, I would be happy to go and not only
give those savings, I'll pay an extra premium
so I can see it right now.
I don't want to wait now.
Okay.
Now, this is often seen as a self-control problem.
Often seen as a self-control problem.
The idea that when you have a long time to wait,
then your emotions are not very strong,
and then you can go and do the wise, prudent thing.
Worse, if it's like, come on, you've got to make a decision right now!
Choose, choose, choose!
That's where people get excited, and then, no!
Alright, something like that.
Alright, so, we have many examples of these alleged self-control problems.
One, of course, is if you ask people,
do you want to lose weight this year, or stay your current weight?
Well, maybe even gain some weight.
Like imagine, do you want to stay your current weight, or gain weight?
Very few people on January 1st will say,
I think this will be a weight-gaining year.
Sounds like an optimal pattern.
And yet, of course, a lot of people do gain weight in a given year.
I think the average person gains about a pound a year.
So, people wind up doing something,
which, of course, how is it you gain weight?
Well, nobody actually goes and chooses an eating path for a year.
Rather, at any given meal, you've got the choice of eating more or less.
In fact, between meals, you have a choice of creating a new meal.
How many meals should I have today?
How many snacks?
When I go to grocery stores now,
and I just remember how thin I was,
and how hard it was for me to gain weight when I was a kid,
and how stingy my parents were with anything that tasted good back then,
I was like, why couldn't I have had an unlimited amount of money
to eat delicious stuff when I didn't gain weight?
Because it's so good, this food tastes so wonderful.
And now, when I can fill my basket with fantastic food all the time,
I would be fat as a house if I actually did what is in my heart,
which is just like, ice cream, three bowls of ice cream every day,
sundaes, sundaes are so wonderful,
it's fantastic, endless candy of every variety,
I want to try them all.
But I can't do that now.
It would be very bad for me to try now.
If there was a time, my parents just would have been not so stingy,
and health conscious,
when I could have had a wonderful experience,
I could be looking back on it and saying, wow, so great being a kid,
pigging out, being thin.
Anyway, some self-control problems.
So there's no one, almost no one says, I want to gain weight this year,
and yet people gain weight by making these very short-run choices
which add up to gaining weight.
People generally don't want to be destitute when they retire,
and yet people, week after week,
will choose not to go and save for their retirement.
Many examples like this.
So you might want to save for retirement, but you have this constant urge to spend.
Of course, there's exercising, so in general, people say,
do I want to exercise this year or not?
Definitely exercise, but then each day,
I don't feel like today,
and I don't feel like tomorrow, and the next day, I don't feel like tomorrow,
and I pretty much don't feel like it ever.
This is a reaction many people have.
So, you might want to have money withheld from your paycheck to avoid temptation.
You might want someone to go and pour all your alcohol down the drain.
You might do it yourself.
January 1st, if you want to stop being drunk,
you might pour all your alcohol down the drain,
and then you might go and tell people,
look, if you see me drinking, stop me.
So there's many possibilities here.
For food, you might go and just only buy really bland food.
You might go and make a bet with someone.
Lots of possibilities.
So, now, in this literature, there is a very standard assumption,
which is that the long-run plan is the better or the one that is more reflective of what you really want,
and the short-run plan is a bad plan that doesn't reveal the real you.
Why should we believe this?
I've never heard any convincing explanation for why the long-term planner is the real person,
and the person who actually makes almost all the decisions is the fake person.
It seems like the person doing things each day is at least as real as the long-term planner.
Furthermore, the idea that long-term plans are better is also very questionable, I think.
So my brother is the kind of person who has bought multiple lifelong memberships in gyms,
and then he goes for a few days and then quits after he's put a lot of money in.
And usually this is because after a few days he remembers that exercising is extremely painful.
It really hurts.
Oh, this is terrible.
Similarly, when people make up extreme diets and they give them up,
normally it's like, look, that diet sounds like a living hell.
You made the right choice.
It's one thing to go and have a moderate, sensible lifestyle,
but you're only going to eat celery for the rest of your life?
That's a really stupid plan.
It's a miserable life.
Even if you live forever, would it be worth it if all you could eat were celery for eternity?
That's many people's view of hell.
I don't eat my celery.
So it's worth considering.
Now, just to get an idea about, I'll give this to Ori, let's see, I think it is worth mentioning this.
So now another way of interpreting all this stuff on dynamic inconsistency or self-control
is that actually the short-run preferences are the real preferences,
and the long-run preferences aren't preferences at all,
but rather they are public relations.
So we're going to talk about this more later today perhaps,
but in psychology, just to back up,
so you know how economists have this whole thing about how you can't believe what people say,
you can't try to like it, it's just words, blah, blah, blah.
Milton Friedman is probably the most famous person for saying stuff like this.
So economists generally have no actual evidence for any of this.
Economists just like to say, well, it's just what people say,
but we will study observable behavior, that's the only thing we trust.
So now, over in psychology, they actually have some empirics testing the economist's claim,
and they find out that there's a lot to what economists are saying.
In particular, if people are saying things that are socially favored,
where there's an answer that sounds good, that people want to hear,
then yes, there's a huge disconnect between words and actions.
Psychologists have a great name for it, they call it social desirability bias.
And by the way, remember that per the general plan of this class,
everything in lecture is fair game, even the son of the nose.
Just wanted to say that, just going to throw that out there.
Anyway, so social desirability bias,
this is the actual body of empirical work to show that
the economist's skepticism of people's words is actually justified.
So this is things like people are more racist than they claim to be.
So you ask people, how racist are you?
Almost no one will say, yeah, I'm pretty racist.
I'm like the average level of racism, even that is a strange answer,
a typical amount.
Instead, the normal answer is not at all, zero.
And yet, when you observe behavior, you see plenty of evidence of racism in human behavior.
Obviously.
And then things like, well, how much money do you give to charity?
Or how often do you go to church?
Or how do you vote?
These are all things where there's a socially approved answer.
Like say, giving to charity, I can't remember, is that socially approved or disapproved?
Disapproved, yes, voting approved, like all this stuff approved.
And for all these things, when we look at the data,
we see a gap between what people report, high levels,
and what people actually do, which is noticeably lower.
And there's many, again, the empirical literature is vast,
and there's so many different kinds of evidence of this.
Another one that I really like is, what fraction of Americans will call themselves rich?
Almost none.
It's like 1%. More Americans will call or describe themselves as lower class or poor than upper class or rich.
At first, that's like really weird. Isn't it good to be rich or upper class?
It's not good to say it.
Certainly not in America, where we're all middle class, and we're all just regular joes, right?
No matter, even a billionaire is just a regular guy, right?
No, I'm not, Bill Gates, but rich, what?
So, the socially approved answer is definitely not rich or upper class or aristocrat or noble.
And what's interesting is actually, there's international data on this.
There isn't a country that's ever been surveyed where more than 1 or 2% will admit to being rich or upper class.
Around the world, it is considered horribly arrogant and piggish,
just to say, yeah, well, what else am I to be?
I'm like in the top 99.99% if I'm not rich who is?
Wrong thing to say.
Even on an anonymous survey, even on an anonymous survey,
there's like, I can't say that.
This is too awkward, too uncomfortable.
Now, once you buy this shit like Esocial Security,
desirability bias. It does have a natural application to this, which is, alright, so
which sounds better to your friends to say, this is the year I decided to gain weight
or this is the year I decided to lose weight? Which one sounds better?
It sounds a lot better to say I'm going to try to lose weight than to try to get into
shape. So there is a natural tendency for people to exaggerate how much they really
want to lose weight, how much they really want to reduce their drinking, how much they
really want to save. And think about how badly we treat an alcoholic who is unrepentant.
Imagine there is a person, you say, look, your family, you're really hurting your family,
your children are suffering, everyone who loves you is really unhappy about this. And
if you say, I don't care because I love vodka more than any of you people.
If you say that, that is actually a good prescription for finally having all these people say, that's
it, we're cutting you off, you're dead to us. But on the other hand, if you say, I feel
so terrible about this, I really want to change, I'm going to do everything in my power to
do it. That's the kind of thing you say to avoid consequences. Social desirability bias,
I mean it would be no surprise from this perspective if people claimed to want to drink a lot more
than they really do. Now does this mean that there is no such thing as self-control problems?
No, there might be those too. But at least a very obvious theory about what's going on
is that people are just saying what is socially approved and their behavior really shows what
they actually feel. Now if you're in doubt, I have a website to prove you wrong. All right,
I guess the website, I think it's stickwith2k, stick.com, formed by two economists. This
is a website where you're allowed to go and put up some money in order to solve your own
self-control problem. For example, there were two overweight economists who both went and
did a bet that whoever lost more weight would be paid $10 per pound difference in weight
loss between the two of them. All right, so for those guys, I believe that's what it seems
like a self-control problem because you really are going and putting some money down in order
to try to change your behavior. Similarly, any hero anyone hears of self-control problem,
if you want to go and say give me $1,000 which you get back after you achieve, if you accomplish
some long-run goal, I'm available. So anyone who wants to give me $1,000 to save and I
keep it if you fail but you get it back if you succeed, right, that's another way you
can solve a self-control problem very easily. You know if I've got it, you can trust me.
I'm not going to keep your money. That's ridiculous. Yes?
How do you verify whether the person is on the...
Well, it does have to be, well, it has to be a verifiable thing.
Maybe I have not enough self-control to tell you that I failed?
Well, I mean, so if it's losing weight, then we just go and put you on the scale, right?
So if it's finishing your registration by time, we see if you finish the registration
by this time. There's a lot of debatable ones. So now how many of you guys have stick.com
accounts where you are trying to solve your self-control problems through putting money
up to change your incentives to make it in your short-run interest to do what's in your
long-run interest?
We don't know about them right now.
Yes, well, so there are, it is a website with a bunch of users. People get value from it.
But very striking, this ain't Google. This is not Facebook. This is not something where
people are going every day, like all over the world, a billion users, trying to solve
their self-control problems. It's a very small niche product.
And pretty much any time someone has ever offered or complained about a self-control
problem, I make my offer. I'm here. Give me money and I'll give it back to you if you
succeed in solving your problem. And people, no one has ever given me money for this if
I ever call correctly. So I'm open to doing it.
To me, given that there is a way that you can actually go and take action in your own
hands to solve this problem, and that almost nobody does, that's why I believe that theory
for almost all these problems, that people don't actually want to change.
So here's what I believe. People would like to lose weight painlessly. People would like
to stop drinking without having any craving for alcohol. But that's not in the menu of
choice. So when you say you have a self-control problem, it's not meaningful to say, well,
the problem is I want a choice that is just simply physically unavailable.
The only choices are either to go and drink and not crave alcohol, or, if you have a problem,
or to not drink and crave it. Those are your options. And then on January 1st, people generally
will, are likely to say, I want to do the second one. And yet, very few stick with it.
And that to me, that is the kind of problem that you could solve for that. You could solve
this way, probably nobody does, or solve this way, probably nobody does. So this is what
makes me think that people don't really want to stop drinking. They don't really want to
save for retirement. They don't really want to lose weight.
And that's my story. I'm sticking to it. Unless someone has some reason to suddenly change
my mind. Yes?
I'm just thinking about, it seems like it's like a kick when you're down. If you really
don't think you have the self-control, then I'm not going to set myself, like I'm being
honest with myself, like I'm going to fail. I don't want to lose money in addition. So
I'm like risk averse to loss.
Well, there's an easy solution to that. Just make the amount of money so high that you
couldn't afford to lose. Right? You just have to rail. And then I remember like, you know,
$10,000. Do you really think I'm going to, I'm going to, I'm going to be strong and the
$10,000 are going to disappear? Everybody knows where I am. Like I've been here for
20 years. I'm on track to become the longest serving professor in the history of George
Mason. So you can trust me, give me your money and I'll solve all your self-control problems,
if any.
All right. So, all right. Now, so a lot of these examples, they are striking and they
do resonate with people. Right? And again, I'm not literally saying that people are consciously
thinking when they say, oh, I totally want to lose weight, but they're actually thinking,
I totally don't, but I have to say all these lies. But rather it's just hasty and hyperbolic
speech. Just like when a little kid says, I'll never be mean to anyone ever again in
my entire life. He's not lying, but he's also not thinking it through. And it's strategic
that he's not thinking it through. He's not like actually saying, well, wait a second,
what am I getting myself into? He's just blurting out what he thinks people want to hear in
order to escape punishment and to receive smiles and approval and his mom's tablet.
Okay. All right. So anyway, so what does it mean? So it doesn't seem like there's that
many opportunities to loan money to people 100% interest. Again, I'm also happy to do
that one. I went up a little more nervous about it because I don't know if you'll pay
me back. So there could be some adverse selections. Students are about ready to leave Mason. They
want to go do it. But grad students, I guess some grad students have kept my books. So
all right. Anyway, and then furthermore, not clear that current interest rates, at least
for me, it'd be worthwhile to go and upgrade my appliances. But of course, it depends upon
how outmoded your appliances are. And then again, to me, like the stick.com one is a
counter example is one of the most convincing points. If self-control problems were really
ubiquitous, then it seems like stick.com would be famous and very widely used rather than
just being a small niche website, which I think the creators have done okay with it.
It's not like they lost money. They have users, but it's not a big website. So the popularity
of the website is way smaller than you expect. If you thought that almost everyone had severe
self-control problems, then they really wanted to solve. All right. So that case, why don't
we go and move on.
All right. So moving along. All right. So we've been going over empirical evidence on
choice theory, and now we're going to do belief formation, how people form their beliefs.
Now belief formation gets a lot less time in the first few weeks of micro, but there
are standard assumptions that economists use when they do theoretical papers about how
people form their beliefs. And most work does rely on these assumptions, especially for
the last 20 or 30 years. All right. So you guys all remember the rational expectations
revolutions, which usually dated to the early 1970s. All right. So before the 1970s, economists
would often just say, well, people assume inflation will be whatever it was last year.
So that would be called adaptive expectations. But anyway, in the early 70s, a new modeling
assumption of rationalizations came along. And since then, it has become more and more
common to call having beliefs that don't fit the rationalization assumption, irrational
beliefs. Or just to call someone whose beliefs don't satisfy the rationalization assumption
as being an irrational person. All right. Now often, if you look, if you pay attention
to who uses the word irrationality how, people got their PhD after the early 70s. Standardly
just call violation expectations to be irrational. And as you might notice now, almost all working
economists did get their PhD after 1971 or so. So there's still a few left, but almost
all I would say that at this point, the use of like equating rational expectations with
rationality, failure rational expectations with irrationality is now very standard. Okay.
So anyway, intuitively there's two different reasons why you might make mistakes. So one
of them is lack of information where you just didn't know, no one could have known. And
the other one is that you're irrational or we could also just call you stupid. Okay.
So these are different stories about why someone makes a mistake. One is, well, he just didn't
have the necessary inputs to reach the right conclusion. Another one is he did not properly
use the information. Did not probably use the information. Either was he irrational
or just didn't have the brains to do it. You know, like when you got a math problem and
one of the options is not enough information. And sometimes that's true, but sometimes there
is enough information and you just don't see how to do it. Right. You've ever had a math
test like this where, oh yeah, totally not enough information. But actually you just
have to go and add the two equations together. I wish I'd seen that. There was enough information,
but I wasn't cognitively skilled enough in order to see how to manipulate the information.
That's the idea. All right. Now the distinction between ignorance and rationality is uncontroversial,
but economists don't like calling people irrational. So anyone ever see the movie A Fish Called
Wanda? A Fish Called Wanda? It's pretty funny actually. So anyway, Kevin Kline back when
he was young and cool, rather than like the Bell's father in Beauty and the Beast. But
anyway, Kevin Kline back when he was young and cool played a hitman who was stupid. And
he was very emotionally sensitive about his own intelligence. So he was stupid and would
often do and say stupid things. And then people would call him stupid. Then he would take
out his gun and say, don't call me stupid. And he would kill people for calling him stupid.
So anyway, don't call me stupid. And the point of it is he was stupid, but he really didn't
like being called stupid. Similarly, economists have a similar reaction like that when you
call someone irrational. Don't call people irrational. Don't ever say anyone is irrational
about anything. A couple of times I've met economists I'm talking to and I say, that
person's rational. They say, you're irrational for thinking that. That's the only thing anyone's
ever rational about is thinking anyone else is irrational. Are you irrational when you're
calling me irrational? No. It's only the first order error of the case where it's a, all
right, so I've had this, so like this extreme defensiveness towards human rationality where
like those are very touching, like don't call anyone cognitive faculties deficient. If anyone's
wrong it's because they didn't have the information that they needed. No one could have figured
this out. Really? No one could have figured it out? It seems like often it wouldn't have
been that hard, but a lot of people didn't. All right, so anyway, economists just don't
like blaming things on anything other than lack of information, but claims about rationality
are empirically testable and there is a literature empirically testing them and sometimes the
tests come out the wrong way. Sometimes people don't pass standard tests for rationality.
All right, so like a really simple example that comes out of psychology is that you can
go and randomly assign people to rooms and experiment and then in one room you say, all
right, so let's see, what's the right one? Oh yeah, so you get, in both cases you go
to read the same stories. You know, Jill has been actively interested in the environment,
but what, but received a degree in business and works as a banker. And then one group
is told, what are the odds that Jill is a banker who is active in environmental causes?
All right, you get a probability from that room. Then you go over to the other room and
you just say, what are the odds that Jill is a banker? And here's the funny thing. The
odds that Jill is a banker who is active in environmental causes is higher than the odds
that she is a banker. And that is logically impossible, right, because the odds of A and
B must be less than or equal to the odds of A alone. So you add on an additional condition.
The odds that I am an economist with brown hair who likes Lord of the Rings movies, that
must be a lower odds than I'm an economist with brown hair, right, because I've added
on, or it could be equal, right, if 100% of brown haired economists like Lord of the Rings
it could be equal. But normally any time you're adding on an additional condition you'll reduce
the probability. And yet we see that people actually seem to not do this. So again, note
that the structure of the experiment is you're given a whole story about a person and then
you're given two scenarios. And one scenario just sounds better. One scenario is like,
well, a banker active in environmental causes, and that kind of fits with the whole story
of Jill. The other one, she's just a banker with no further information? That doesn't
sound like Jill. And that's the problem. So you can see that. And then, of course, Bayes'
rule. So you guys all remember Bayes' rule? If you do not have it committed to absolute
memory, or long-term memory, so you'll never forget it again. So the probability of A given
B is equal to the probability of B given A times the probability of A. All over, all
over, probability of B given A times the probability of A plus the probability of B given not A
times the probability of not A. All right, so you all have that committed to memory,
right? Right, perfectly? Like that. And you all apply it to every event that occurs to
you without any problem, right? And moreover, so does your mom, so does your dad, so does
everybody now, right? So the answer, of course, is of course not. If I would just go to randomly
take some college graduates and give them a bunch of Bayes' rule formula, I don't
know, Bayes' rule formula problems, I think it would be amazing if they could get 10%
correct on average. And in experiments, they give you problems like this, usually quite
easy in terms of computation. It's not like, it's like, you know, probabilities of square
root of 2 over 2, and then another one is the cube root of 7 or something like that.
It's not like they're giving them really hard probabilities to manipulate. They're
very simple ones. But people just mess up problems like this because this formula is
hard, right? And again, the classic example of messing up Bayes' rule is any problem
involving false positives or false negatives. So in the classic example of people messing
up this problem, you can go to medical students and you say, all right, so suppose there's
a disease that 1% of the population has, and there's a 5% false positive rate. All right,
so conditional upon testing positive, what are the odds that you actually have the disease?
And people generally, the favorite answer is 95% chance. All right, now you can either
go and show that's wrong with Bayes' rule, but there's actually something much simpler
you can do that works just as well, which is suppose there's 1,000 people. All right,
so if 1% of people have the disease, then out of those 1,000 people, how many will have
the disease? 10, right? And if there's a 5% false positive rate for it, then approximately
how many will test positive and don't have it? 50. So then the fraction of people that
will actually, the total number of people that will test positive? 60. Fraction that
actually have it, or number that actually have it? 10. So odds that you actually have
the disease, can you test it positive? 1 in 6 for a test that's 95% accurate. All right,
so this is a very simple Bayes' rule problem, but it's one that is very hard for most people
to do. It's so counterintuitive to people, right? And this also explains why people are
like, get it, like, so, well, maybe, let's see, should, is it less, it's consistent with
the fact, it's consistent with the fact that there are a lot of people who get horrible,
unnecessary treatments for conditions that they probably don't even have. On the better,
safe than sorry theory, which is a really crummy theory when treatments have horrible
side effects, such as for prostate cancer, horrible, horrible side effects. So for a
condition that is highly unlikely, you're likely to die before it actually kills you.
So, so anyway, so Gerard Gagrenser is very good at taking problems like this and turning
them into, turning them into problems like this that people can actually understand without
to do Bayes' rule, but that's interesting that people are in fact so bad at Bayes' rule
that this is a live issue.
So why don't we go and take a break now.
And let's see, there's no homework to turn in today, but I still do have homework for
Jay, Olivia, Brittany.
All right.
So Bayes' rule, a lot of people in here can violate that.
Now, as I said, we've got the assumption of rational expectations.
This is a stronger assumption.
Now, almost all modern models in economics rely upon rational expectations.
Any time you've been looking at a model published in a top journal and there's some assumptions
about facts and then somehow the variables from the fact assumptions move into the equations
about the beliefs, how does that happen?
Rational expectations is the transportation system for moving facts into minds.
That's the way the models are working is they are saying, well, if the true value is A,
then on average people believe A. And so that's what's going on.
So, stop it.
Okay.
All right.
Now, furthermore, even though it's only in the last 40, 45 years or so that we've seen
a lot of this, we've seen a lot of this, we've seen a lot of this, we've seen a lot of this
in the last 20, 30 years or so, we've seen a lot of this in the last 20, 30 years or
that rational expectations has been explicit,
but still you can go back centuries in economics
and still see that something like rational expectations
is in the minds of the economists.
So you just think about things like,
Adam Smith talking about the effect of a price control.
So if people had completely random views about the world,
or if people believed that up was down,
then price controls would not necessarily affect behavior.
So suppose, for example, that people just didn't believe
that price controls existed even when they did.
People are so oblivious, you have a minimum wage,
and you say, well, you realize that you have to go
and pay people's amount.
They're like, no, I don't.
No, I don't.
And therefore, I'm not gonna go and hire fewer people.
Right, if people really were that confused
about the way the world works,
then they would not be responding to incentives
in which they are unaware.
So whenever an economist says,
well, this is what the government does,
we'll change incentives in this way,
which leads to this behavior,
that last step requires something
like a rational expectation assumption
so that people's views about the world
are related to the way the world really is.
Pretty simple point.
All right, now what are the empirical implications
of rational expectations?
So the one that's really easy to test,
as we've said before, is no systematic errors.
All right, so no systematic errors.
In other words, the expectation of the error is zero.
There can be views that are too high,
views that are too low,
but on average, they balance out.
And then there's also the no correlation
with available information.
No correlation with available information.
That's one where it's a little bit harder to do
because you can argue about
what information counts as available.
In the 1970s, a standard thing would be to say,
well, was it in yesterday's Wall Street Journal
that it's available?
All right, that kind of thing.
Today would be harder to do in a way,
so if you said, well, when is the price of Exxon available?
You might say, one second ago is when it's available.
And then you'd have to have your beliefs uncorrelated
with information as recently as that.
So anyway, big empirical literature
that's found deviations from rational expectations,
but I've also elementary probability theory,
and I'm gonna be playing devil's advocate.
But I will also give you some reservations along the way.
So let's see.
So since we're getting a little bit behind,
I'm gonna cut out section two,
so you don't need to know that.
Nothing else really builds on it,
just more of a fun topic.
So move on to section three.
So belief, perseverance, and confirmatory biases.
So remember, this Bayesian framework is about updating.
New information comes in, and what are you supposed to do?
Change your mind, change your mind.
And think about this.
Whenever someone says,
every day I become more convinced of X,
is that person likely to be a good Bayesian?
That would be a miracle.
It's like, wait a minute, that would,
because look, if you've got an information
that makes you think something is more and more likely,
then you should just update.
And then after you update, then from then on,
the information should no longer be more,
keep convincing them.
Instead, for example, if you,
every day I become more convinced that Brian's a jerk.
So once you have some information on that,
you say, well, it's really likely that he's a jerk.
And in that case, when the evidence comes in
that I'm a jerk, you say,
well, just about as jerky as I was expecting.
No surprise there.
So I don't think he's more of a jerk
just because he acted like a jerk again.
That's just what would be expected,
given my previous view.
You know, just like if every day Bill Gates
shows up wearing, or shows up driving a fancy new car,
he goes, every day I'm more and more convinced
he's a rich guy.
It's like, look, I'm already convinced.
He's driving the cars at exactly the level
you'd expect for a billionaire,
if his dad's really likes cars.
So really, you know, like you might act,
you might drive a fancy car and you say,
not quite as fancy as I was expecting.
And so I'm gonna think that he's less rich.
Right, whereas another person
could be driving the very same car
and you would say, hey,
a graduate student's driving that car,
that graduate student, that made me change my mind,
think that graduate student's really rich.
But if Bill Gates doing it,
it would make you think less of him
because you expect so much.
Yeah, Ash.
If this is saying every day,
I'm more and more convinced that Brian is a jerk,
is that equivalent to saying,
every day Brian surprises me more and more
with how much of a jerk he is?
Yes, yes, yes, exactly.
Every day there's more,
there's another surprise piece of evidence
in favor of jerkiness.
It's like, well, you've been surprised
like a hundred times in a row?
What's wrong with you?
Like, how could you?
I mean, like that's,
makes as much sense as every day
someone stands behind a corner and says boo,
and every day you're like, ah, ah,
a hundred times in a row.
It's like, eventually it should get old.
Like, well, you always do that.
It's not surprising at all anymore.
Not scary at all anymore.
That's the idea.
All right, so anyway,
Bayesian framework's about updating
whenever someone says,
every day I become more convinced.
That is a strong sign
that you should just ignore what that person says
because they're a bad Bayesian.
Right?
Normally people say it as a brag.
It's like, I'm just so right all the time.
Everything keeps confirming what I thought.
It's like, well, essentially,
in other words, what you're saying is that
every day you fail to adequately adjust your belief
in response to information
so you can be surprised over and over again.
But let's go and listen to people
who every day things are either,
they're equally likely to move their mind
in either direction.
You know, generally, anytime someone says
I've never seen any evidence that was against this,
it's like, never, ever.
Funny, I'm seeing evidence against my views all the time.
Because given, like, once my view is confident,
any little error, it's like, hmm,
that's not what you'd expect if this theory is right.
Even if it's a small deviation.
Strange.
All right, so anyway,
Bayesian framework's all about updating.
But there's a bunch of experiments showing
what's called belief perseverance,
where people stick with their initial view
even when contrary evidence pours in.
All right.
And there is a, you know,
there is a set of experiments finding that people
can actually be more accurate with less information.
All right, now this is kind of a weird experiment,
but it's still pretty famous
and people are talking about it,
so I'll share it with you.
So this is an experiment where
you either show someone a blurry image
and then you gradually make it clearer,
or you just show them the last frame of the series.
So in other words, you know, you only get,
so in both cases,
so imagine that you see 30 pictures,
you know, 30 pictures of the picture,
30 screenshots of the picture
getting more, less and less blurry,
although the last picture's still kind of blurry,
that's key.
Or you would just see picture number 30.
And in these experiments,
it seems like people only see picture number 30,
are better able to guess what the picture really shows
than people who saw a whole series of pictures
of the thing gradually coming into focus.
And the usual story is,
the people who saw 30 pictures
formed a theory about what they were seeing early on,
and then once they formed the theory,
then every picture's like,
oh yeah, that's the nose of the penguin.
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, that's his wing.
And each one, they are imposing their theory
upon the evidence.
Whereas if you only see the last one,
then you don't have a chance
to go and fit everything into this
emerging body of information,
then you just look at the last
and of course most informative picture
and form your belief on that.
So that is one experiment.
Now, important to remember that in the experiment,
they never show you a clear picture.
It goes from being super blurry
to kind of blurry.
If it eventually was crystal clear,
then this result almost certainly wouldn't work.
Right?
If in the end, it's like the Joker for Batman
and you thought it was a bird,
the actual penguin, the bird, not the super villain,
then you'll, I think, be very unlikely
that someone would make that mistake.
But if you keep them,
if they're blurry before and afterwards,
but you give people a chance
to start getting their mental gears turning
and thinking, oh yeah, that's kind of what it is,
that's where the problem emerges.
Yes, is there a question there?
All right.
Okay, now other experiments find a stronger effect.
Once you believe in hypothesis,
then they get increasingly confident.
Right, per the saying.
Every day, the evidence is mounting.
Like more and more convinced every day.
It's like, wow.
So how agnostic were you at the beginning
if you've spent the last 30 years
becoming more and more convinced every single day?
Wow, it's like, seems like you'd be
quite agnostic initially.
All right.
So anyway, the story here is that
more likely to notice confirming evidence
and to misinterpret ambiguous evidence
as additional support.
And this has a special name.
It's called confirmatory bias or confirmation bias.
All right, so, simple example.
So yeah, going back to the Brian is a jerk story.
Once you believe this story,
then you might just sort of follow me around
and look for examples of me being a jerk.
And then you say, look, the evidence is overwhelming.
I've got 30 different instances.
Right, but that's not a very good way to test the theory.
Right, it's one thing you should be doing,
but what should you also be doing
in order to test the theory?
Yes, making a list of all the times I'm not a jerk
and looking for disconfirmatory evidence.
And then once you've got all that,
you say, well, what would the ratio be
for a jerk versus an un-jerk?
Right, and then it might be,
oh, actually, this is totally expected.
Right, you know, just like someone might,
so a communist might look at the American economy
and then go and make a list
of a thousand horrible things about it
and then say, communism is true, obviously.
Who can deny the facts?
It's like, well, all you did was go to a world
or a country of 300 million people
and go and find a thousand problems,
which can't be that hard, actually,
and then say, you're right,
that's a terrible way of approaching it.
You'd want it, like, again,
you could go and list all the bad things
and then list all the good things.
You could also do random sampling.
That's another nice approach.
Just say, look, I'm gonna go and take a look every minute,
and I'm just gonna go and look at a random news article
and see what's going on.
Why didn't that would be a much better way of doing it, too?
Right, there's many better ways of doing it
than just going and starting with a theory
and then looking around for every story
that advances it.
This is the reasonable core of Popperian falsificationism,
where he says, yes, give it,
but I'm not sure whether he said
whether he actually framed it in terms of psychology.
At least his followers have never done so to me,
but the idea is if there's a theory you think is right,
look around for all the reasons that it's wrong.
You'll be very energetic in trying to find reasons
to change your mind about something.
We'll be looking for exceptions, right?
Like if you think that the economy is verbally competitive,
you might just spend a day walking around looking at verbs
and try to find things that look like they don't fit
with a verbally competitive model.
Like go to a movie theater at the matinee,
and you will see an overwhelming contradiction
to the verbally competitive model.
Whoa, 90% of the seats are empty, but the price was $8,
and the marginal cost appears to be maybe eight cents tops.
So the verbally competitive model says the price will,
the price, the marginal cost is eight cents.
Verbally competitive model says the price will be?
Eight cents.
Eight cents.
It's $8, how can that be?
Right, so these are the kinds of things to be looking for,
or if you're looking for,
so you know, for price differences, try to explain them.
Right, so verbally competitive model says
the different products can have different prices,
but only if the costs are different.
Right, and then you might even go and look at things
that initially seem to support the model and say,
wait a second, actually they don't really support the model.
Like think about this, every flavor of ice cream
is the same price within a brand normally.
What are the odds that the cost of producing
every one of those flavors of ice cream
is exactly equal to the penny?
Seems hard to believe.
Yeah, it seems to me.
So again, like the only theory that I know that makes sense
is that they vary the content,
the quantity of the expensive ingredients
to hit a certain price, but again, that's,
so like they're telling me that the cost of mint
is exactly equal to the cost of chocolate syrup.
Like, that's weird.
Like what a world that these things would all be,
so it would all be equal in price.
So there's many opportunities to go and look
for these counter examples.
So it's looking for the model to fail in interesting ways.
Yeah, yeah, there's lots and lots and lots
of interesting ways to fail.
And then of course, the fact that you've found
what appears to be a counter example,
it might be like on third, on second thought,
you say counter example, third thought,
maybe it's not really a good counter example
to think about it more.
Anyway, these are standard tactics
for avoiding this confirmation bias.
All right, now in terms of experiments
on confirmation bias, my very favorite one in the world
involves a real issue where if we were doing this room,
I would first of all go and find out, right,
so who supports the death penalty, who opposes it?
Great, all right, then I would go and randomly assign
equal numbers of each group to two different rooms.
In room one, I give you two kinds of econometric studies.
One has panel data that shows the death penalty to hers.
Another has cross-sectional data
showing that it doesn't deter.
The other room has panel data showing
that it's penalty does not deter
and cross-sectional evidence showing that it does.
What happens when you do this experiment?
Everyone gets more confident in their view, everyone.
All four groups, right?
And how does this happen?
Well, in the room where the panel data is pro-death penalty,
what do the pro-death penalty people say?
Of course.
Yeah, panel data is the rival data, cross-sectional,
ugh, all right, and of course,
the people that don't like the death penalty in that room
reverse their econometric judgment.
Cross-sectional is so much more probative than panel data.
You can do anything with panel data.
Meanwhile, over in the other room,
your counterpart who has the same prejudice that you do
but received reversed information
is rationalizing the very same view
based upon the methodological superiority
of the opposite kind of study.
So, pretty striking example.
Okay, so questions about that?
So, that one's fine.
All right, and this is something where they go like,
more and more evidence like this has come out.
It's fine to say that more and more evidence has come out.
Not fine to say that I keep getting more convinced, right?
Because to keep getting more convinced,
the evidence would have to come out to a degree of,
it would keep coming out to a greater degree than expected
given how much evidence we've already got, right?
Because if there's a whole bunch of great studies
showing something,
what should you expect to happen in the future?
More great studies that keep saying the same thing, right?
So, when those studies come out,
that's where you say, yeah, pretty much what we had expected
given how solidly established this was.
And you can even have studies that are quite supportive
but not quite as supportive as you thought they would be
leading you to lose some of your confidence.
And again, if you've ever said things like this,
saying, look, I thought, well, the evidence is strong,
it's not as strong as I expected it to be at this point,
and so I've reduced my confidence in the theory,
which is a very weird thing for a human being to say.
But if you've heard someone like,
if that kind of thinking is occurring to you,
you are really internalizing Bayesianism as a way of life
rather than just an equation,
because what goes to the equation if people don't live it?
All right.
All right, now, more general terms.
There is some evidence of systematic overconfidence.
How do you test for overconfidence?
Anyone here read the blogger Scott Alexander?
Yeah, so, every year Scott makes a bunch of predictions
with probabilities, and then at the end of the year,
he goes and he graphs the subject of probabilities
he had at the beginning of the year
with the object of probabilities of what really happens.
Right, and how does that work?
Well, so, when people do this,
they normally code everything
so that everything is at least a 50% probability.
Otherwise, you should just believe the opposite thing.
So anyway, so the normal thing here
is you've got a graph, and it starts at 0.5,
goes to one, and over here, 0.5, also goes to one,
and here are your subject of probabilities
before you actually know what happened.
And here are the object of probabilities
of what actually occurred,
the frequencies with which they occurred.
Now, if you have neither over nor underconfidence,
this will be a nice 45-degree line,
where half the stuff that you assign
a 50% probability to actually occurs,
where 60% of the stuff that you assign
a 60% probability to occurs,
70% of the stuff that you assign
a 70% probability to actually occurs,
100% of the stuff that you assign
a 100% probability to occurs.
That is what's called perfect calibration,
where you are neither over nor underconfidence.
On the other hand, if your actual line,
this 45-degree line right up there,
if your actual confidence looks like that,
remember, you can't have a probability more than one.
I guess if you could fill in something 110%, sure,
but that doesn't make any sense.
Anyway, so if your line looks like that,
are you over or underconfident?
Yeah, so this is where you say that,
so you have a 60% probability that occurs,
and this actually goes and occurs even more often.
Yes, so that's since you can say you're underconfident,
but then you can have this one here, this one here,
that's what we generally see in the real world.
So very typical that if someone says
they're 100% confident, they're right 80% of the time.
100 equals 80.
90 equals 70, so on, so on.
I think for like 50%, I think people actually,
if you say, I can't actually remember
whether even odds, whether you actually are,
whether that means you're actually
right 40% of the time or not, but anyway.
So a lot of evidence of this overconfidence.
All right, a lot of evidence of this overconfidence.
Okay, now, this evidence, however, is not totally solid.
Again, that German psychologist,
Gerhard Gigerenzer, points out,
and this has been acknowledged
by people who've done the regular evidence,
although per confirmation bias,
what do they say about Gigerenzer's evidence?
It's not good enough.
Yeah, yeah, no, no, no, wrong way of doing it,
it doesn't count.
All right, but anyway, so Gigerenzer says
this works if you ask people question by question.
So for example, if you give people an SAT test,
and then for each question you say,
probability you got that one right,
probably you got that one right,
probably you got the other one right, then this works.
But on the other hand, if you ask people the question,
what fraction do you think you got right?
Gigerenzer says, there actually,
there's not much evidence of overconfidence.
So there's something about thinking about it
question by question that where it looks like
your odd people have high overconfidence,
whereas if you ask them in general terms,
like what fraction of other answers will be correct,
then at least there's greatly reduced
evidence of overconfidence.
And which is the one right way to find out whether people are overconfident?
I don't know.
There's two different approaches which give two different answers.
It seems reasonable to me to split the difference and say,
kind of seems like it, but maybe not.
Or, of course, maybe it is highly subject specific.
Like people are very overconfident in their political claims.
But maybe not so overconfident in, say, whether or not they're going to be getting a raise next week or something like that.
Also possible.
Alright, so questions about that?
Yes, Nathan?
Has there been anything on the interaction between this sort of epistemic overconfidence and social desirability bias?
That's a great question, yeah.
It might look really bad to say, oh, well I'm not sure if this thing is a bad thing.
Yeah, I don't know if your dog can be saved by the vet.
I'm sure the vet will be able to take care of this.
That's what a good person says.
An honest person who says, I don't know, he looks incurable to me, I think you're just wasting your money.
Not a nice thing to say.
According to society, although according to true concern for another person,
say, well look, there's a question, can you say the truth with sympathy?
Like, I know a lot about veterinary medicine, there's nothing they can say to your dog, and that person is just taking advantage of you.
Try that.
Might work.
You can't give up on my dog.
Who are you to say whether a dog will live or die?
Doctor of veterinary medicine, qualified as anyone, specializing in this very disease.
No one will get to convince me.
So there's that mentality, which you may have seen in plenty of cases.
So yeah, I don't know if anyone saw that.
It seems very plausible, and maybe that could be a dissertation.
Who knows?
But anyway, so interaction between social desirability bias and overconfidence.
And sort of along those lines, I'd be curious to see what work's been done regarding the sort of general overconfidence,
underconfidence of professional researchers and practitioners in economics, medicine, and whatnot.
You think of episodes like how forever we thought that fat was the problem, and now it's carbs.
And social desirability bias.
So once people say, it's the fat that makes you fat, and like any time you say, what?
The fat makes you fat.
Once that saying becomes socially accepted and standard, then anyone saying something else,
it's almost like you're saying, so you want people to be fat, huh?
You just think it's great for people to die of obesity.
That's the way.
I'm saying that's the wrong theory.
What's the wrong theory?
We're supposed to like, when did you become a paid disciple of big fat?
So real-world significance.
This is something where, over time I have moved the view that this matters more than I initially thought.
I am not constantly moving this direction.
I stabilized a while back.
But some of the experiments show that you've got a lot of problems, but what real-world mistakes can be attributed to them?
So like in the week where we do public choice, I'll mention, I think that this describes political views so well,
and so painfully well, just to see the opinions that people have on subjects that they couldn't possibly know much of anything about.
Just the way that everybody knows that elasticities work the way they want them to work,
and they know it before they even know what elasticity they need for the answer.
So imagine you're teaching someone elasticity, and then before that, say,
so what do you think elasticity of labor demand is, high or low?
And until you have actually got them to think about, well, which answer applies to my view on the minimum wage is true,
people will probably give you one answer.
It's like, well, I don't know.
It doesn't seem like that.
Why would I have an opinion about the elasticity of labor demand?
And then you say, well, if labor demand is highly inelastic,
it means the minimum wage doesn't cause much unemployment, but it's highly elastic when it does.
Well, then, man, it's so inelastic.
It's highly inelastic, man.
And this is one you could actually go and try tricking people and actually just tell them one or the other
and see if they just leap to whatever elasticity assumption gets them the result they want.
I mean, it might be too hard to actually do experimentally because it would involve an elasticity lecture, but still.
It seems like it's interesting.
I guess it would even work if you just said, like, what was the slope of the demand curve?
That would also give the same qualitative result.
Was there a question, Nathan?
Might that be reflective of them, to be charitable to people who are displaying this bias,
of them knowing something about the empirical literature but not understanding the underlying economics?
So if someone thinks, oh, well, I know there's a well-done, hard-cruiter-like study,
I'm going to say that probably the data, the elasticity reflects what is shown in that data.
Yes, that would be perfectly fine if you had some independent reason of thinking that the hard-cruiter study was accurate
other than that it gave you the result you wanted.
Although, in order to do that, you would have to understand elasticity in the first place, so it seems unlikely.
But theoretically, of course, it's possible.
I mean, just imagine that someone knows an incredibly trustworthy person who just reads a lot of things
and just tells them the answers.
Any time that they audit the person, what they say is perfectly accurate, that would be fine.
But how many people actually have a person like that in their lives?
Where are these people?
My roommate. At least he tells me he's always right.
He tells you he's right.
So the auditing is important, where you have to at least once in a while just double-check that what they're saying is right
so that you aren't simply saying, well, look, how accurate are you?
Totally accurate.
Okay, then.
You're like, well, great.
Now let's go and ask you all the questions.
I mean, it answers everything for this one person who's told me it's totally accurate.
All right.
So now something else you can say about belief perseverance is once you have a lot of evidence,
it is reasonable to not update much anymore.
So that can be true, and yet once you've seen 1,000 observations,
it's very reasonable to not noticeably budge when 1,000 first observations comes along.
So I have the following arrogant view about the news.
Look, I have spent 40 years reading history.
I understand the kinds of things that happen in the world,
and the stuff in the news is in no way surprising to me at all, really.
It's just all the same kind of junk that I expect to happen given everything I've read before.
So if someone says, you're so dogmatic you don't change your mind on terrorism in light of yesterday's news.
Do you know how many events like that have occurred in history?
Tens of thousands.
So why should your event make any more difference to me than like a fly landing on my nose?
It doesn't change my view of anything.
People don't like this attitude, but it seems like a reasonable attitude if you are that well informed, of course.
It is tempting to claim to be super well informed long before you actually are,
because these are the kinds of things that you can go and check for yourself.
If you say, oh, well, let me go and get a history test and see how well I can do off the top of my head.
I have a 1% time.
Pretty good, actually.
All right, good.
All right, my arrogance is justified.
All right, and then, you know, like issues as emotional as death penalty are rare,
so maybe that's not such a great example either.
So I'm blanking on his name, but there's, so since doing this, there's been a psychologist
that's been doing a lot of work on political beliefs and just how ridiculous they are,
and he has found that like on many issues,
this general fact that people will just go and wait and will just reverse the reasoning from is the right answer,
then that determines how reliable the evidence is.
And is the person an expert?
That too.
Well, what is their answer?
In that case, I can only know their expertise based upon their agreement.
So climatologist at Harvard, well, does he agree with me on global warming?
If so, he's an expert.
If not, he's not an expert.
Right, that mentality is fairly pronounced,
and he does a lot of experimental manipulations where you can really see that people are just going
and doing something that is extremely correct,
where it's all just reasoning backwards from the answer that you want,
and Bayes' rule is not being allowed to have any say.
All right, questions?
All right, then let's move on to more fun stuff.
All right, one of the ways that people often ask me probabilities is by thinking about the E,
is by the E's of thinking of examples.
It's like, what's the probability the next person who walks in the room is Albanian?
Well, one thing you might do is how easy, how many Albanians can I think of?
And if it's like no Albanians, then probably you're going to get a low probability.
If it's like, my God, there's tons of Albanians, then it's going to be high probability.
That's the idea.
All right, now this has a special name.
It's called the availability heuristic.
The availability heuristic.
All right, and very often it's an extremely useful heuristic.
All right, so what are the odds that the next movie that becomes a bestseller in the U.S. is a Romanian movie?
I can think of zero Romanian movies that have ever appeared in the list of the top grossing movies of the week.
So I'm going to put that really low.
And on the other hand, what about a Tom Cruise movie?
Probably the Tom Cruise movie becomes one of the top ten grossing movies.
Well, let's see.
So, four movies a year, and how many movies are there?
And they all are in the top ten pretty much.
So, that's going to be, what?
Maybe like 200 theatrical releases a year, four Tom Cruise movies.
So, that's going to be like one in 50.
That's a 2% chance.
And actually, we know it's even higher because movies generally stay in the top ten for more than one week.
So, if it's just for one week, then it should be even higher than that.
Yeah, Ash?
Can you explain maybe the difference between heuristic and bias?
Ah, I'm getting to that.
I'm getting to that.
Okay.
Alright.
So, anyway, this is known as the availability heuristic.
Just trying to sort of think, how can I think of examples?
Well, lots of examples, likely.
Not many examples, not likely.
Okay.
Alright.
Now, sometimes very useful, but it also predictably generates bias judgments.
And what it does, when the heuristic predictably leads us in the wrong direction, then we call it availability bias.
So, heuristic could be useful, and in fact, often is.
The bias is when the heuristic is hackable.
When you can hack the heuristic, or when the world hacks the heuristic,
and takes something that normally works and turns it into something that leads you very predictably into error.
So, for example, if an event is especially vivid or memorable,
then there's a lot of evidence that we overrate the probabilities,
because it is easy to remember vivid and memorable events.
Memorable events are, of course, by definition, easy to remember.
Right?
Vivid events.
Vivid events are just more memorable.
So, odds of dying in a plane crash.
You can probably think of a number of famous plane crashes.
On the other hand, famous car crashes, not too many.
So, that's one where the availability heuristic, which normally is reasonable,
but because plane crashes are so vivid, so gripping to people,
that it actually seems to predictably lead people to overestimate the probability of dying in a plane crash relative to a car crash.
Car crashes are actually much more, cars are much more dangerous per mile.
So, you remember economists saying,
you shouldn't require babies to have a seatbelt on planes,
because more babies will die if, based upon our estimates of price elasticity demand for flying versus driving.
So, basically, if you require every baby to have a seat,
then it's more expensive to fly with a baby,
which will lead to more people driving their babies,
and since driving is more dangerous than flying, more babies die.
Alright, that's the kind of reasoning economists do.
But, non-economists, on the other hand, just think about,
oh my god, it's so terrible when a plane crashes, they're so scary,
and so that means that it's a real danger.
And then, we got into what is car crashes, how often does that happen?
Alright, well, I don't know, I can't think of any good cases.
Certainly, the only time a car crashes on the front page of the news is,
just a regular car crash, not trying to kill a bunch of people in a car,
but a car accident, the only time it's on the front page of the news is when?
When a celebrity dies in a car crash.
But, no normal human being dying in a car crash would ever be news.
Whereas, if one person fell out of a plane somehow, that would be front page news.
Right, and they're talking about, oh, look, how are we letting the airlines get away
with these insecure planes where a person can just fall out?
It's happened once. What makes you think we're letting them get away with anything?
How many people have flown in planes, one fell out?
Is that a lot? Seems like a very small number.
Alright, but that's not the kind of reaction that you're going to see,
and of course, it's very vivid thinking about a person falling out of a plane.
That's terrifying.
I'm getting a slight, my palms, the palms of the soles of my feet are getting slightly sweaty
just thinking about a person falling out of a plane.
Whenever I see a mountain climbing movie, wipe the sweat off.
So vivid. Whereas, I see people who get electrocuted, it doesn't bother me at all.
I don't have any reaction at all when someone's getting electrocuted,
but falling, oh my God, like, the sweat, it's scary how much sweat I can make.
Why that is, I don't know.
Seems like it's kind of dysfunctional for people to get really sweaty palms
when they're thinking about falling from a height, but I don't know why.
So one possibility is just that they're very vivid,
but there's other cases where it's not so much vivid as it's just easier
for the human mind to go and do the search.
So think about this.
So there are more words in the dictionary that start with the letter A
or that have the letter I in the third to last position of the word.
Well, if you're thinking about words that start with A, that's super easy, right?
Apple, anchor, you know, they just go on and on.
But on the other hand, words with I in the third to last letter.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
So, you know, it's hard until you hit on the trick,
which is any word that ends with I and G qualifies.
Singing, running, dancing, leaping, talking, right, then you can get a ton.
But if you don't get that trick, you may sit there, you know, like,
you can't think of any.
There's got to be some, right?
This is a trick question.
There's actually no such words, but there are.
All right, so people find it much easier to do a mental search based upon first letters
than third to last letters.
Notice a computer would have no trouble doing both equally well.
A human being is a different story.
A human being is used to thinking about words by their first letters.
So, all right, so anyway, people, it's much easier to come up with those,
and people normally falsely conclude that words that start with the letter A
are more probable in the dictionary, are more probable.
So to readily pick a word out of the dictionary, it's more likely to start with A.
It's actually more likely to buy in the third to last position.
Okay.
So availability bias is often used to explain why people overestimate the risk of flying,
for example.
All right.
So, that's out there.
Questions about availability bias?
Yes.
So would it be correct to say that availability bias is just incorrect availability heuristic?
Yeah, well, so, what I would just say is that
most availability heuristics are reasonable most of the time,
and the bias is in like the subset where there's some particular way that the human mind screws up
so that it's misleading.
It could be that for some issues, the heuristic is just a bias,
where it just always leads you in the wrong direction.
It could be that we just happen to be in an unusual environment where it's wrong,
or, again, it could just be that it normally works fine,
but there's just a narrow subset that gets heavily researched because we're trying to improve on our views.
Or, of course, there's also the possibility that it's confirmation bias,
and psychologists really want to show that human beings are wrong about everything,
and so they're looking around for every time human beings screw up to go and say,
see, further proof!
Human beings can't do anything right.
So there's that possibility, too.
To me, the most obvious case of availability bias in the world is our focus on terrorism.
Actual quantitative severity of terrorism.
Well, basic numbers.
Fraction of all murders that are terrorism on Earth.
Under 1%.
Fraction of all deaths that are murders.
Under 1%.
Terrorism causes under 1% of 1% of deaths.
Less than 1 in 10,000.
How much coverage and news space does terrorism get relative to its actual severity?
A hundred times more than it should get based upon the ability to risk.
I think even that's probably more like a thousand times what it actually deserves.
And, of course, there's no policy response to this error, right?
Instead, over a trillion dollars spent fighting terrorism,
a problem that is less severe than groundings in bathtubs.
And, again, if you want to talk about social desirability bias here,
you're running for office saying what I said.
Look, we're doing way too much about a very statistically small problem.
There are, in the world, pretty much almost any problem you've ever heard of,
and most of the problems you haven't are worse.
So, what are you talking about?
So, you don't care about terrorism.
I care about it appropriately.
I care about it appropriately.
Well, you're making a joke about horrible deaths.
Well, your deal is to be like, it's not a joke.
I'm making a joke out about how bad people are at estimating probabilities
and how much people allow their emotions to color their judgments.
You say, that's fair. That's funny.
The actual things aren't funny.
But if someone thought that dying from choking on chewing gum
was the biggest risk in the world, that would be pretty funny.
It's not funny that it happens.
It's funny that someone could be so wrong.
And even funnier that it's such a widespread error.
If it's one person who has this strange view, it's like one kook.
But if it's almost everyone has this strange view, what's wrong with them?
So you're telling us it's widely believed that
one of the biggest problems is dying on chewing gum?
No.
Is that going to be on the test?
Yes.
Laughter
Yeah, it's not.
All right.
So this isn't the same over, so probability
that a given dollar is spent on foreign aid.
Well, so foreign aid, again, very vivid.
Very vivid.
Gets people very upset thinking about it.
And so there's a great overestimation
of the actual fraction of the budget that goes to foreign aid.
Think about anything that actually is newsworthy
is likely to be greatly overrated.
Because newsworthy things are the,
what does it mean to be newsworthy?
It isn't really a judgment of objective worthiness.
It's a judgment about what people care about,
what's interesting to people.
And what's interesting to people?
Are numbers interesting to people?
No.
Things that are vivid, things that are exciting.
But also, things that are horrifying,
things that are scary, things that interest people
are generally not only not necessarily good things,
they're just things that strongly affect any emotion.
Things that are really disgusting are news.
Things that are really scary are news.
Things that are really happy are news, although not as much so.
Things that are really sad are news.
So let's see.
So the six primary emotions are, what again?
Let's see.
So happiness, surprise.
Things that are really surprising,
that's news, of course.
Happiness, surprise, sadness, anger, disgust.
What's the other one?
I don't know.
That's not a primary emotion.
Surprise.
Yes.
Did I say anger?
Yeah.
Anger.
Let's see.
So anyway, there's another six.
All right.
There's one in the middle.
Anyway, so anything that appeals to those basic emotions
is news, even if it's not reported yet.
So today my Facebook feed filled up
with a guy who was thrown off a plane.
How is that newsworthy?
Oh, but did you see how he was savagely beaten?
All right.
Do you know how many people were murdered today?
Like, what happened to that guy is nothing
compared to what happened to like 1,000 other people
on Earth.
And furthermore, what kind of a person
gets beaten up because they were thrown out of a plane?
How does that happen?
Sounds very unlikely that he was totally blameless here.
Sounds like fact.
If, say, my brother got thrown, like got beaten up,
and he was thrown off a plane, I would totally
side with the airline.
But anyway, unless I knew the person was completely
blameless, that kind of person, I
would always side with the airlines.
Because that person's probably just making a mountain out
of a molehill, and many things escalate.
So why is that news?
One difficult person.
That's me.
All right.
Now, so that's availability heuristic.
Now another common technique for estimating probabilities
is just to compare a particular case to stereotypes,
and then go with a better match.
Which one is a better match?
And this has also a name.
It's called the representative heuristic.
And of course, it goes along with a parallel
representativeness bias.
The representative heuristic, and there's also the bias.
The A, and there's the B.
So here is a classic example.
Someone says, what's more likely?
There's a Chinese professor who teaches Chinese literature,
or a Chinese professor who teaches psychology.
Well, what's our stereotype of Chinese literature professors?
What's their ethnicity?
Chinese.
What's our stereotype of psychology professors?
Their ethnicity?
Austrian.
Austrian, white, yeah.
So Jews, something like that.
Anyway, it's definitely not Chinese.
All right.
So and it's very tenuously.
So one fits more than the other.
All right.
So now what's wrong with this?
Well, sometimes nothing.
But there is one basic problem here,
and that is a tendency to ignore base rates.
So when you're deciding, so what's
more likely that that Chinese professor is
a professor of Chinese literature or psychology,
there's a tendency to ignore the fact
that there are hardly any Chinese literature
professors in the United States.
And there's a vast number of psychologists.
So even if 100% of the Chinese literature professors
were Chinese, it's still quite likely
that there are more Chinese psychology professors,
because there's a ton of psychology professors.
So if there's 100 Chinese literature professors in the US
and they're all Chinese, and there are 10,000 psychology
professors and 5% of them are Chinese,
there are still far more Chinese psychologists
than there are Chinese literature professors.
And that's the problem.
All right.
So and that's where the bias comes
from, from ignoring base rates and not
doing a proper adjustment for the general frequency.
Now notice that problem I've just given you
about the false positives, that fits in this bowl very well.
Because what is our stereotype about,
so the test is perfectly accurate.
So we'll put a test, if you have the disease,
then you always test positive.
And 95% of people who don't have the disease test negative.
So then our stereotype says, if you test it positive,
then you got, so sick people test positive.
And well, people test negative.
Those are two true stereotypes.
They're both correct.
100% of people who test positive have the disease.
95% of people who test negative don't have the disease.
So then where are we going wrong?
We're going wrong because we're getting that only 1% of people
have the disease.
So that is a base rate.
And when you factor in that base rate in the calculation,
then you realize, my god, most of the people who test positive
are still perfectly fine.
They're still perfectly healthy because it's so rare
that someone actually has this disease.
OK.
So now a class experiment involving
a representative misbias involves a strange conference.
This is a conference where engineers and psychologists
get together to discuss their shared issues,
whatever those might be.
I don't know why they'd have one.
But anyway, so the standard manipulation
is some people are told that 70% of the attendees are engineers.
Others are told that only 30% of the attendees are engineers.
And then they say, all right, so you
meet someone who has horn-rimmed glasses and a pocket
protector.
Now, if you don't know any engineers or that, anyway,
so my dad was an engineer.
And in the 1980s, he definitely had horn-rimmed glasses
and a pocket protector.
So he totally fit the stereotype.
But the strange thing in the experiment
is that you can go and tell people 70-30 or 30-70
and still their conditional probability that someone
is an engineer, given that they have horn-rimmed glasses
and a pocket protector, doesn't change.
And it should change.
The only way in which it shouldn't change
is if you really believe that 100% of all engineers
have horn-rimmed glasses and a pocket protector
and 0% of psychologists have that.
Then you could just say 100% regardless of the base rates,
and it wouldn't matter.
Just like in that false positive experiment,
if there's a 0% false positive rate and a 0% false negative
rate, then of course 100% of people
who test positive have the disease.
But people realize that it's not really people
are smart enough to know, well, sure, there's
going to be some psychologists who have a pocket protector
and some engineers that don't have the pocket protector.
It's not like that.
It's too cartoonish to think that every engineer dresses
one way, every psychologist dresses the other way.
But they fail to do the logical inference of saying that we
should then adjust for the fact that in one scenario,
there's more engineers than psychologists.
In another one, there's less engineers than psychologists.
That's a problem.
And then another one of my favorite examples here
is gaydar.
So a man is wearing a pink shirt.
Probability that he's gay.
Well, there is a stereotype that gay men are perfectly fine
wearing pink shirts.
And there's also a stereotype, possibly
caused by the first stereotype, that straight men
don't wear pink shirts.
But again, it's not 100%.
And so there is a tendency to just say
you see a man in a pink shirt and say, that guy's gay.
My gaydar's going off.
But if you go and look at sex research,
it says, look, only 2% of men are gay.
That's got to go and say, look, if only 2% are gay,
then there's probably a lot more straight men
wearing pink shirts, even if a much smaller fraction
of straight men would wear pink shirts.
See, the funniest example of this
is when I was at Princeton, there
was an attempt to start a holiday called Gay Jeans Day.
And it's one where if you're gay,
you're supposed to wear jeans that day.
And you're like, what?
Well, it's a very clever and thoughtful holiday.
Because the whole point of the holiday,
the real point of the holiday, is
to see whether straight men will deliberately not
wear jeans on the day out of fear
that they will be misidentified as gay.
And it does then make people confront, well,
I'm not homophobic at all.
But if someone, a total stranger,
thought I was gay, that would be the worst thing ever.
So I better not wear jeans today.
It's an interesting idea.
And it is building on this representative heuristic
of saying, well, once people know about the holiday,
then the stereotype will be gays, jeans equals gay,
no jeans equals not gay.
And then, well, you've got to make sure
that total strangers don't make a mistake about my orientation.
Because Lord knows where that could lead.
So questions?
Questions about this?
All right.
So let's see.
Oh, yeah.
Another fun example of this is if someone
claims to have an IQ that's better than one person out
of a billion, well, one possibility
is they really are one out of a billion.
But how many people are actually one out of a billion?
Very few.
And what would be the false positive rate for identifying
people that smart?
Probably enormous.
So if you figure there's only the seven smartest people
on Earth, there's seven of them.
But how many people would get falsely identified
as being one of the seven smartest people on Earth?
There could be a million people if you're so identified.
And so the conditional probability
that you are that smart, given that you've
been identified as such by some test or other, is super low.
There actually is a society called JICA Society
where they claim to be a one in a billion level of intellect.
And at least my last check, there were three members.
They claim they're still looking for the other four.
We haven't found them yet.
But if you think you can qualify, let us know.
We'll give a test that only we're smart enough
to actually grade.
Even no one but us can do it.
All right.
So questions about that?
So then let us move on to risk misperceptions.
So remember, the rational explanation
of this assumption says that on average, people's beliefs
are true.
On average, people's beliefs are true.
The average belief is correct.
And that would hold, of course, for assessments of risk,
such as the risk of being killed by a terrorist
or dying in a plane crash or a car crash
or dying from drinking too much water or from alcohol poisoning
or from a brick falling on your head.
All these different risks you face.
So let's see.
Lately, I've taken to asking professors in different areas,
how afraid are you on a scale from 0 to 10
that you're going to say something which will lead
your students to protest you?
And I've been getting some numbers
that seem extraordinarily high, even
for people who don't seem very controversial at all to me.
Whereas I say many controversial things.
And I say, like, 0 to 10, like a 1 and 1 half.
So I think more likely than the average person,
or I think it's astronomically unlikely anyone would ever
protest most professors.
But then, look, the stuff you see in the news,
these are the worst things that happened on Earth that day
in the field of students getting angry over a professor
for making some level of comment.
Because what do you need to have a great story about a professor
being protested?
You want to have the statement be totally inoffensive
and the students to be hysterical.
That's the ideal story.
So professor says that Europe is further north than Africa.
And then the students flip out at him.
All right, that's a perfect story.
Then as the statement becomes crazier,
or the students become more moderate,
the story gets worse.
So the best stories are these ones
where students are upset for no reason.
But there's a vast number of professors in the world.
And there are journalists trying to find these stories
and share them and make you very aware of them.
So I still say that my risk is really low.
I don't want this to be a self-reversing prophecy.
I have never gotten a single student evaluation
that said that I said something offensive, ever, 20 years.
That's what I've gotten.
So what are the odds that I would get something way worse?
So I figured, on one student going and complaining
that you're offensive, that must be way more common than a riot.
I think that one angry student just saying,
yeah, really offended me when he said that thing.
That's got to be way more common than there's
just a giant crowd of protesters swarm me and throw stuff at me.
So that seems like it'd be 1,000 times more common for there
to be one angry student.
And since I haven't even had that problem,
I'm really not scared about the other problem.
All right.
Anyways, but the question is, are people on average
accurate about this?
Maybe I'm the one that is living in a dream about how safe I am.
And actually, I'm just about to go and cause a riot right now.
I am in five, four, three, two, one.
No riot.
And then he said that there wouldn't
be a riot in five seconds.
And that really upset me and caused a riot.
So anyway, there's a big empirical literature
looking at people's assessments of risk.
And again, it's very similar to this calibration thing,
where we're trying to go on this axis.
We put people's beliefs about probability
that something bad is going to happen.
And then here we have the actual probability, which
usually happens to the actual frequency.
So this is subjective belief.
This is an observed frequency.
And then rational expectations means
we're on the 45 degree line.
People think there's an 80% risk of things that really
happen 80% of the time.
They think there's an 8% risk of things that
happen 80% of the time, and so on.
So anyway, empirical literature says
that we're not on the 45 degree line in lots of ways.
So lots of findings and lots of details.
So I'll just tell you the big findings.
Big finding is that we are really bad at handling
low probability events.
So what this says is that if we go and zoom in
on the part of this graph from 0% to 10%,
so we go and zoom in on the really small risks,
that's where we screw up very badly.
And how are we supposed to screw up?
Well, sometimes we go and treat low probability events
as if they have a 0 probability.
So rounding down to 0 is one common thing people do.
Another common thing, though, is rounding up
from 1 in a million to 1 in 100.
So there seems to be this binary response of either saying
it is 0 when it's not.
So a 1 in a million chance of dying
isn't a 0 chance of dying.
If there's a 1 in a million chance of dying daily,
then every day 300 people die in the United States,
which is noticeable, and it adds up.
From 0, of course, then it would be 0 every day.
But then the other problem is treating low probability event
as being much more likely than it really is.
Normally, when people do this, they still
think that it's absolutely low, like maybe it's a 1% chance.
But if it is like a 1 in a billion event
and you're rounding up to 1 in 100,
that leads to massive waste of resources.
And this is probably where terrorism falls.
So I'm not sure if there's actually
any study just asking people, what
do you think your odds are of dying from terrorism?
But what I can tell you is, in terms
of the objective frequency, it is really low.
So it would be like the opposite.
Remember that everybody dies of something eventually, so far.
So an actual risk that it will be terrorism
is under 1 in 10,000.
So if you were to actually go and ask people,
what are the odds that you will ever, in your entire life,
that your cause of death will be terrorism?
I don't know, so what it would be, I mean,
on this, I don't think it's ever been done.
But I think it's got to be at least 1 in 1,000,
maybe even higher than that.
And I would also bet that right after a terrorist attack,
it jumps up, especially in the country that it's happened.
Now, a fun thing about this empirical work
is it's very standard for advocates
of paternalistic safety regulation
to claim that the empirical evidence is totally
on their side.
And again, so what is the idea?
So again, like in a standard model of, say, labor markets,
so suppose that we're talking about nuclear workers, where
there's some probability that a nuclear worker gets
killed in a meltdown.
So if that is the number of hours that are sold,
that's the wage.
This is supply and demand for a totally normal job
without the risk of a nuclear meltdown.
What is our standard supply and demand story
about how the market will be different if there
is a risk of radiation?
You want to do that by radiation?
Supply is going to go to the left.
Yes, supply is lower.
Supply is lower.
And as a result of this, of course,
what happens to the wage?
Goes up.
And this gives employers an incentive to do what?
To try to mitigate the risk.
It gives employers an incentive to go and do it.
And if they can go and get rid of the risk for a cost
less than the end of the wage premium,
they will get rid of the risk entirely.
If they can get rid of half the risk
and get rid of, say, 2 3rds of the wage premium,
but then the remaining half the risk costs more than that,
then they'll get rid of half the risk.
And then you'll just live with the remaining half the risk.
And this is, of course, all exactly what social optimality
will tell you to do.
So normally, when people who know economics
want to argue for risk regulation,
they'll say, well, that's what the model is.
But you have to remember that people are rational about risk.
Now, there's just one problem.
If that is your story, then you need
to actually go and look at the detailed empirics
to figure out whether those particular regulations
that you were pushing for do, in fact, compensate for the risk
misperceptions, because here's the thing
about safety regulation.
How many safety regulations are concerned
with making people get more safety
than they would get on their own?
Probably not a lot.
No.
Regulations that try to make you have people get more safety.
Yeah.
Almost all risk regulation is about pushing more safety.
What fraction of safety regulation
is about trying to get people to not
take unnecessary precautions that are not numerically
justified?
Virtually none.
I can think of a very small number of examples.
Now, this is odd based upon what I just
told you about the evidence.
Because if people sometimes round down to zero,
that is a reason to go and say you have to go
and adopt these additional safety precautions
because you think that nothing can hurt you,
but it really can't.
But there should also be a bunch of regulations
on the other side saying that you're not allowed
to offer certain precautions
because people are exaggerating a danger.
And again, there's almost none of those.
The best example I know of, like I can think of two actually.
Well, one's real and one's proposed.
So there is a regulation in the book saying that it's illegal
for airlines to advertise their safety records.
And in terms of the human tendency
to exaggerate the risk of low probability events,
this makes some sense, right?
Because if airlines were to go and be advertising their safety
regulations all the time,
this would further amplify human's tendency
to be terrified of flying.
And then we'd kill babies.
All right?
We don't want to kill babies, right?
The babies should live.
All right?
So that's one where that is a genuine one where it seems,
again, probably the actual reason is just rent seeking
and the airlines don't want anyone talking about it.
But it does actually serve a useful function
of getting people to worry a bit less about something
that they really shouldn't worry about at all.
Another example of this is Ralph Nader advocates banning all
sunblock with an SPF over 15.
Because he claims the science says
that nobody needs more than 15.
All right?
And then it's just companies that are taking advantage
of the ignorance of people who don't realize
that 15 is full protection.
And they're just ripping you off.
And so the law should go and stop this.
All right?
Now, as a person who has tried 15 as well as higher than 15,
I just think Ralph Nader is wrong.
Right? So that's my natural skin tone.
And therefore, like I have gotten badly burned with 15,
especially remember that you may be using it
when you're swimming or at the beach.
Where even if 15 is perfectly fine, if you don't do anything
that dilutes it, you may still want to have the SPF 90.
So that if it loses 90% of its efficacy, you're still protected.
So anyway, but anyway, if Ralph Nader were right,
that would actually be a regulation trying
to discourage excessive precaution.
But those are super rare.
And instead, virtually all regulation is just trying
to make people even more paranoid than they already are.
Sometimes, you know, sometimes of course there are risks
that people are rounding down on.
But there's other risks that people are really rounding
up on.
And again, terrorism.
Over a trillion dollars spent by government trying
to fight a nearly nonexistent risk.
Right? And it's like how many government programs are here
to say, look, let's be numerous about terrorism, people.
How many school curricula just have a section on probability
where they go and try to go
and explain how terrorism is a microscopic risk?
Right? There's, you know, how many public service ads?
Do you know how likely are we to get
by terrorism is less likely than dying in a bathtub?
Are you scared of bathtubs?
No? Well, there's not many scared of terrorism, people.
Right? There's no effort to do this
in any country I've ever heard of.
I guess John McCain had some statement saying, look,
I'm not scared to fly, and I'm not scared of terrorists either.
Right? And it's like, all right, well,
that's a step in the right direction anyway.
Well, then should we go and cut back on the efforts?
No. No way.
That's cowardice.
Is it cowardice to not spend a lot
of money fighting microscopic risks?
No, it is if it's not for Antimerica, I guess.
So. All right.
So, anyway, the link between the empirical literature
and what governments do is tenuous at best.
And really what's going on is confirmation bias
where people are finding the part
of the psychological evidence which supports the status quo
and ignoring all the evidence that undermines the status quo
because people think the status quo is great.
Generally.
Right. And especially, of course,
for highly socially desirable things like safety
and protection from terrorism and other things where just
to go and say, I don't see what the big deal is, who cares,
is like, why are we so worried about this thing?
These are not things that will make you friends in general.
Right. You know, so.
Yeah. Don't think that just because I say it that you can go
and say to other people that they will say, oh, wow,
that's so great.
Right. You're good.
Your professor is great for saying it and you're great
for relaying the information.
Right. Not a likely reaction.
Yes. I remember when my dad's trying to get me to freak
out about terrorism and he says, well,
maybe one day you'll understand things that I understand
and I believe as I do.
And I resisted the temptation to say, well, is it possible
that one day I'll lose the part of my brain
that lets me do math and.
But until that day, it's not going to happen.
All right.
So anyway.
If you really believe the psychological evidence,
there would be a, it would make sense that you want
to have a bunch of paternalistic regulations
to make people less safe.
Because they're wasting their hard-earned money fighting
microscopic risks.
And of course, there's almost no regulation
of this kind in the world.
All right.
So questions about any of this?
Yeah.
I'm curious to know what lawsuits and legal things
like that that have found liabilities
and implied liabilities in more recent decades
than previous decades and how that might affect the existence
or nonexistence of regulations, you know, one way or the other
in both instances here.
Yeah. It's complicated.
So I mean, if there's a regulation you're following it,
then, well, you're not legally invulnerable then.
But it's much harder to prove negligence if you say, look,
I'm just doing whatever the government is saying.
So like sometimes you need to prove negligence.
Sometimes you don't.
So I actually have sort of a meta view on this.
I think that actually people greatly overestimate the risk
of lawsuits.
And that, so I think if businesses were well run,
they would all have a legal department that worked
like the legal department at Uber.
So like, you know, any well-run business will have a legal
department like Uber has
where the question they're being asked is not, is this legal,
but rather how can we get away with what we want to do?
That's what a useful lawyer says.
On the other hand, the crummy lawyers
that most businesses have are there trying to say, look,
I strongly advise you not to do this
because we could get sued.
Right? And that's the kind of thing where not only are they,
you know, like, well, could be,
like we should tolerate a certain risk of being sued.
Well, what will the damages be?
What are the odds?
But also, if your lawyer ever tells you
that in writing, they've already heard your case
because someone could discover the lawyer's advice advising you
not to do something.
And then the other side finds out that you did it anyway.
And then so, like, you know, if I were running a firm
and I had some lawyers, like if they said something like that,
I would say, look, I'm just going to stop you right there.
Like, I think, from now on, I never want you
to give me your opinion on anything like that.
Like, your job is to help me do what I want to do
and to give me probabilities of lawsuits
and the expected damages of lawsuits.
You can do that.
I don't want you.
Right? And never go and never strongly warn me about anything.
I don't like that.
I don't want to be strongly warned.
I'm, like, your job is to give me numbers,
which will then feed into a business decision.
There are not two parts of this firm, the legal part,
which tells us what's legal to do, and the business part,
which then operates within the framework that you decide.
No, no, no, no.
That's not what I want.
What I want is for you to be totally subordinate
to this business, and you are here to help us
and to give us numbers.
And then ascend.
But then you can get sued.
You're fired.
Okay? I don't want anyone like you anywhere in this building
because this is illegal.
We're not running a logic class or philosophy seminar
or anything like that.
We're just trying to run a business.
And if we lose a million dollars in lawsuits every year,
and we make two million by so-called breaking the law,
like what some people,
what ignorant people would call breaking the law.
So really everything you need to know comes from Littlefinger
when Ned Stark tells him that's the reason,
and Littlefinger says, not if we win.
So that's the kind of lawyer I want.
Yes?
Yes?
Right. Also possibly, although again, this is one where,
like depending upon the probability of getting sued
for malpractice by the firm, you could just go and compensate them.
Or you could go and give them a contract absolving them
of all malpractice liability.
Well, I don't think so.
Like if a firm says, I will indemnify you,
it's very standard in contracts to put out, to indemnify,
say in the event of any lawsuit, you'll be fully indemnified.
So I've signed contracts like that.
So like I've written things for people where it says
that if there's ever a copyright lawsuit,
I must indemnify the person that hired me,
or the firm that hired me.
I think that's legal.
And there may be some additional rules.
But, you know, like basically you just want to get,
you want to get you a suit.
And then you say, well, I don't want to have bad lawyers.
But there's a bunch of other ways you can get high-quality
lawyers, just get people with lots of experience
and fancy credentials.
But, you know, and I bet this is what Uber does.
I bet that they have a great legal team.
But people who have been told, look, I don't want you to tell me
that what we're doing is illegal.
I don't want you to say
that licensing laws are clearly against us.
What I want you to say is it's always, we can litigate this.
That's what I want you to say.
I want you to say, well, there's only one way to find
out what the law is, and that's just to go and try new things
and see what happens.
So, and Uber does this, and it's worked very well for them.
You know, they have a few.
Did anyone know what happened
to the French Uber executives who got sent to jail?
Are they still in jail?
Anyone?
So, all right.
So sometimes you can go too far.
But maybe they were notified, actually.
Who knows?
Take care of your family if anything ever happens to you.
Uber will provide for you.
All right.
All right.
So I'll stop here for tonight.
