You want to put that up there towards the,
or you can just put it on the corner of yours right there.
All right, everyone, let's get started.
So everyone agrees for the PhD micro too?
I know, it's distributed.
You all agree, right?
98% says yes.
Okay, good.
All right, good.
All right, let's see.
Here, and you can go back to the corner.
So we've already violated one of Thomas Schelling's
fundamental laws of social science,
which is that in any room,
students will always sit as far away
from the professor as possible.
For some reason, the front row is full,
and the rear rows are empty,
which I've never seen,
I don't think in my entire teaching career,
the only reason people sit in the front is normally
because there are no chairs left.
All right, so maybe this signals
that economics itself is gonna change
in the course of this course.
We shall see.
All right, so you remember all of the microeconomics
that Walter Williams taught you last semester?
This class, we do everything else.
Everything that he has not taught you,
we will now proceed to learn.
All right, so that means basic game theory,
information economics,
and then a whole lot of what have been called anomalies,
things that, at least on the surface,
do not fit with standard microeconomic theory.
All right, and then there's an underlying goal,
which educational psychology tells me
is highly unlikely to be achieved,
but I'm going to try anyway,
and that is to teach you how to think like economists.
There's a lot of research on teaching people how to think,
which is very negative,
and I trust it because usually the people
who do the research begin saying,
I'm gonna show how it's possible
to teach people how to think,
and then they come away, I failed.
Anyway, we are going to pursue the quixotic quest
for economic understanding on a deep level.
I'm sorry, can you close the door?
Thank you.
All right, so prerequisites.
So I assume that you know multivariate calculus,
not the really hard stuff,
but how to differentiate an equation
with three variables in it.
So if you've forgotten that,
it's almost the same as doing one with two variables.
In fact, it's really similar.
Still don't know why the D is different
when you do it with multivariates.
I'm sure it's not one of the best, but.
All right, and then I also assume
you know intermediate micro.
So if you don't know intermediate micro currently,
this does not mean that you simply cannot take the course.
It does mean you should get an intermediate textbook
and start reading it to get ahead of the game.
All right, then for texts.
We have a very old PhD micro text,
the very one that I used in grad school,
which so far I haven't seen one that's better.
I'm not saying it's great,
but I haven't seen one that is clearly better than this one,
so, and I've been using it for a while.
So David Krebs' Course in Microeconomic Theory.
I do think it is the least unreadable of all the main ones.
It's not really high praise, but there it is.
Then we've got two books by Steve Lansberg,
both of which are highly readable.
And one way you might think they're basic,
but on the other end,
I read these books in grad school and several times,
so now I understand what they were supposed
to be teaching me.
So I think that they do actually do help you
think like economists.
Then we got Richard Thaler's book, Letters Curse,
and then Daniel Kahneman's Thinking, Vast and Slow.
And then there's also different readings
that are assigned throughout.
If there is a star, then they're available on JSTOR.
So you all know about JSTOR, right?
And you all know how to access journals
through library.gmu.edu.
So your lives are vastly better than mine was in your shoes.
We were supposed to go to the library's basement
and request a folder and then copy every page by hand,
just to avoid copyrights and to maximize transactions costs.
So anyway, you don't have to do that anymore.
Right, and then everything that is by me is on my webpage.
So you can go to econfaculty.gmu.edu
slash vcaplin slash cv.hnl.
Or if that's hard to remember,
you can also just go to www.vcaplin.com.
All right, so for this class.
So there's gonna be one midterm and one final exam.
And the midterm counts for 40% and the final counts for 45.
And the homework is the remaining 15.
Do not think this means that homework
is that important to your grade
because the variance in homework is not that large.
Right, so usually over half the students
can get full credit in the homework.
This is not true on the exams,
which means the people who do not do the homework
will often lose a full grade or two grades in the class.
This is awkward sometimes.
Someone does great on the exams,
they don't do the homework,
and then they have to give you a C according to formula.
But anyway, so rather than,
I have already modified the formula a bit,
but this is the formula,
this is the way I will compute the grade.
And if it seems unjust, I'm gonna go with the formula.
So you have been warned.
So, and these weights are fixed.
So when someone does poorly on the midterm
and they ask me what can I do to improve my grade,
the formula implies the answer to the question.
Do well on the homework and the final,
and then your grade will rise.
Okay, then there's no formal grade for participation,
but at the end of the semester,
I go through everyone in the class
and make a subjective judgment
about whether you made this a better class
for the class overall.
And if the answer is yes,
then I bump you up one third of grade.
And then I also, since my memory
may be getting worse my old age,
I think more likely I just accept
how my memory was always flawed.
I also tell, you don't need to remember this,
but the last class I will tell everyone,
if you believe you deserve credit for participation
and you fear I don't know your name,
email me a photograph of yourself.
And then this will prevent the injustice
that would otherwise occur if I can't link the two up.
Right, so anyway, I will tell you this again on the last day.
At least among undergraduates,
I'm shocked at how few you bother to take me up on this.
So maybe they're just very humble,
like, oh clearly I totally don't deserve anything.
Or maybe they just think I know everybody.
So, especially when we meet once a week,
that's actually not so likely,
although this class is unusually small this year.
So you know, we have like 23 students.
Earlier years we've been having like 35.
So this does improve your chances of being known,
but it does not raise them up to 100% or anything like that.
Okay, then, so for homework,
there is a lot of homework for this class.
So I have a simple philosophy this class.
First of all, earning your PhD in microeconomics
should be the most important thing in your life.
We all agree to that, right?
Secondly, microeconomics is the most important part
of economics, therefore this class
is now the most important thing in your life.
And as a result, we will be doing a lot of homework
in order to go and learn the enormous amount of material
that we still have to learn.
There will be 10 homeworks, eight graded, two not graded.
There will be one that you will be given today
and will be due next class.
In the syllabus it gives the deadlines
for all of the homeworks.
In the event of snow days,
which for about the past four years
there have been multiple snow days,
the week is determined by the number of weeks
that we have met.
So it's not based upon the actual calendar.
So if there is a blizzard next week,
then week two is two weeks from today.
Right, so any official canceled snow day,
we just relabel what the week is.
So the syllabus is gold, but the week is malleable.
Does that mean we miss out on?
I mean, so if we miss days,
then normally what I will do is two things.
First, I will accelerate a small amount
and secondly, I will trim material
until we're back on track.
So I will not simply cut out the last week,
which I think is bad.
Was the last week so inferior to all the material
that we can just forget it?
No, instead I'll try to go and cut the marginal material
for each week until we are back on budget,
which that is the effort.
All right, and then on the homework,
unlike the exam, there are discrete grades.
So either get a check plus,
which is four points maximum credit,
check, which is three points,
check minus, which is two,
or if you don't turn it in, you get zero.
And then if the homework is late,
then you will lose one point.
If I've already given you the answer key,
then you get zero.
So that's, you're a good enough economist
to understand why after I hand out the answer key,
it is no longer, you can no longer get credit
for trying anything in.
All right, so let's see.
The best way to contact me is email,
which is right here and should also, yes,
is up on the top left corner of the first page.
And then you can also satisfy a lot of requests
just by going to the class webpage.
You get the easiest mnemonic is www.bcaplin.com.
Many people would say,
I'll go immediately go to Blackboard and start asking.
I put up my webpage before there was Blackboard,
and I don't see any,
the way that Blackboard has improved upon what I've done.
So we don't use Blackboard.
We just use the same thing that I've always used,
which I know how to manage.
So anyway, there's no Blackboard.
Don't worry about that.
Just go to this webpage.
That's everything you need to know about this course.
And then I've got official office hours
on Monday, Wednesday from 133 and 11 Carroll Hall.
So you guys all know where Carroll Hall is.
Since I'm not, it's in the middle of nowhere.
All right.
So walk that way for a while.
And after you pass the heating and cooling plants,
then there is something that looks like an abandoned church,
and that is Carroll Hall.
It was a church at one point.
All right, so.
Yes, a few people who don't like public choice
have made jokes about it.
When they say, I'm glad I'm here
at the center of your religion.
All right, and let's see then.
There's my phone number.
There as well.
So sometimes students will leave work hours early
to come and talk to me face to face.
This is perfectly fine, but you don't have to.
You won't hurt my feelings if you call me on the phone
and ask me questions,
or if you want to Skype with me, that's fine.
And in addition, if you want to come to talk to me
any time around, that is normally fine.
But if it's outside official hours, then you're gambling.
So you might want to call in advance
and make sure that I'm gonna be around or whatever.
But in any case, certainly I'll never be annoyed
if you show up at any point in the day.
Once in a while, I'll say I'm really busy
and I'm doing an interview,
but normally I can talk to you anytime you want.
So then again, of course, if you want to talk on the phone,
Skype, just call me anytime.
So I won't automatically answer, but it's likely.
But again, normally email is the best way.
But if you would rather converse,
or like if you want to see my face through Skype,
all these things are doable.
And again, if you do want to schlep out of the office,
that's fine too.
I'm puzzled why people will say leave work two hours early
and fight traffic just to ask me one question.
It happens that I'm like,
all right, well, I guess you really wanted
a personal touch here.
Why did you answer three rather than four?
Well, because you have to add one there.
Oh, okay, all right.
All right.
And then here's my schedule.
I now have taught this class 18 times, something like that.
So I'm pretty sure I can do what I set out to do.
So with snowstorms, sometimes that means
that we need to cut out a few topics,
but generally it works out fine.
So I'm not gonna go over the entire rest of the syllabus,
but let me just think about all the main
bureaucratic questions.
Can I be in this class?
Yes, you can be in this class.
What if I'm not a student and don't pay any money
to be here?
You can still be in this class.
What if I have a friend or cousin or enemy
that I would like to bring to the class with me?
As long as they do not bite people,
this is also fine and you do not ever,
you don't even have to ask me.
I'm happy to be introduced to any person
that you might know, but you don't need my permission.
Anyone who wants to learn economics is welcome.
I don't believe that there's a highly elastic supply
of these people, which is how I can offer this deal.
Anyway, so you don't have to be officially enrolled
in this class.
If you wanna be officially enrolled,
that is totally fine with me.
If you want some advice about whether you will fail
the class, then you can talk to me about your background
or you can just look at the class webpage
and see does this look like something I can learn
during this time frame or does it not look like that?
And if you are still confused, I'll give you my best guess,
but I will not be paternalistic.
You can decide for yourself whether you think
you can probably lose the class.
And I think actually no longer do I ever sign
any paperwork.
I'm a little confused about what the system actually is.
But sometimes I get an email from a secretary saying,
can this person be here?
And again, the answer is always yes,
the person can be here if they want.
Officially, unofficially, semi-officially,
whatever capacity you wish to be here,
learning economics is fine in my view.
All right, so I guess those are the main
bureaucratic questions.
Let's see.
Yeah, I mean, so the exams, we'll talk about them
a lot more as they get closer.
But anyway, if you wanna have an idea
of what the exams look like, I have a large number
of old exams up on the class webpage.
So your exams will be very similar to those.
All of my exams are fully open book and notes,
which goes back to how I'm trying to test
whether you've learned to think like an economist,
not whether you've memorized anything.
So if you're suddenly having amnesia during the exam,
you can look your notes and find out.
But on the other hand, if there's a question
and you're like, oh my God, this would require
thinking like an economist, and I don't think
like an economist at all, then it will be a problem.
But this we'll talk about as we get closer
to the actual exam.
So my exams are considered by many to be hard,
but that is only in nominal terms are they hard.
So the real average grade that I occur for is a B plus,
although the nominal percentage that I shoot for is 50%,
which again, I do because I'm trying to maximize
the spread in the scores, so shooting for 50%
gives me the best chance to actually get
the maximum spread to distinguish people
who really know their stuff from those
who don't know their stuff so well.
So let's see, I think those are the main
bureaucratic issues that often come up.
Any other purely bureaucratic issues
that are weighing upon you, which would otherwise
impede your ability to master the material?
Just in terms of interpreting this, is today week one?
Today is week one, yes.
Let's see.
See, the other thing I like to do is,
is there something I can do so that I can see the faces?
Yes, okay, will this cause a disaster?
All right, let's avoid that.
Let's see, so if I do this, then people in the front row
will not be penalized for the, all right, so.
All right, I feel so much better now.
Okay, all right, so no, all right,
so bureaucratic questions, any questions about the syllabus
or why we're here?
Okay, in that case, we will begin with
the next set of notes, so let's see.
I think I would, so it's, this is a weird configuration,
so I'll try to figure out what I'm gonna do here,
but it's all right, so.
After over 10 years of teaching, I eventually found out
that it takes more time just to give all,
and pass all the notes out to students,
and have them shuffle around and talk to each other
when there's a misallocation.
So I'm gonna do this, and then I'm gonna do this.
I was throwing people into the comments,
and I'm not sure how well they're accepting.
Let's see, let me, do I keep one for myself?
Let's see, so somehow, that's weird.
I already have a copy.
Oh, you have a spare?
Yeah.
Okay.
Okay, so today we're going to go over two topics
that officially you have already had a bunch of times,
but in my experience, not only PhD students,
but a lot of professors don't really understand
these concepts very well, so it is worthwhile
to go over them, and especially there's many people
who kind of understand them, but they lapse into error
at the problem hat, so I'm trying to forever inoculate
everyone in this room against ever misusing these concepts,
so we will try.
And the two concepts that people mess up very frequently,
despite many years of study of economics,
are efficiency and probability.
All right, so let's just start with efficiency.
There are many meanings of the word efficiency.
So there's one that normal people use
that you get out of the dictionary,
which is that efficiency is something like,
quote, effective operations measured by a comparison
of production with cost as an energy time and money,
like a fuel-efficient vehicle.
All right, so fuel-efficient vehicle means
you get a lot of miles per gallon out of it.
That is a definition of efficiency,
and economists, once in a while, do use efficiency
in this dictionary sense, such as the ratio
of the value of output to input, something like that.
But normally, economists use the word efficiency
in totally different ways that have nothing to do
with this verbal definition, and then the really bad part
is economists will often equivocate,
which means they will use multiple definitions
in the same essay or the same page,
the same paragraph, the same sentence,
and then what are we to do other than say, stop,
you have used the same word in two different sentences
in a single sentence without appearing
to have any idea what you're doing.
All right, so the two most common uses
of efficiency in economics are, first of all,
parade efficiency, and second of all,
counterhicks or cost-benefit efficiency.
So we've got parade efficiency,
and we've got counterhicks,
which is also known as cost-benefit efficiency.
All right, and since a great deal of my career
is about analyzing efficiency, it is worthwhile
to really get a good grip on what these concepts mean.
So starting with parade efficiency,
after famous economists and political scientist
Vilfredo Pareto, who was a teacher
of Mussolini in Switzerland, yes.
So if you read some of Mussolini's pre-war columns,
you'll detect some influence of Pareto
as he was grappling with what does Mussolini mean,
who is Mussolini really?
Eventually, not to blame poor Pareto for any of this, but.
Well, maybe, you decide.
All right, so now, anytime you remember
any welfare theorem in all economics,
it is almost certain that it is a theorem
about parade efficiency.
So almost all of the famous theorems
are in fact about parade efficiency.
A situation is.
Pareto efficient, if and only if.
As you guys are familiar with IFF.
Yes, so a word that's, you know, if you have no background
in math, you may think it's a typo, but no.
It means if and only if.
So it's Pareto efficient, if and only if.
The only way to make one person better off is
to make another person worse off.
The only way to make one person better off is
to make another person worse off.
And then there is a related concept,
the concept of the Pareto improvement.
A Pareto improvement is any change
that makes someone better off
without making anyone else worse off.
So notice, the Pareto efficiency is an evaluation
of states of affairs.
Pareto improvement is an evaluation of changes.
Evaluation of changes.
Right. Now a slight variation that you may have heard is a
situation that's Pareto efficient, if and only
if there's no way to make everyone better off.
Now in English there's a huge difference
between these two things.
Wait. So, wait, is the same thing
to make one person better off and make no one else worse off
or to make everyone better off?
How are those two things the same?
One is making one person out of 7 billion better off
and the other 7 billion minus one people the same.
And another one is making all 7 billion people better off.
But the answer is that normally this concept is used
in a model of perfect mathematical continuity.
And in such a model, then one follows very naturally
from the other because if you manage to squeeze
out one penny's worth of gain for one person
in a continuous world, then how could you benefit everybody?
Just give everybody 1 7 billionth of that penny
and then everybody has a very tiny gain.
All right.
So, now in theory it is possible
that someone could propose a genuine,
a genuine bona fide Pareto improvement and a bunch
of people will complain.
It's possible in fact that I could propose a Pareto
improvement and everyone will complain and say
that my idea is the worst idea they ever heard
and will destroy the world.
That is possible.
All right.
Why? Well, for strategic reasons.
So, suppose that I'm offering you a job
as a system professor of economics
and I say how does $200,000 sound?
All right.
Now, one thing you might say, you know,
$2,000, $100,000 a year.
You might just say sold, awesome.
On the other hand, you might say,
man this guy is really dumb.
He doesn't have any idea what the market is like.
So, you might say $200,000, how would I survive on that
and start complaining about it.
I mean, I hear that like everybody gets that at least.
I mean, you could just start complaining
about my offer despite the fact that it's a great deal for you.
Now, do not try this at home.
But, I'm sure you have noticed times when you propose a deal
that is really good for somebody
and they start complaining about it.
So, maybe they're just confused
but another possibility is they're very clever
and they sense in your generous offer weakness.
And, from that weakness they hope to profit
by asking for even more.
This is really blatant if you try offering kids a deal
and say, hey kids, how would you like to have three chocolates?
So, I'm only three, how can you give me three?
And, they start crying.
You're like, man, before I said anything you had no chocolates.
I just offered you three and now you're crying at me.
So, but they're trying to get more.
I'm going to give you the chocolate.
All right.
So, and sometimes with certain kinds of weak parents this works.
And, they start crying.
You offer them a favor and then they complain
and then they get even more.
All right.
So, what this means is that there's a big difference
between a standard of a Pareto improvement
and what could be called a demonstrative preference
standard where everyone says, yes, I agree, this is fantastic.
All right.
So, if you are fond of Austrian economics,
sometimes they will talk
about the demonstrative preference standard.
The Pareto standard is different from that
because it admits the possibility
that you could deliver a Pareto improvement
that is universally denounced and everyone says, no way,
I hate your idea and I hate you.
And, I absolutely refuse to go along with it.
And, then you do it and everyone may be quietly thinking, wow,
this is way better than what I had before.
All right.
So, that's possible.
Does this mean that it's always that way?
No, of course not.
But, you know, the Pareto improvement standard is not
in any way the same as everyone vocally agrees
that they like what you're offering.
And, it's possible in theory.
And, you have probably observed plenty of times in practice
where someone has actually bought an idea
that would be an improvement for them.
Why do they do that?
Because they want to, because they,
is it because they don't like improvements?
No, it's because they want more.
And, if you offer them something, then they sense
that maybe there's even more where that came from.
Yes.
I, from what I understand from demonstrated preference is
that it's the thing that people actually, in fact,
would choose if given the option, not what they say.
So, someone who says I would buy magazines
with normal looking women in them, but when they actually go
and buy magazines, they buy ones with.
So, that, so, like, the answer again is there is a multiplicity
of the language that people use.
But, among Austrian economists
who like the demonstrated preference standard,
really the goal, really the only way you can actually truly
say that something does, does improve people
in this demonstrated preference standard is
if they in fact make the trade.
So, if you go and pass the hat for,
to raise $100,000 for asteroid deflection
and everyone, otherwise everyone dies and you don't manage
to raise any money, this would actually by the standard show
that people do not in fact prefer the donation
to getting destroyed, even though that may seem strange.
But, yes.
So, and again, sometimes, well,
it's just that they haven't proven that they,
that they actually would rather donate
or that they prefer the money to,
or they prefer not being destroyed to donating money.
But, yes.
There is this other point of there's a difference
between what people say
and what actually makes them better off.
And, when we get to psychology and economics, we'll talk a bit
about what psychologists call social desirability bias,
tendency of people to say what sounds good rather
than what's true, which is a very interesting field
of research because it is the empirical proof
of what economists have been saying
without any evidence for all this time.
Namely, that people often actually say one thing
but want another thing.
I can see most of the economists I talk to, it's just like,
well, people could be lying.
I suppose they could be, but do you have any actual evidence
for that?
Prove that they're not lying.
Sounds kind of paranoid.
But, psychologists actually do try
to document real empirical differences
between what people say and what people in fact do when they are
in that situation, such as which magazines they're going
to buy, which magazines they're going to watch.
Which magazines they're going to buy.
All right.
Now, in a highly stylized theoretical setting, right,
and what is a highly stylized theoretical setting?
It's a homework problem or a model in a journal.
All right.
That's what we mean by a highly stylized theoretical setting.
It's one where we construct it perfectly
so that all the pieces fit nicely, right.
In these settings, Pareto improvements are conceivable.
So, in settings like this,
Pareto improvements are conceivable.
For example, if we have a world
where everyone has identical preferences and endowments
and there's an externality.
All right.
So, how do we get that?
Well, you know, you just think about homework problems,
you're done.
Everyone has identical preferences.
Everyone has identical endowments.
There's a negative externality of pollution.
Everyone's polluting.
And what would be a, what could be a Pareto improvement
if we just point a gun at everybody's head and say,
hey everybody, pollute 5% less now.
All right. And in this world,
it is possible that's a Pareto improvement.
Like so. And that's the whole set up of a model like that.
So, that is possible.
And you might say that people don't like being coerced.
Well, they don't like being coerced,
but they also do like sometimes.
And in fact, in this model, they definitely like what happens
when other people besides themselves are coerced.
And we can set the model up very easily so that the dislike you
experience of having the gun at your head is much,
is smaller than the like that you get for the benefits
of the gun being pointed at the heads of everybody but yourself
for a net positive of the gun being pointed
at everybody's head.
All right.
So, that is totally doable in a model.
All right.
Okay. But, but, there's a very strong argument
in the real world, right.
The real world is different from a homework problem.
The real world is different from a model
that you publish in a journal.
The homework problem or the model, you can tailor it
to make it work to be just the way you want to prove your point.
But, the real world, you don't get to do that.
Right. The real world, you don't get
to actually make everything work just so to make it perfect.
At least, usually you don't.
I never have.
I've never been able to make the world perfect so far.
I don't know if anyone else had this opportunity.
Like, this is my day.
I'm doing everything right.
All right.
So, in the real world, there's a strong argument
that two weird things are true.
All right.
So, weird thing number one, everything's Pareto efficient.
All right.
So, that's weird thing number one.
And, weird thing number two is Pareto improvements
are impossible.
All right.
Now, I should warn you.
These are two things that are almost never mentioned
in this class, in a way when people teach this class
around the world.
And, yet, they are almost certainly true,
as I think I can convince you if you think about the real world.
All right.
So, why would these things be true?
Simple. It's highly unlikely that any change will literally
hurt no one.
Any change that you can imagine is going to have some person
who loses at least a small amount.
Furthermore, while many economists wave their hands
and say, well, we just compensate the losers.
In the real world, compensating losers is really hard.
And, remember, if it's to be a genuine Pareto improvement,
what percent of the losers do we have
to actually successfully compensate?
One hundred percent.
We can't miss a single loser.
Furthermore, even if we compensate every loser,
we have to make sure that we give everyone compensation,
which is at least as good as whatever he lost.
So, it's not enough just to give everybody a little bit
of compensation.
Say, well, everybody, all right, I found all the losers,
and I gave them each five bucks of compensation.
Problem solved.
Well, if there's one person who says, yeah,
but I lost by five dollars and one cent.
So, you still have failed to create a Pareto improvement.
Of course, he might be saying that,
even though he gained from the change.
He might just be going and being a squeaky wheel,
hoping to get some grease.
But, in the real world, what are the odds
that there's nobody genuinely like that?
Nobody who actually lost more than the other people,
and you have failed to adequately compensate,
you've missed no one, that is really pretty fanciful.
So, think about one of the most mundane transactions
in the world.
Let's see, does anyone even own a watch anymore?
They were more common when I first wrote these notes.
All right, so, suppose I want to buy, what is this?
What is that?
Suppose I want to buy whatever that is.
Actually, it is better to be a watch.
So, suppose that I go and buy somebody's watch.
All right, now, the very easy thing is,
it's very easy to say,
well, that was clearly a Pareto improvement
because you accepted my offer
because you value the money more than the watch.
I made the offer because I value the watch
more than the money, problem solved.
But, there are other people affected.
For example, anyone who ever would have asked you the time
is now going to be affected.
Right, so, anyone who might have asked you the time
is now going to be slightly inconvenienced
because, rather than being able to see you off the bat
and ask you what the time is,
they're going to have to search a little bit harder.
So, the loser here is in absolute sense,
now you value the watch.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
They are just, they're a little bit worse off
than they were before because now they have,
they are slightly inconvenienced.
Now, of course, you can say,
but aren't there some other people,
once Brian has the watch, they will benefit?
Yes, but those are two different groups of people.
Right, so, I don't follow around the person
that I buy the watch from all the time.
We don't walk, walk, walk around together all the time,
which means that we encounter different groups of strangers
who will ask for favors.
So, when you sell me your watch,
you are slightly hurting your strangers
while helping my strangers.
I'm not going to pray, don't prove it.
Some people have lost out.
Now, you might say, well, we'll just compensate
all the people who have asked you what the time is.
How?
We don't even know who these people are.
Who would have asked you the time?
How would you locate?
There's a crowd of people.
Who would have asked me the time if I had a watch?
Just imagine going through your day.
Where are all these people?
It'd be like Pokemon Go where you have a phone,
you have a spot.
Who are the people that would have asked me the time?
Where are they?
And then, how much, how inconvenienced were they?
So, there's just no feasible way
that you could imagine about compensating these people.
But, they're there.
Right, they really, or they do exist.
It's not like this is a native example
of people asking the time.
Now, Robin Hanson is the most diehard defender
of this compensation standard that I know.
So, he will sometimes say, well, look,
obviously for one individual change,
we can't compensate everybody, fine.
But, the general rule of allowing watch selling.
How about that?
So, we move up to a higher level
and we analyze a rule as being a pretty improvement
over another rule.
All right, so this sounds better,
but even there, there are some obvious problems.
Things like, well, what about someone
who's terminally ill and is gonna die today?
And then, you change the rule on him
and he wasted one of his last seconds
looking around for someone to ask the time of.
All right, so how is this person going to be better off
as a result of the change in the rule?
Right, and then, if we start expanding
our imagination further, I've just limited this
to people with ordinary preferences.
But, if you've ever been on the internet,
you may have found people with very strange preferences.
Strange preferences.
I don't get it.
I don't get it.
Now, some of them may just be making it up,
but they're not all making it up.
You know, like the guy in Australia
was the webpage about how North Korea
is the greatest country in the world
and all day, every day, just talks about how great it is
and how brilliant, well, as he used to be,
Kim Jong-il, and so anyway,
how brilliant his son now is, all this stuff.
All right, now, this person, all right,
maybe this person just gets a lot of fun
out of pretending to believe in North Korean communism,
but it's hard to believe that he isn't a true believer,
given that this is almost the only thing
he does with his life.
And, how does this guy feel about someone selling a watch?
Seems like he might be very upset.
It's like, another capitalism going and people going
selling stuff, commodifying things, right?
And so, this guy might be very angry, right?
Especially if he found out, say, I was benefiting,
then Brian Kepler, symbol of everything wrong in this world.
You know, someone who has repeatedly disrespected
our great leader and so, right?
And if you just think about how much anger and resentment
different people feel for other people, right?
And yes, some of it is probably just hot air,
but it's not all made up, right?
There really are a bunch of Democrats who hate Republicans,
a bunch of Republicans who hate Democrats,
and just to know a Democrat sold a watch
to his own advantage today,
I wish his watch had exploded.
I just wish he had burned his wrist and suffered.
I hate him so much.
All right, are we gonna compensate these people?
Are we gonna compensate the hateful people
who want other people to suffer and be miserable?
I don't see any sign of anyone making the slightest effort
to compensate these people, right?
And even if you wanted to, how would you do it?
Right, it's just not a feasible thing to do
in the real world.
And again, like if you were to have a rule about,
what would the rule be like?
All right, so we're gonna have a rule saying that
we compensate all the resentful people.
So we're gonna have like a national hate registry
where we hate the hateful people
to deal with the same judge that says,
well, you know, we understand that a number of groups
that you just like are better off
and we're gonna tax those people
and give you some of those gains
so that you now consider this
to be a parade of improvement too, right?
And in some of those people,
you might manage to make them feel like things are okay,
but what about the most extremely hateful people?
People who have nothing going on in their lives
other than hating other people, really.
Like eating food so I can stay alive another day
to hate other people.
They're out there.
And what does Robin Hanson propose to do for them
with his ex-ante rules?
I don't think anything.
I think, I'm trying to like, so,
I mean, I definitely asked him this a bunch of times.
I'm not sure whether he ever just bit the bullet
and said, they don't really hate people.
He's encountered enough hate in his life
that he can't really say that.
He's actually sought it out in ways that seem strange to me.
I don't know, you talk to them?
But don't they hate you?
Apparently.
Well, why?
Why would you let them abuse you for those hours?
I don't know, I thought I might learn something.
So I suppose you would, but still,
to have that kind of abuse heaped on you for hours,
it doesn't seem like the value
of what you're learning is that great,
but maybe he values learning about the world more than I do.
So Pareto efficiency is not just talking about material gain,
but also-
Of course not, anything,
anything at all that anyone cares about is included there.
Absolutely.
Yes.
All right, anything can be in the utility function.
There's no rules about what can go in the utility function.
Anything can be in there.
All right.
So, we have one other example.
There was a documentary I was watching
a number of years ago about,
that was called Delivered Vacant.
And it was all about how horrible it is
that there are some real estate developers
who go to rent-controlled apartments
and offer very heavy bribes to every single person to leave.
And then, this raises the value of the property,
and then they sell the property
while advertising it as Delivered Vacant,
so the developers can then go and approve it.
Right now, if anything ever seemed
like a Pareto improvement, it would be this, right?
Because you start out with the rent control,
and then you bribe every single resident
a lot of money to go away happily,
and then you go, and this allows the developer
to approve it, and then resells it to somebody else.
Who loses?
Well, this whole documentary is about
how this is terrible and has to be stopped.
And it came down to people,
where they talked to some of the people,
said, yeah, well, they gave me $20,000,
but the community's been destroyed.
And I said, well, but you'll find a new community.
Well, the new community isn't quite as good
as the old community, and I don't know.
And then saying, and like, really,
given that everybody else had taken the buyout,
I figured there was no point in trying
to preserve the community all by myself,
so I took the buyout, too.
But I really would have preferred it
if nobody took the buyout, and we just could have remained
a nice rent-controlled community for all time.
And, all right, so that's a case where I think
almost every economist would look at that and say,
that's a total great improvement.
And actually, these documentary filmmakers
might well be right.
There might be some person, it's like,
well, I'm like 88 years old.
How am I, I'm not gonna make new friends
when I move to the new development.
I had all my friends here, and now, thanks to this,
I was bought out, and now, it's worse for me.
And we found one person lost,
which means it ain't a parade of improvements.
So, the way that that analysis is being made
is it's all being compressed into one moment of time,
whereas it is, in a sense,
if you're doing each trade successively,
then once you get it.
Well, the idea is that every time you do the trade,
you should consider, you should evaluate,
was that trade a parade of improvements?
And if that hurt the community more
than whatever compensation the people being hurt
has experienced, then.
So, in that sense, all action is impossible,
because if you do it.
The actions are possible,
it's just that these are not pre-planned.
improving actions.
It does mean that if you require that every action be a Pareto improvement, then we couldn't
do anything.
But someone might object to that.
Or you might say, well, so what do we define as the status quo?
Wherever we are.
All right.
So the standard of Pareto efficiency combined with the related concepts of Pareto improvements.
And remember, so key things.
So when, if there are highly stylized, two people on a desert island and one of them
buys something for someone else.
Is that a Pareto improvement?
Yeah, that qualifies.
There's nobody else around on earth to be affected.
So you have your Pareto improvement there.
All right.
So, but, so, so is the fail, so when you take a look at this, so you see two people, when
you see two people trading, is it correct to say that the trade is an example of Pareto
efficiency?
That the trade moves you to Pareto efficiency via a Pareto improvement.
And the key point is, if something, if you have a Pareto, the only way you can have a
Pareto improvement is if you're not Pareto efficient yet.
Because once you reach Pareto efficiency, then there can no longer be any further Pareto
improvements.
All right.
We'll come back to this, but we're pointing out.
Okay.
All right.
So we have this concept of Pareto efficiency.
It has some uses.
You probably have done some homework problems and some exam problems involving it.
You may have read some papers involving it.
But it is way less useful in the real world than most economists would like you to believe.
Right.
In fact, for real world purposes, unless we get down to a really small population, if
you're going to like two people on an island, so they have the entire, if the human population
dwindles to two, suddenly this becomes a really relevant concept to you.
But as long as we know, although even there, what if it's like that North Korean fan from
Australia who's the other person?
Me and that guy.
All right.
It's a little scary.
Me and the guy who wants my watch to explode.
Hopefully when you get to know each other, some of the hate will diminish, but there
are no guarantees.
All right.
So in any case, in the real world, when economists analyze any actual policy, they normally forget
about credit efficiency, forget about credit improvements, and switch to this one here.
Counter-efficiency, also known as cost-benefit efficiency.
So a situation is counter-efficient if and only if the dollar value of social resources
is maximized.
Of course, it could also be the pound value or the yen value or the euro value or whatever.
Then a counter-efficient improvement is any change that raises the dollar value of social
resources.
So this is the definition of the concept.
All right.
Now, every counter-efficient situation is frame-efficient.
So if we have maximized the dollar value of social resources, this automatically means
that the resources are in the hands of whoever puts the highest dollar value on them.
And if resources are in the hands of the person who puts the highest dollar value on them,
is there any way that you can go and move resources to somebody else and get a rate
improvement?
No.
Because remember, the whole idea of trade is that people who put lower dollar values
on things sell them to people who put higher dollar values on things.
So if we already are at the maximum dollar value of everything, then everything is in
the hands of the person who puts the highest dollar value on it, and so there's no room
for them to sell to anybody else because anybody else would put a lower dollar value on it.
So every counter-efficient situation is frame-efficient.
But most prey-efficient situations are not counter-efficient.
All right.
So let's go back to the watch example.
So suppose that you value a watch at $20.
I value it at $30.
All the strangers you will ever encounter who ask you the time value you're having it
at 10 cents.
All the strangers who value me having the watch that I will ever encounter value my
having it at 10 cents.
But of course, those are different strangers.
Remember that.
Now, if I have the watch, the situation is counter-efficient and prey-efficient because
the dollar value of the social value is $30.10 when I have it, $20.10 when you have it.
So it's prey-efficient, of course, because there's no way to make any one person better
off without making someone else worse off.
But it's also counter-efficient because we've maximized dollar value.
On the other hand, if you have the watch, then it is prey-efficient for you to keep
the watch because if you sold it to me, you would hurt those people that ask you the time.
But it is not counter-efficient for you to keep the watch because the social value of
you owning the watch is only $20.10, whereas when I own the watch, it's $30.10.
So that's the idea.
Now, similarly, every Pareto improvement is a Calrix improvement.
Because if you can find a Pareto improvement, this means that resources are moving from
people who value them less in dollar terms to people who value them more.
And therefore, we have a, that is a Pareto improvement, automatically a Calrix improvement
because the dollar value of social resources is going up.
But most Calrix improvements are not Pareto improvements.
Most trades are going to hurt somebody on earth in a way that they are not compensated
for.
And again, remember, there's 7 billion people on earth who can be affected negatively by
whatever transaction you're proposing.
So to be a real, to be a real Pareto improvement, zero of them can lose.
Zero of them can lose.
All right, but there are tons of Calrix improvements in the world.
This is really easy.
So if there's a whole bunch of people who lose, but they don't lose that much, and there's
a whole bunch of people who gain and gain by more, then we've got our Calrix improvements.
It's really easy to do.
So if, say, if there are a hundred people benefit from something, ten people lose, and
the dollar value they put on average is the same, then of course the Calrix improvement
is to help the larger number of people.
But what about compensating those ten?
Calrix improvements don't require any compensation of any kind.
It's just about maximizing the dollar value of social resources.
So yes, if you can go and make me a billion dollars worse off, and then make the rest
of the world a trillion dollars better off, that's a Calrix improvement.
And what about me?
Tough luck.
Tough luck.
That is built into the Calrix standard.
Okay.
Now Calrix efficiency is sometimes described as potential Pareto efficiency.
Potential Pareto efficiency.
All right.
And the idea is that if the value of social resources rises, then assuming perfect continuity
and no transactions costs, assuming those two things, then you could compensate all
the losers by sharing the gains and surplus.
So in other words, given two totally false assumptions, then it would be a Pareto improvement.
All right.
So I get it.
It would make more sense to say that it's Pareto efficiency with two lies.
That would make a lot more, that would be a much more honest description of it.
But people like the idea, especially pure theorists are in love with the idea of Pareto
efficiency.
And of course, you can absolutely write down a theoretical model with perfect continuity,
no transactions costs, and then they're right.
But this is totally useless for analyzing anything in the real world.
So what this could mean, essentially you could, if transactions costs ranging compensation
were zero, and in the real world, when is ranging compensation free of all transaction
costs?
Never.
So for all policy purposes, it's irrelevant.
All right.
Now this bothers a lot of people.
And again, there are many Austrians who have a philosophical objection to the idea of Calrix
efficiency.
And again, what people sometimes say is, well, aren't transactions just as real as any other
cost?
And the Calrix answer is, of course, they're every bit as real as other costs.
And that's why sometimes we don't have a transaction.
So the Calrix answer, in other words, is to say, look, well, we thought about whether
going and doing a change with compensation would be a Calrix improvement.
And you know what?
It wasn't because it was a pain in the neck to do the compensation.
And then we thought about whether doing a change without any compensation at all would
be a Calrix improvement.
And you know what?
It was.
Awesome.
All right.
So for example, just abolishing rent control, right?
Is that going to abolish rent control without compensation?
Is that likely to be, according to stuff that you've read in Econ 1, is that likely to be
a Calrix improvement?
Sure, because it goes and moves housing into the hands of people of value more away from
those who handle it less.
All right.
So how about abolishing rent control with an elaborate system of compensation that specifies
where we're going to go and we're going to raise tax on landlords, and then we're going
to compensate people based upon the number of years they have, and we're going to come
up with a giant rule book of 1,000 pages based upon who gets compensation and who doesn't.
Because remember, you might want to compensate people that would have moved into the apartments
but haven't moved to New York City yet, for example.
What about them?
You get rid of rent control.
Has anybody ever thought about the people who would have gotten a rent control apartment
after the current person dies?
What about them?
Who are they?
Where are they?
They could be living in Kansas in the middle of nowhere right now.
They themselves will never move to New York unless they can find rent control apartments.
All right.
So something like that is much less likely to actually be a Calrix improvement because
it comes with so many strings attached, it's really hard to actually make it fly.
All right.
Whereas the simple cut the cord, tough luck, in many ways that is more likely to actually
be a Calrix improvement.
Right.
And just think about it this way.
Anytime you think about how the cost of arranging compensation, the Calrix answer is often,
though it doesn't have to be, let's see, how will I deal with all the difficulties
with arranging compensation for people?
How about no compensation for anyone?
That's my solution.
All right.
And that is one way you can do it.
Right.
And it's so complicated.
It's not complicated if we don't do it.
Right.
And if you look at the real world, how often do we really make any policy changes, any
real effort made to remotely compensate all the losers?
No.
Sometimes, and usually not even there, sometimes we only find some really loudmouth group of
losers and we compensate them.
So for example, there are a lot of laws that say that if you have lost your job as a result
of international trade, then you get government job training.
All right.
But this only applies to people who are in the very clear cut export competing industries.
We don't worry about people who lost their job because they were competing with a product
where an import was an input, which then reduced the prices, which then indirectly caused them
to lose their job.
We don't worry about people that have lower real estate values because the industries
in their area that they didn't actually work for were hurt by import competition.
All these different groups of losers, what do we normally say to them?
Well normally we just pretend they don't even exist.
Right.
Tough luck.
And if they do come up, tough luck.
All right.
So, or if you think about, you know, like what's generally done in countries when they
privatize resources, they might find a few people that are losing and try to give them
something.
But most people, well, just going to have to get used to it.
Too bad.
Too bad.
All right.
Okay.
All right.
So, a common complaint that, you know, that transaction costs are just as real as any
other cost, they absolutely are, which is why if you are analyzing CalREx efficiency,
you or something is a CalREx improvement, you say, all right, so what compensation is
in there, what transaction costs are in there, and then we go and we count that.
But we don't have to count transactions that don't happen because we're not bothering
to have the transaction.
That's the idea.
Right.
So, you know, another example would be we could either have a big, we could have a big
negotiation about when the midterm is going to be, which would then, of course, burn up
a whole lot of transactions costs as we go and talk about it and argue and get mad at
each other and everything else and lobby.
Or we could just have a dictator decrees when the midterm will be.
Okay.
And if we're going and seeing whether one is a CalREx improvement or the other, we just
add up the social value resource in both scenarios.
In the first one, we subtract out all those transactions costs.
In the second one, we don't.
Why don't we subtract them in the second one?
Because there weren't any.
Right.
It was just me saying, I decree that the midterm will be now.
You don't like it?
Tough.
All right.
And whatever the problems with that dictatorial system are, it does save on transactions costs.
So, worth keeping in mind.
Whenever you criticize dictatorship, at least transactions costs were saved.
Whatever else occurred.
All right.
It is a one good thing you can save on an otherwise horrifying system.
And if you have ever been on a university committee, or many of you will one day be
on it, you may then long for a dictator.
Just for this small inconsequential corner of the world, if only there were one terrifying
person saying, shut up everyone.
Here's what we're doing.
I don't care what you think.
Just let her like it a little bit.
And then, thank God someone did that.
So we can leave today.
Because I don't really care that much about what happens.
All right.
Okay.
So, when you judge whether something is a Calrix improvement, you do have to count the
transaction costs for the move.
But remember that it is possible for a Calrix improvement to be very light on transactions
costs because the negotiations were brief, or nonexistent, or illegal.
All those are possible.
All right.
Now, Calrix efficiency naturally gives rise to another concept.
You've probably heard quite a bit.
Oh, yeah.
Just to back up.
So Calrix efficiency, so it comes from two economists, Calder and Hicks, with two separate
articles and then they are generally given joint credit.
I can't remember who did it first.
But the phrase Calrix efficiency is rarely used in policymaking.
But the concept is used all the time.
But in regular policymaking, it's normally called cost-benefit analysis.
It's exactly the same thing when done well.
All right.
Now, sometimes cost-benefit efficiency is just, here's 100 things I like and I call
them all benefits.
And 100 things I don't like and I call them all costs.
And now let's do that.
But when trained economists do cost-benefit analysis of a government program, normally
they are just doing Calder X efficiency analysis.
But they call it something else because nobody outside of economics has ever heard of Calder
or Hicks.
All right.
So anytime you see an official government cost-benefit analysis of anything, normally
there are some national economists there who went and tried to do something like this.
And of course, they may have been subject to pressures to go and get the number to turn
out a certain way.
But a pretty good rule is that the less anyone is paying attention to the work, the more
the higher the quality.
So if no one cares about the answer, you could be totally blunt and honest.
The more important it is, then the more likely it is that there's some kind of political
corruption.
Although, there are a number of high-profile government agencies that at least I have very
rarely heard much criticism from them from anyone regardless of ideology on the quality
of cost-benefit analysis, like the Congressional Budget Office.
So I have very rarely heard anyone complain that they are biased, regardless of their
political views.
I've heard people just say, I philosophically object to cost-benefit analysis.
But that doesn't mean the CBO is doing bad cost-benefit analysis.
It's just, well, if all cost-benefit analysis is bad or incoherent, then you might say that.
So anyway, anytime you see economists doing cost-benefit analysis, normally they are just
doing CalGREx analysis under a different name that is less jargony.
But it's essentially the same thing.
All right, so questions about that?
Anyone here ever done cost-benefit analysis as a job?
Okay, so a few of you.
All right, so in the back, there's a question.
Is CalGRE the cost and is it the benefit?
No.
Both of them consider both benefits and costs, but I think one of them did willingness to
pay and one did willingness to accept as their measures.
So that's why they both get credits.
And so we're not going to go into that level of detail, but yes, there is a long tradition
of discussing CalGRE versus HICS.
So anyway, oh yes.
Does there have to be a monetary measurement of all the costs and benefits?
Everything must be monetized in order to do CalGREx.
And you guys remember, it's about maximizing dollar value social resources, which means
everything you're talking about must have a dollar value.
Now what about things that can't have dollar values?
Wrong!
Everything has a dollar value.
Finding that dollar value may be hard, but everything in principle is a dollar value.
Well, what is the dollar value of something?
Well, it's the sum of the willingness to pay of every single human being on Earth for that
thing.
All right, and you're like, how can you do that?
So I actually, I guess I've been in a bar a couple times in my life, but I know as little
about bars as a human being possibly can.
They exist, they serve alcohol.
All right, anyway, what some people call the bar bet standard of, well, look, I bet you
100 bucks you will not pick up that cockroach and put it into your ear.
All right, and fine, you're on.
And you go, but all right, so then a minimum of that guy values putting that cockroach
in his ear at less than or equal to $100.
That has now been demonstrated.
All right, so anytime someone says, how much would someone have to pay you to get this?
Now what you say may not be a good, what you say could be a lie or be poorly thought out,
but the honest answer, that is what counterintuitive sufficiency is supposed to be using.
The truth.
Not the socially desirable answer, so there's a whole body of research trying to evaluate
how awesome is undeveloped land in Alaska.
And a common thing is say, well, how much would you pay to go and ask people, how much
would you pay to keep one more acre of land in Alaska pristine?
You know, a dollar.
All right, do you have any idea how many acres there are in Alaska?
All right, it's a lot of acres.
Millions and millions of acres.
You give up most of what you own to keep Alaska a place you've never visited and probably
never will visit pristine?
Because it's possible, but that sounds more likely to just be a lie or severe numeracy.
And there's a lot of further evidence on how innumerate these answers are.
Things like the numbers people give you seem to have very little to do with the actual
number of acres or in the case of what would you pay to save a bird.
Like you tell people there's a million birds or a billion birds, the answer seems to be
the same.
So you give like everything in the country for this one species of bird you've never
heard of and would never miss?
Seems unlikely.
So there are other ways that people have tried to get better measurements of true, honest
willingness to pay.
So one of them is by looking at housing values.
So for example, you might try to compare, you know, if you're selling, like what value
do you place on having lower crime?
One socially desirable answer is any amount.
You can't put any value upon the whole.
of the indignity of Crowley, the victim of a crime.
All right, so that's one answer that a lot of people give.
Say, well, then how can we live in this neighborhood
where the rent is $100 less than that neighborhood
where the crime is, even though the crime here is 5% higher?
Well, I mean, I can't afford to live in a place $100 more expensive.
Really? But you have cable television, you know, you have a phone,
that comes out tomorrow.
Well, you can't live without cable television and a phone.
So, in other words, you can put a price on it.
It's worth cable TV plus a phone to endure this risk.
Okay, so there is a literature trying to use actual market behavior
to get a better measure of how much people value things.
Although, of course, that only shows you what the marginal person thinks.
So, it's possible that there is one really extreme weirdo
who is not the marginal person at all,
who really does put some enormous value on the things that they claim.
So, maybe there is a person out there who really,
I would rather die than see one acre of Alaska be blackened by soot.
All right, maybe.
So, when you really think about it,
to do perfectly accurate cost-benefit analysis,
you would need to have a superpower.
You would have to have migrating.
You would have to have telepathy to do it perfectly.
Of course, that does not mean that you can't do a,
that you can't try to make a reasonable guess at it.
In the same way that you're trying to figure out
what would make this child happier,
a party at Puppet Up or a party at home.
So, you have a lot, you could ask the child.
That's one thing you could do,
but maybe the child doesn't know what's going on,
or maybe the child lies for his own nefarious reasons.
And then you could try to go and figure,
and then you could take other signs.
So, you might go, let's go and look at,
like, what was his face, you might look at his face.
You might go and see,
and look at how hard he tries to get one result versus another.
There's a lot of things that you might do
to try to figure out whether someone's lying.
And in fact, of course, we have a whole list of tools
that we use to try to figure out
whether someone is being honest with us.
Right, which, you know, some of them don't work that well.
Actually, there's a whole literature on that, too.
Like, lie detection, how good are we at it?
And then, of course, once in a while,
we get these golden opportunities
to contrast what people say with what they do.
Like, someone who says,
I will leave the country if Trump gets elected.
And then we can see whether they really leave.
So, those people, at least,
were overstating how much they cared.
They might have changed their mind.
I realize that as much as I would like to leave the country,
the country needs me.
So, I cannot do what I wanted to do.
I must do what the country now requires of me.
So, there's always these stories,
but nevertheless, there are ways
you might try to do quality empirical work
by sorting through what seems more or less like to be true.
Yes?
Is this Hicks, the same Hicks of the Slutsky decomposition?
Yep, sure is.
Yep, he did a bunch of things.
Yes, Calver, like, there's one or two other things
he's kind of known for,
but nothing as famous as the Hicks-Slutsky decomposition,
which, of course, is discussed very heatedly in the media
on a daily basis.
All right, now, Calver, oh, yes, by the way,
so one thing that I did not tell you
on the bureaucratic issue of this class
is you are entitled to two things in this class.
First of all, you are entitled to a 10-minute break,
not less, but not more, either.
So, the break will be the middle class,
normally at 8.35 every day, from 8.35 to 8.45.
So, you are entitled to that.
If I appear to not be giving that to you,
you have every right to interrupt me
and say, stop on break time.
And also, I will strive to land on time down to the minute
because while, as graduate students,
you are expected to be willing to do economics
until 10 o'clock, regardless of how much you are suffering,
you are not expected to do it at 10.01.
So, that is why we will go to the end of every class,
no matter how tired we may seem,
but I ask all that of you, but no more.
And if I am at 10.01, totally appropriate to go
and call time on me to signal that you have dealt with it
and there's enough, because there's also some people
who have to catch buses and things,
so it's even worse than just discourteous to go over
the allotted time.
Good question.
Yes.
Is it always going exactly to time inefficient?
Let's see.
Possibly, probably a little bit.
Good question.
Homework problem now.
All right.
Now, counter-exhibitionism naturally
gives rise to another concept that you're
likely to have heard about more, which is the deadweight cost.
So, how many people have heard about deadweight cost
at some point in their economic education?
All right, so if the value of social resources
did not maximize, deadweight costs exist.
Deadweight costs are by definition
the difference between the actual dollar value
of social resources and the potential value.
So, take the maximum value, subtract the actual,
that difference is equal to the deadweight cost.
So, any time you saw a diagram of monopoly,
something like this, marginal cost, demand,
marginal revenue, any time you saw that,
that deadweight loss triangle was
the difference between maximizing the dollar value
of social resources, which would occur here,
and the actual dollar value of social resource, which is that.
And the difference is that deadweight loss triangle.
All right, so that's what deadweight losses
are by definition.
It is the difference between reality and potentiality
in terms of dollar value of social resources.
All right, now, why is this so important or interesting?
So, here is my favorite way of thinking about it.
Suppose that someone comes to you and says,
tell us what economists know that normal people don't.
All right, now, hopefully the following
will not be your answer.
Here's what economists know that no one else does.
It's possible to take resources from one person
and give them to another.
All right, so that is the case of transferring resources.
And it's something you don't need any economics in order
to understand.
Everybody knows about transferring resources.
Something that is a better answer to this question,
that resources can be destroyed, leaving no one better off.
And those resources that are destroyed,
leaving no one better off, are the deadweight costs.
All right, so here's an example that I actually
taught to Peter Leeson when he was in your shoes,
or in your seat, in a different room.
But, so, here's an example that I actually
taught to Peter Leeson when he was in your shoes.
So, you know, Peter Leeson has his book on piracy.
So I don't think my book about this lecture
inspired his book on piracy.
But I think he had other interests in piracy.
But anyway, piracy.
So if you were to go and just give a really simple minded
theory of piracy, it would just be
pirates transfer resources from victims to themselves.
That's what piracy is.
But there are also deadweight costs of piracy,
which when you really start listing them,
they overshadow whatever it is the pirates are transferring.
So just for starters, if there's ever
any treasure that gets destroyed during the fight,
if the pirates shoot their cannon
and it hits a treasure chest and blows it out of the ship
and it's destroyed, then who got that treasure chest?
Davy Jones.
Yes, Davy Jones is lost.
And which is slang for nobody, right?
So the victims lost it, but the pirates did not gain it.
And then you get damage to the ships.
Who gained the damage?
Who gained the hole in the hull?
No one gained the hole in the hull.
It's just destroyed.
It's lost to mankind.
Or how about some people die in the fight, pirates and victims.
Who gained those deaths?
Who is now the proud owner of those souls?
No one.
They're just lost.
And then if you start going and thinking about incentives,
then you realize, well, so what might
victims do if they know that the Caribbean is a center of piracy?
How might potential victims revise their behavior?
Circumvent.
You'd go around the Caribbean, then you
have deadweight costs of the extra transportation costs
that are spent circumventing the piracy.
Or they might go buy land.
Or it might be that they decide not to bother trading at all
because the costs are so high.
I remember when I was in high school,
in Los Angeles, theft of car CD players was rampant.
So if you had a CD player in your car,
the odds that your car would be broken into
and it would be stolen was probably about 50% per year.
And then one result was that people
would get extra alarm systems, things like that.
Another one is people had this weird kind of CD player
where every time you left your car,
you'd press a button and pop off the front of the CD player
and you would carry in your pocket 10% of the device
every time you left.
And the device was useless without it.
I guess a thief could go and steal and try
to pickpocket someone else for that piece
and then they would have two pieces.
But that would make it useless.
But probably the biggest fact is just a lot of people
that would have liked to get a CD player just
didn't buy a CD player at all because of it.
So this is another deadly cost of it.
Now the point of this is not a new agey one of piracy
hurts you deep inside, man.
When you go and hurt another person, you hurt yourself.
We're all part of a circle of being.
One man is not an island.
So it's nothing like that.
That might all be true too.
But that is not the point of talking about deadly costs.
And it's not saying that piracy is bad for the pirates.
So ex-ante, the expectation is that pirates
are doing it because on average, it's better
for them than anything else.
The point is that pirates are gaining only a small fraction
when the non-pirates are losing.
This does, again, make some assumptions
that ultimately require mind reading to be certain of,
such as that the pirates don't enjoy the sight of gold
falling to the ocean floor.
That the pirates are not truly sadistic people,
just love watching other people die.
They're not misanthropes who like
seeing their fellow pirates die.
So there are always background assumptions
that are being made, which normally are plausible.
Although, again, if you really go and scour,
not just the internet.
This would also go to Wikipedia to see all the weird things
people have done, all of the serial killers that have
existed.
What was motivating those people?
You may not want to think about it too much late at night.
But it appears that there are some people who really
do enjoy torturing a human being that they have never met
and has done them no harm to death.
It's not common, but they exist.
These are not made up people.
They're out there.
So you do.
Would people like that have been relatively inclined
to go into piracy backwards around?
Seems likely.
So maybe there were a few people like that.
Now let's just quickly do Steve Landsberg's analysis
of drug legalization.
This is Steve Landsberg doing cost-benefit analysis.
Now the point of this is the end of chapter,
is the science, one of the readings.
The point of this is not that Steve did it perfectly,
but Steve thinks the right way.
And if you want to improve upon Steve, what you should do
is not challenge Steve for being too Steve,
but challenge Steve for not being Steve enough.
You need to be more Steve Landsberg if you want
to improve upon Steve Landsberg.
And the piece was interesting because it
begins with a piece in favor of drug legalization, which
Landsberg says, I totally favor drug legalization.
But there's no excuse for bad cost-benefit analysis.
You might think that's self-contradictory.
Well, what if bad cost-benefit analysis
passes a cost-benefit test?
But in any case, so he says, look, I agree with inclusion,
but the reasoning is so poor, so shoddy, so lacking
in any understanding of real cost-benefit analysis
and what it's actually supposed to look like,
I cannot remain silent.
I must speak out against this horrifyingly bad cost-benefit
analysis.
So some of the main problems that Landsberg finds.
The author just declares that taxes are a benefit.
So he says, we've legalized drugs.
We can tax them, and that's a benefit.
And Landsberg says, no, they're not a benefit.
Taxes are a transfer, not a benefit.
What are you talking about?
Secondly, the author of the analysis
counts imprisonment as a cost.
And Landsberg says, that's fine.
So the cost of keeping someone in jail is an affidavit cost.
He says, but we should also go and count
the disutility of being in prison, which vastly outweighs
the cost of keeping someone in the actual fiscal cost
of keeping someone in prison.
Think about, what would someone have
to pay you to do a year in maximum security voluntarily?
For me, I think I could really say,
I don't know of any price someone would get me to do this.
What about $1 billion?
I don't think so.
I don't think $1 billion would be enough.
It's like, what would I do with the $1 billion
that I can't do already?
How much could it really improve my life to have $1 billion
once I'm free?
And that would be a year.
I mean, think about me in prison.
I would make that exchange.
Yes.
Yeah.
So if you know anyone.
Yeah.
So if you're younger, I mean, if you're just bigger and more
muscular and tougher than me, you don't have a bunch of,
my knees hurt, my feet hurt, and all these other problems.
I do have a DGC plan where I introduce Dungeons and Dragons
to the players.
And I don't know, to the prisoners, excuse me.
I've heard federal prisons ban D&D or something.
So apparently it was causing violence, real violence.
It was causing real violence.
From under.
Yes.
All right.
Let's see.
So anyway, so the main cost of imprisonment,
according to Lenzberg, is almost certainly
that people don't like being in prison,
not that it costs taxpayers a lot
to go and put someone in prison.
That might be $50,000 a year.
But $50,000 a year is a really lowball price
to get someone to live in prison, which, again,
is the right thing that you should be putting in there.
Then the piece goes and also counts
theft as being a cost.
Lenzberg says theft by itself is just a transfer.
Really, the real deadweight cost of theft
is all the resources that are used to steal
and to avoid theft.
And then the really big one that Lenzberg mentions
is you manage to do a cost-benefit analysis
in favor of legalizing drugs without ever mentioning
that anybody likes drugs, without ever mentioning
the consumption benefits.
I mean, you could do a cost-benefit analysis
of the existence of movies, and if your analysis forgets
that anybody likes movies, you have heavily biased the analysis
towards the abolition of movies.
The whole point of this is a product people like,
and the willingness to pay that they have for that product
should have been factored in, Lenzberg says.
And then finally, the author goes and counts
whatever harm is done to productivity as being a loss.
And Lenzberg says, well, as long as lost productivity
is factored into your wages, then that's double-counting.
We've already factored in that your wages are lower,
so we don't need to also go and look
at how productivity is lower, because employers have already
paid you less because of lower productivity.
All right, so we'll come back and finish up
with this after the break.
So we've got 10 minutes, so please do.
All right, so Lenzberg on drug legalization.
There are plenty of other things that Lenzberg didn't mention
that within the framework of counter-hicks analysis
would make perfect sense.
So he certainly could have mentioned,
how about strangers don't like other people using drugs?
And they have some willingness to pay for that.
Now, my personal view is that that actually is mostly
just people talking, and they don't actually care very much,
as evidenced by things like people actually
pay very little attention to finding out
how many drugs people in their area are using.
As long as it appears to be peaceful,
what people are actually doing in the privacy
of their own homes, they don't really care that much about.
Although I would then focus more narrowly and say,
for each adult, there are generally two people
that care a lot about whether using drugs.
Who might those two people be?
Your parents, right?
And they plausibly do have a pretty high willingness
to pay to have you not using drugs,
depending upon what kind of parents you have.
I guess my neighbors went to Colorado
with his son to smoke pot, and I was like,
oh, all right, so that didn't happen when I was a kid.
It's kind of unusual, but so he clearly
had a positive willingness to pay
to get his son to smoke pot with him.
But I bet a lot of people's parents
would feel quite differently about it.
And that would not just be hot air,
but in fact, you would probably find it hard
to get away, imagine a legal system
where your parents had to give you permission
to smoke pot, for example.
How many people here think that you could get,
that you could bargain your parents
with anything that you could offer them
into signing that paper?
So yeah, so some people could, but a lot of people,
like, I mean, like my parents,
I think it'd be really hard to get my dad.
It's like, all right, dad, I will go
and help you in your cars for 1,000 hours a year
if I can smoke pot.
No, all right, and so I wouldn't worry
so much about pot, but if my kids needed
my permission to climb Mount Everest,
no, that's the stupidest thing I've ever heard.
I'm talking about Everest.
Didn't you see that movie Everest?
His hands had to be removed,
all because he felt bad about his normal life.
Now he feels really bad.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
That is one horrifying movie.
And I checked, totally accurate too, so.
Not nothing, and it didn't seem to exaggerate at all.
All right, so and then you could also go,
on like the number five, you might sit around
thinking for a scene more about it,
and then there's a question of, well,
so what if employers don't know who's actually
using drugs and who has lower productivity?
Then there might very well be a deadweight loss,
because suppose that one employee out of 10
is too drugged up to actually do their job,
but employers can't figure out who to blame.
In that case, an employer might decide
that they don't want to hire another employee,
a perfectly sober employee, because the employer
only on average gets 90% of an employee
when he pays the market wage for an employee.
So in that case, there could be a deadweight cost
of your drug use caused by reducing demand
for workers in general, so that some other people
don't get hired because your behavior,
reflect, your behavior statistically gets transferred
over to them because they can't tell quite
who's actually doing it.
So in that case, there very well might be
some deadweight cost for productivity after all.
So, and knowing Lindsberg, I am confident
that he would say, yes, these are all
interesting possibilities, these are all fine,
unlike that crummy article in The Atlantic
that I critiqued, which is worthless.
Or worse than worthless, it just confuses people.
Now, one other way to think, or one of the reflections
on Cal-Rate's efficiency, so economists often criticize
non-economists for their fixed pie thinking.
Have you ever said, you think there's a fixed pie of wealth?
Well, aren't you ignorant?
Have you ever had that tone with anyone else?
Well, there's something to this, but,
so in that sense, economists are more optimistic
than the public because economists see
their mutual gains of trade, but a corollary
to the pie can also shrink.
In that way, economists are more pessimistic
than normal people because normal people see a conflict
and they say, who won?
Who's winning, who won?
Right?
But if in fact there are deadweight costs or are an issue,
they were that the winner of the conflict might really be nobody.
It might be that there's just a giant bonfire of wealth,
and there's great misery that is caused by the conflicts.
Once you have something like a 30 years war and Europe is laid waste,
then finally non-economists may start saying,
you know there really was no winner here.
But, although even there not technically true,
what about the most fanatical people who thought it was better,
that it's better to murder people than let their souls be destroyed?
Or said, look if we by killing the people of the wrong religion,
we prevented them from spreading the poison to others and destroying their souls.
So, but still, the idea that a lot of resources get burned up and are
captured by nobody in a very serious war people eventually get the idea.
But when it's a less destructive war then who won?
Who came out of this looking great?
And again the answer according to the concept of deadweight costs,
maybe actually there's just a great deal of destruction.
So, in other words if you have a fixed pie of resources all conflict benefits somebody.
And if there is a variable pie of resources,
conflict might actually just be generally disruptive.
All right. Now, again as a matter of just definition,
reducing deadweight costs is automatically a Calrix improvements.
And then if a situation is Calrix efficient,
then deadweight costs are zero automatically.
All right. So, questions about Calrix versus Pareto efficiency?
Any questions about either of these concepts?
Right. And again, so, and remind me,
which one is tends to appear on homework problems and journal articles again?
Pareto.
Which one is used to analyze actual policies in the real world?
Calrix.
Calrix. Again, normally under the name cost-benefit analysis.
Okay. So, moving on.
So, Calrix efficiency is based on dollar valuations.
It's not based on utility in any sense,
and it's not based upon happiness in
the rich psychological sense that you probably know about.
Right. So, if you ever heard someone who's happy,
and if they appear to be,
if they have a very miserable face on,
then you generally say you don't look happy.
Right. Your action is generally not,
well, you did what you want most wanted to do,
so you must be happy.
Or at least, you must be happier than you would have
been given any other possible choice that was available to you.
Right. If you were an economics for a while,
you're very tempted to say that.
And yet, if there's a person who was happy before they made the choice,
with a smile on their face,
and afterwards they're crying,
you say, maybe they're not happy after doing this.
Maybe they didn't do the thing that actually made them happiest.
Right. And how could that possibly be?
All right. Well, there is a difference between willingness to pay and human happiness.
Hopefully, you have noticed this at some point in your life.
There's many different counter examples,
but one thing, so you can know that I'm willing to pay
$100 for something without knowing anything at all about how happy it makes me.
So, here my favorite example is buying kitchen granite.
Kidding, I've seen granite kitchens,
they have granite. That granite costs a lot,
so $10,000 for a kitchen.
Now, I know a lot of people have granite,
and I've never seen anyone ever smile at the granite.
I've never seen anyone go,
this is my granite, I love my granite so much.
My beautiful, beautiful, smooth granite,
and it has this special cut on the side.
It's so cute, I just love you.
Right. So, I've never heard anyone express these emotions or,
I've seen movies in other languages where people have granite,
and in no language has anyone ever talked to their granite with this kind of emotion.
Whereas, I've seen people get an ice cream cone that costs way less than the granite,
and they're super happy, ice cream, and they're really happy.
So, there must be some disconnect between willingness to pay and happiness.
Seems pretty obvious,
unless you think the ice cream people are pretending,
well, hi, this ice cream is not nearly as happiness-degrading as granite,
but I'm going to pretend I like it a lot more than granite.
So, and people look at the granite,
my God, granite completes me as a human being,
but it would be weird if people knew that.
So, I pretend to be really cool about my granite.
Seems that there are actually large disparities between
willingness to pay and this emotion of happiness
that human beings are very well able to recognize in other people.
It's very cross-culturally easy to recognize how happy somebody is.
Again, you may say, well,
there are some cultures that frown upon the expression of happiness, that may be so.
Although, don't you just think they're really unhappy?
You see cultures where people just never smile.
Aren't you only seeing, maybe the culture says don't smile,
but maybe they're actually just miserable here.
Is that possible too? Seems possible. Yes.
On the granite versus ice cream question,
can we analyze that in terms of marginal utility?
So, the ice cream has a much higher marginal utility versus the granite?
So, think about a person who eats ice cream every day and they own the granite every day.
Yes. I mean, like the ice cream,
like every ice cream they seem to be enjoying it more than every day of granite.
I mean, I have never,
ever seen a person smile at granite in the kitchen.
A person ever eat ice cream every day?
Yes.
Have that reaction?
Yes. Well, I mean, that actually is so, let's see.
Yes.
People eat ice cream every day.
I know a number of people eat ice cream,
any chance they get each time, ice cream.
Yes. The fact that they smile at the ice cream ever and never smile at the granite,
which costs so much more.
That's a lifetime supply of ice cream you have just put into a surface.
So, where did the cost of ice cream come from?
All right. Right. And then, in addition,
just think about, say,
you have high happiness and low happiness friends that you have.
It's possible that the friends you have who seem to smile a lot are really not all that happy,
and the friends you have who seem to be kind of miserable all the time are super happy inside.
But it's really hard to believe that.
So, yeah, maybe they're just really private people and they smile a lot in private,
or maybe this is like this,
is them feeling jubilation.
It's possible, but it seems kind of hard to believe, at least to me.
So, you know something that makes me very happy,
you do have low willingness to pay for it.
In fact, there are a number of things that most people will say make them very happy,
and yet they wouldn't pay anything for it.
For example, how about a hug from your child?
How much would you have paid for that hug?
I wouldn't pay anything for the hug.
If I had to pay for it, that would ruin the whole thing.
It's got to come for free from the heart in exchange for nothing.
Otherwise, it wouldn't make me happy at all.
And then, but you do get, oh, wow, that's great.
I get the hug from the child, and I love you, Daddy.
You're the best daddy in the world.
And that, for many people, they will say, and it seems plausible,
that was the best thing that happened to them the entire day,
and they wouldn't have paid anything for it.
So, that would also seem to be a counter example.
All right.
Now, the philosophy of utilitarianism, which historically has very close ties to economics.
So, who are some famous economists who are also famous utilitarian philosophers?
Yeah, Bentham, Mill, and then we got Edgeworth, and we can keep going on.
There's even more obscure ones than that.
So, Jaylin, Mill.
Which Mill?
Jaime.
Yes, Jaime Mill.
Yes, John Stuart Mill, but then there's James Mill.
All right.
So, you know, a bunch of economists are closely associated with the philosophy of utilitarianism.
But utilitarianism is distinct from economics in that it is not about something,
it is not about maximizing efficiency, rather it is about maximizing happiness
in the ordinary sense that psychologists would typically study.
Although now, there are actually plenty of economists
who study the happiness that psychologists care about.
I mean, why would an economist study something so stupid as human happiness?
What's the possible point of going and thinking about something that psychologists care about?
Well, who cares about it besides psychologists again?
Like, almost everybody.
So, even among economists who officially don't even believe in happiness,
they still, they too seem to care a lot about their own happiness normally.
All right, so Robin Hanson, who is a super happy guy, when you bring it up, he'll say,
well, I think people care a lot less about happiness than they claim to.
And there again, I think he is right.
So, there are many things that people do where it's pretty obvious they could be happier
if they did something else.
And even if you tell them, they will sometimes admit it.
And then they don't do it.
Like what?
Well, we can go back to one of the greatest and briefest philosophers of all time, Epicurus.
We have about 10 pages of every, 10 pages of his writing survive.
They are 10 fantastic pages.
Every paragraph is great.
Every sentence is great.
And you can read it in half an hour and you're done.
And now you know the thought of a philosopher way better than say,
Manuel Kant, who has thousands of pages of mostly gibberish that people have been arguing
about the meaning of for 200 years.
Because, you know, there is a whole journal called Kantstudien.
If you look at it, in 1851, what did Germans think Edward Kant really meant?
How about 1857?
How about 1888?
It just goes on and on.
Anyway, nothing like that for Epicurus because he was clear, said it right the first time.
Anyway, so Epicurus has a number of pieces of advice for people who want to be happier.
And his first one, which is very commonsensical and which has been strongly confirmed
by our research is lower your expectations.
Lower your expectations.
Expect as little out of life as you possibly can and then you will be happier
because you will appreciate what you have.
All right, and many people, you know, many will hear this and then like, yeah,
but I can't do that.
Have you tried?
Just try.
At the margin, if you could just marginally lower your expectations by 5%,
that would do more for your happiness than almost anything else you're trying to do right now.
But I told this to my wife, she said, that's cheating.
Well, who made up the rules of this game anyway?
Who said those are the rules that you can't lower your expectations to be happy?
Why not? All right, so in any case, utilitarianism is precisely
about maximizing happiness or pleasure is another word that people sometimes use.
And of course, there's a debate about whether happiness is just pleasure
or whether there's more to it than that.
Now, the main reason that economists rarely talk about happiness, although it has increased
over time, is that talking about happiness seems
to require interpersonal utility comparisons.
Oh my God.
Interpersonal utility comparisons, saying that one person is happier than another person
and also figuring out how much happier they are than another person.
So a way that some economists put it, how do you add happiness?
How do you sum it?
You know, if we were to say, what's the happiness of all the people on this side of the room
and compare it to the happiness of all the people on that side of the room, how can we ever do that?
It seems like a meaningless question, and so we shouldn't do it.
Okay, so that is a common view among economists.
Although, it is one that I've never known an economist to actually consistently execute.
So even Walter Block.
So as staunchly Austrian economist as I have ever met, who has an official position of,
yeah, you can't do interpersonal comparisons at all.
And I said, but like, what about like you here smiling versus that guy
over there who seems really unhappy?
And you're like, is it meaningless to say that you're happier than him?
I mean, you might say that I'm wrong, but it just sort of doesn't seem meaningless.
And then even he says, well, there's two senses of the word happiness.
There's the normal sense, where sure, of course, I'm way happier than that guy over there.
But then there's the scientific sense, in which case the sentence is meaningless.
And then I said, well, could we just switch over to the normal meaning from now on?
And then could we go and make the null meaning the scientific meaning
and flush the scientific meaning down because it doesn't serve any purpose anyway?
No. We're not allowed to do that.
I'm still confused about why not.
But in any case, so anyone who says that interpersonal utility comparisons are possible,
yet they do actually rank people by more or less happy.
They say that this friend is less happy than they normally are.
They say that one friend is more happy than another person.
They can go and say, look, who is the least happy character in Seinfeld?
How do the main characters?
Well, of course, it's George.
The question's meaningless, but the answer is George.
So they do this.
And then, of course, once you start taking this philosophy or dogma, if you prefer, very seriously,
then if you can't do interpersonal comparisons, why can you do intrapersonal comparisons?
If it's meaningless to say that one person is happier than another, does it also mean
that you can't say that one person is happier than he was yesterday?
In both cases, if you say that you can't measure it so you can't compare it,
then whether you're doing it across people or between people or even between yourself today
and tomorrow, if you're at the point where you say, I can no longer say that I'm more
or less happy than I was yesterday, it's a meaningless statement.
All right?
This is where the conversation ends.
I'm not going to persuade you of anything, but doesn't that sound crazy?
It seems crazy to me.
All right.
Now, some people who want to go and just be a little bit utilitarian will say, well, look,
all utilitarianism is is like regular Calgary Hicks cost-benefit analysis with an adjustment
for marginal utility and wealth.
So all we do is the regular thing, and then we go and do an adjustment based upon the idea
that a dollar's worth less to Bill Gates than it is to a homeless man.
Okay? Of course, you know, at a philosophical level, that's no help
because you saw it, so how much less?
We can't do the calculation unless we go and assign a functional form.
Is it like the square root of the wealth that is proportional to or what?
But in any case, this is the usual problem where once you go and make one concession
to common sense, then why not make two concessions to common sense?
Why not make all the concessions to common sense?
So once you say that you're factoring marginal utility wealth, why not also factor in things
like some people are more materialistic than other people.
Right? So more materialistic people get more joy out of material things.
Less materialistic people get less joy out of material things.
So if you're a utilitarian, who would you take money from?
The monks.
You take money from the monks, the people who don't care about material things,
who don't appreciate material things, and then you give it to the yuppies.
You give it to the people who like shopping for designer goods and the people
who have a big smile when they buy a new pair of pants.
You know, we took money from those monks who don't care about material possessions at all
and gave it to the people who just love talking about, well,
this pair of designer jeans might seem no better than the other.
Oh, but you're so wrong.
It's so much better.
It's wonderful.
The stitching, look at it.
It's wonderful.
Right? And those people I have met, actually.
Not the great people.
But the great lovers are, as far as you can tell, just non-existent.
They've got to be out there somewhere.
But I've looked around and I know a lot of people with granite.
But the people who can get excited over clothes, I've seen those.
Those people are out there.
All right.
So once you start saying, well, yeah, it's not just about marginal utility of wealth.
We have to adjust for how materialistic you are.
And then you might want to just, like, how happy of a person are you?
So you might think that people who just have a happy personality just appreciate everything more.
Yeah, it's possible that miserable people have higher marginal utility.
But I've never seen any sign of it.
So, you know, like the perennial miserable person, you get them a present.
Oh, thanks.
See, but it's not just the material thing.
It also shows people care about you.
Yes, they care about me.
That's so great.
All right.
All right.
So you know some people like this.
And then there's people, oh, goody, a present for me.
All right.
So, you know, if you're a utilitarian, want to transfer resources from the grumpy people
over to the cheerful people who will really appreciate the stuff.
All right.
So that is what would be applied by utilitarian.
And once you make the adjusting for wealth, then why not adjust for everything you can think of?
All right.
So anyway, so people often say utilitarianism is factors of marginal utility of wealth.
But not necessarily true.
People might be willing to pay for things other than happiness.
And utilitarianism is often used to justify redistribution.
But even on its own terms, it's not necessarily followed.
There's a famous counter example involving a utility monster.
This is a creature that has increasing marginal utility of wealth.
Even if you don't think they currently exist, they could be genetically engineered.
And if you were utilitarian, then you'd like, let's just go and give everything
to the utility monster who just loves stuff beyond all imagination,
more than any of us could possibly do.
All right.
So questions?
Questions?
So this, by the way, is the most philosophical lecture by far.
Although I mention it because it's so interesting and worth knowing.
And also, GMU PhDs are especially likely to do economics and philosophy.
So perhaps I am starting you on your pathway to these bigger and better things.
And note, if you do want to do philosophy, the best place to do it is in the econ department
where you have a job and a salary.
So just, you may need to do something else in addition until you have tenure.
And then, it's all philosophy now, with economics in the background.
So moving on.
All right.
The Commercial Instant Proofs approach and second best.
So I'm guessing that Walter Williams told you about Harold Dempset at some point.
Yes, the great Harold Dempset.
So Dempset famously complained about what he called the Nirvana Fallacy.
All right, which, as far as I understand, is based upon a misunderstanding of Buddhist
theology.
But almost everybody misunderstands it in the same way.
So he still makes his point.
All right, so what is the Nirvana Fallacy?
Metaphorically, it's comparing the real world to heaven.
From what I understand, Nirvana is actually a state of nothingness, not heaven.
But in any case, comparing the real world to an unrealizable ideal.
And then say, you know what, the real world stinks compared to heaven.
And so now, let's go and regulate pollution.
All right.
So anyway, what he literally meant was doing efficiency calculations.
And again, of course, since he's talking about real world calculations,
he's talking about Caldeirx or cost benefits.
So doing Caldeirx efficiency comparisons while selectively relaxing
important constraints.
While selectively relaxing important constraints, generally without ever
mentioning you're doing it, and just hoping everyone in the audience will let
you get away with it, because they have the same bias of what they're looking for.
All right, so what in the world is going on?
Well, Demsetz is criticizing old style welfare economics of the 1950s, the 1960s,
1970s, and based upon what it was like when I was an undergraduate, also the 1980s
and the 1990s.
And how does old style welfare economics works?
Well, it's something like this.
Step one, you point out one of these deadweight loss triangles.
All right.
Step two, you say, government can, should, will, and must fix that deadweight loss
triangle.
And then say, and that's it.
End of story.
All right, and you say, what's the problem with that?
Well, there might be some cost
of fixing that Nedley-Loss Triangle.
Like at minimum, there's gonna be the cost
of paying the bureaucrats
and having their bureau building, right?
If you walk around D.C.,
there's all these bureau buildings.
Those resources have to come from somewhere.
So suppose that the cost of fixing
that Nedley-Loss Triangle was that much
in bureaucrats and buildings.
It would not make sense to go
and have government go and fix
and spend that much in resources
to fix that much in losses, right?
That would be, technical term, stupid
because you are, if the loss is relatively small,
the cost of fixing it is much higher.
It is rather more economically efficient
to live with the problem, right?
And could people really be so dumb?
Well, I had a lot of undergraduate courses
where professors who knew the real world
would go and put these diagrams on there
and then say, and what is the solution?
Not what could be the solution,
what might be the solution if the cost is low,
but what is the solution
and the solution is government intervention.
And very often the specifics,
the details of the intervention
were so wildly impractical,
you could never do it in the real world,
as we shall see.
And then you're really wondering,
so there's a problem here
and your proposed solution is completely undoable
and that's an argument for government, how?
Just like, wait, is this an argument for government
in a homework problem or in the real world?
And the tone was always, well, of course, in the real world,
but the answer only applied in a homework problem.
So, shortcomings of government according to Demsets
and I think this is a very fair description
of the welfare economics of his era, right?
And even basic overhead almost never factored in.
So, classic example of the intervention policy.
We go and we take a look at something like this,
we have a monopoly and we see the price
is greater than marginal cost.
Right, in fact, we have,
probably this is where marginal revenue
equals marginal cost, whatever that's.
And so you've all seen
deadweight loss of monopoly at some point.
All right, so we're right here,
leading to this deadweight loss.
All right, now, the textbook solution
is just to impose a price control
set requiring price to be equal to marginal cost.
Right, and wait, how come your price controls don't work?
Well, if there's a monopoly
set up exactly like this, price controls work great.
So, if the world is exactly like this,
then all we do is say, well,
price must be equal to that.
And if price must be equal to that,
then the monopolist maximizes profits
just by going and producing equal to marginal cost
and problem solved.
Okay, now this immediately gives rise
in the real world to a secondary problem,
which is that all real world monopolies have fixed costs.
So, if you make firms charge a price equal to marginal cost
and there are fixed costs, then all firms lose money.
And therefore, the regulations effect
will not be to reduce the price of the product,
but rather to destroy the existence of the product,
which is not the intention, right?
So, the goal of the price control
was not to eliminate the product from existence,
it was to eliminate that deadweight loss.
All right, now, then of course,
there's a standard solution to that.
Well, we'll just go and subsidize firms
at amount equal to their fixed cost
and that will keep them in business.
So, we have the price control
and then we have the subsidy to cover the fixed costs
and now everything's great, right?
Well, then there is a tertiary problem.
How are we gonna fund these subsidies?
With lump sum taxes.
All right, and which are the countries on earth
that have lump sum taxes again?
Which are, where are they?
Which ones are these?
There are none, as far as I know, zero countries like this.
So, in the real world,
well, like what kind of taxes would pay for the subsidies?
So, for almost all countries,
these would be your usual disturbance of taxes.
And remember, what is the essence
of what a tax assertion does?
No, what a tax assertion,
what is the essence of what a tax assertion does?
It is to raise price above marginal cost.
It is to create a wedge between the value that is received
by the person delivering the product
and the amount they are paid.
So, you produce more value than you actually receive,
which then leads again to this deadweight cost.
In fact, if you estimate the deadweight cost of taxation,
you also get a triangle.
It is exactly the same geometrically.
All right, so then what about the deadweight cost of taxes?
What about those?
All right, and then notice I haven't even covered
some of the other obvious problems,
like what is marginal cost, what are fixed costs,
how would you discover what they are?
Are you just gonna ask people?
If you do, what are your fixed costs, man?
Because I'm giving you a subsidy, which equals something.
You could do that that's not a very effective method.
At least that won't drive firms out of business.
They'll all stay in business once you do that.
Maybe they might be killed by the taxes
that have to be paid in order to pay
for the subsidies for everybody else.
But still, but then you might say,
no, let's go and have a panel to figure out
what your fixed costs are.
And so that creates problems as well.
So maybe, so if the number's too high,
then you are going and imposing unnecessary deadweight costs
for excessive taxation.
If it's lower, then again, you just wind up
destroying the firms that you are regulating.
Right, and then strategically, of course,
if you run one of these firms,
you might want to pretend to die in order to say,
oh, I'm about to die if only my subsidy
would not have to cover my fixed costs.
Then I could continue supplying food to the children.
But you can't do that because the subsidies
won't remain sufficient.
All right, and then you're having to fire all of my employees
except for me now.
And the subsidy, you can fight in your heart
to go and double the subsidy,
and maybe I could come back from this.
So you could try that.
So why does Dems test his alternative
to the crummy welfare economics
that almost everyone by himself was doing at the time?
Well, what he said is that economists should use
what he called a comparative institutions approach,
which begins with the motto,
nothing is perfectly efficient.
We never are going to be in a perfectly counter,
in a perfectly counter exhibition world.
So instead, we should be asking
what out of all the feasible options,
which one gives us the lowest deadweight costs?
Which one gives, which one leaves,
makes us closest to the efficient outcome?
Right, and associated with this approach is a,
what is it called?
A, where's the word for it again?
An allegory, that's an allegory.
So an allegory is a story where each of the characters
and events stands for some other characters and events.
So you know George Orwell's Animal Farm, it's an allegory.
Napoleon is Joseph Stalin.
Snowball is Leon Trotsky.
The Raven is Rasputin, supposedly, and so on.
All right, so, and like the windmill getting blown up
the second time is World War II.
Right, so if you go and have your cliff notes
and you read through it,
you will map this correspondence
between the characters and events
and other real world characters and events.
So anyway, the Tale of the Emperor is an allegory
and it goes like this.
The Emperor of Rome announces a great musical contest
to find the best musician in the entire empire.
Only two musicians show up.
The first musician begins to play, but he misses a note.
So the Emperor says the contest is over.
The second musician is the greatest in the realm
and he has the prize.
The end.
That's the allegory.
All right, so how is it an allegory?
Well, the Roman Emperor is supposed to be
the mainstream economics profession.
The first musician who misses one note
is supposed to be the free market.
And the second musician that we haven't even bothered
looking at and listening to how he plays
is supposed to be government.
And this allegory is a criticism of welfare economics
of the 50s and 60s and 70s for economists
going and finding any fault they can in free markets
and then saying that government can, will, should,
and must fix it without ever bothering
to actually investigate how government really works
in the real world.
And of course, there's a very strong public choice theme
here of saying, why don't we look at how government
actually functions?
I remember when I was the TA
for Industrial Organization of Princeton,
the professor was, young assistant professor,
only knew models, only knew theory,
knew no empirics, knew no history of any kind.
So when he was teaching antitrust,
I would occasionally, anytime possible,
bring up actual antitrust cases that were relevant,
pointing out how the actual antitrust cases
had been often did the opposite of what he said
would be a good idea.
And finally said, you know, Brian,
I don't care about any of the history of antitrust.
All that matters is what policy,
all that matters is just giving the best policy advice
to the government so it can actually do a good job.
And I said, well, but shouldn't we look
at the past history of antitrust to get an idea
about what government is actually likely to do
and how the extent of government
is actually likely to listen to good advice?
And then he said, well, by that standard,
we would never have any governments.
And I said, that's way stronger than I would have said.
But anyway, it's a good concession.
Yes.
Who was the professor?
I'm not gonna name names.
He eventually did some empirics and got tenure.
But not a great story.
All right, so that's the tale of the emperor.
Now when you add more constraints to a standard problem,
the original optimum is no longer feasible.
And it's very common for economists
to call the original optimum with very few constraints,
the first best optimum,
and the optimum with the additional constraints
as a second best optimum.
So it's common, for example,
to say that setting price equal to marginal cost
is the first best optimum,
setting price equal to average cost is the second best.
So markets will often give you average cost pricing,
but very rarely will they give you marginal cost pricing.
And intuitively, think about the route
that you drove to school today.
Now imagine what your route would be
if you had to stop by Kentucky Fried Chicken on the way.
It is very likely that that would be a different route
when you add on that extra constraint.
Unless by sheer coincidence,
you already are driving right past
Kentucky Fried Chicken.
In general, any time you add additional constraints
to an optimization problem,
it changes the result and gives you something
that is harder to do because you added on more constraints.
And that is the idea of why adding on more constraints
goes and changes the results.
So sometimes people talk about,
what if you add in public choice constraints, for example?
How does that change the optimum?
And every now and then, economists will talk about
a policy being 15th best.
This is where it's so weighed down with the baggage,
the real world, it looks horrifying.
But where you say, look, given the fact that
we couldn't get anything unless
congressmen from Colorado got a bow and arrow subsidy,
and unless Haiti got a new water slide,
and unless we declared war on one country,
didn't matter which one,
and unless we did all these things,
that's the only way to get to this deal,
so it's 15th best.
Sorry.
People will sometimes say that.
All right.
So, questions, questions?
All right.
So, now, big question.
Who cares about efficiency anyway?
We spent now two hours talking about efficiency,
and many people say, well,
what difference does it make anyway?
It's like saying, you know,
some concepts you came up from homework problems,
maybe you can, like the second one,
at least apply to the real world,
but we could have gone and we could come up
with a new efficiency standard,
say, you know what, we should maximize
like the number of trees,
or the number of copies of Brian's books.
That's what society should be all about.
We could go and analyze everything by
Kaplanian book maximization efficiency,
and then we'd say, like,
how can we squeeze more of his books out of the system?
How can we do that?
And if that were the main thing we're talking about,
then you could make that your standard.
There's an unlimited number of standards
that you can adopt.
So why are these plausible in any way?
Well, there is the hard question of,
is there anyone who really believes
that this is the only principle
that anyone should care about?
So, you can do this for both.
So is there anyone who really believes
that everything in the world
should be about Pareto efficiency?
Right, so, unlikely.
How about Calgary sufficiency?
There's a couple people I've encountered
who at least claim to believe that.
So, Stephen Chabelle at Harvard
has given multiple talks
where he actually had time to prepare,
was not enough to cut from arc,
where it came down to,
there are those of us who favor
doing nothing except maximizing counter-efficiency,
and then there is the dark side.
Everybody who believes anything other than that.
It's horrible other people.
All right, so there are a few people
who sound like that.
If you read early Richard Posner,
it sounds like that,
although late Richard Posner has,
I think he's totally repudiated it,
and now I'm just a pragmatist,
so no, I'm not gonna have any big standard
of anything anymore.
I'm not gonna do that.
All right, so anyway,
is there anyone who really believes
the right action is always the one
that is most for Calgary sufficiency?
There is one other person
who sometimes sounds this way,
and that is Robin Hanson,
my own beloved colleague,
who is a wonderful human being in every way,
but he has bitten some bullets so grotesque
in loyalty to Calgary sufficiency.
So yes, so remember,
this is in no way criticism of Robin.
He's just logically deducing the conclusions
from the position,
but I say, well, I know,
but he once said this,
don't judge him, listen.
He said, the main problem with the Holocaust
is there weren't enough Nazis.
And then, oh, of course,
now I know what you're saying.
It's like, look, if there were a trillion Nazis,
each of whom enjoyed the spectacle of the Holocaust
at like $10,000 each,
and the number of Jews is so small in comparison,
then the dollar value of the Nazis
are getting to be so great,
it would out overshadow any loss of the Jews,
and so it would fit the standards,
so it would be very unfair and biased
to be against those Nazis.
All right, and yes,
all right, now, is he pro-Nazi?
Of course not.
Not in the slightest way.
All he is doing is applying the doctrine
and saying, well, that just needs to be applied by it.
And you say, look, that would never happen
because there aren't a trillion Nazis.
Right, I agree.
I think it's unlikely there are Nazis
in space out there in mass numbers
going and watching horrible atrocities
as paid for view or something like that,
but we can still imagine,
the question of the hypothetical is,
if there were, just multiplying the number
of sadistic, horrible people watching it makes it good?
Well, that would be applied by the doctrine.
And yes, and also I brought up,
well, what about, there's a cannibal lector
who enjoys eating children,
and there's a bunch of penniless orphans
who are never going to be any richer than they are now,
so they can't borrow against their future earnings,
and we have an auction,
and Hannibal Lecter gets to buy all the children
and eat them,
because the orphans are allowed to borrow,
they're allowed to bid,
but they've got nothing to bid with.
And then the good outcome is for Hannibal Lecter
to get to eat the orphans.
And I said, well, we wouldn't want to be biased
against Hannibal Lecter.
It would be very unfair if we were seen
as having these biases.
And he's also made an argument
that seems really odd to me,
which is people won't trust economists
unless we go and bite these bullets.
No, they will trust us only
if we refuse to bite these bullets.
Well, once we go and throw Hannibal Lecter under the bus,
what about all these other people?
Well, we have to consider them case by case
to see whether or not throwing them under the bus
will lead people to trust us more or less.
It's a verbal question, but anyway.
So there are a few people who do bite these bullets,
and I will say that when I debated Robin,
he gained votes.
There's a before and after vote,
and I said all this,
and he came and he gained votes compared to me,
so there must be something persuasive about this
as expressed by him.
Was the vote cast before he gave his second speech?
It was, yeah, so it was before either talked
and then after we were all done.
So they didn't listen to your performance and then vote?
No, no, no, no.
I'm just talking about the effort.
They heard, yes.
Roman effort.
Yeah, they heard both,
so it was not like the Roman effort, yes.
All right, now one reply that many economists love
is to say, look, calorie sufficiency is fantastic.
We just have one little tweak,
and that's to combine it with redistribution
based upon wealth, and then we should do exactly that.
So the solution here is we just need to redistribute
from the head of electorate to the orphans,
and then he won't be able to get the orphans anymore.
Or we just need to go and redistribute
from the Nazis to the victims, and then,
but wait a minute, but there's a trillion of those Nazis,
so even after we equalize the wealth,
they still might be able to get their way,
so this redistribution doesn't seem like
it's really gonna work very well for this problem, does it?
And then you're back to, well,
but there aren't a trillion Nazis, which is true,
but seems totally inadequate to the hypothetical.
But if there were, just getting more horrible people
changes the answer to murder?
That doesn't seem like it.
You're biased.
Okay, all right, so anyway,
so this seems inadequate to me,
so there's lots of other issues
that seem like they're relevant,
and again, once you violate calorie sufficiency
in one way, why not violate it in lots of ways?
So once you're willing to redistribute
based upon, like, waste upon wealth,
then how about considering things like dessert?
Like, one person worked for the product and deserves it,
and the other person was a lazy bum
and doesn't deserve anything.
That's a common view, right?
Certainly, when professors are handing out grades,
I know almost no one egalitarian enough to say,
I give the A's to the students who need it the most.
And then I give C's to good students,
because they're gonna be doing well in life anyway,
so they can afford to get a C.
I don't know anyone who does this.
Instead, even very philosophically egalitarian professors,
they say, well, look, some people understand the material
and they deserve a good grade,
and other people don't,
and they don't deserve a good grade.
And you say, well, but the people
that don't understand the material
didn't have the same advantages.
Yeah, blah, blah, blah.
All right, I'm still giving it to the people
who understand political philosophy.
If you can't explain Rawls accurately,
then you deserve to get F's and have a low income.
But, well, anyway, that's not my problem.
Let the government solve the problem
with the low income of the people
who got F's in political philosophy.
What I do is give A's to the deserving people
who understand Rawls,
and F's to the reprobates who didn't do their work.
All right?
I did.
Yes, and if this has any plausibility to you,
that you should not give grades
based upon whether someone needs them,
I have had students who come and say,
I really need this grade.
Unfortunately, my grading system is based upon desert.
So it's based on whether you deserve a grade,
not whether you need a grade.
So many people deserve a grade but don't need it,
and other people need a grade they don't deserve.
So, and when that happens,
normally I don't actually go tell them this.
I just say no.
But if they were to philosophically challenge me,
then probably I would just say,
I don't wanna discuss this philosophically.
But if I did, I'd say, well, here's my view.
All right, and so desert,
and so if you've read Robert Nozick's
Anarchy, State, and Utopia,
you may be familiar with the entitlement theory of justice.
Maybe there's an example involving Wilt Chamberlain,
which I won't go into,
but you can go and Google Wilt Chamberlain example
and find out about it.
So anyway, my view is just that efficiency
is probably one thing we're thinking about.
So you could be what philosophers will call a pluralist,
says, you know what's good?
Lots of different things.
One of them's counter-insufficiency.
It's just one.
There's lots of other things that matter.
So that seems like a more reasonable view.
I'll say, why should economists focus so much
on this one thing?
And there an answer might be because
economists have special training for distinguishing
deadweight costs from transfers,
which allows us to say something especially useful
about this one thing that matters.
Whereas we don't have any special training
on entitlement or desert,
or say, we probably don't even have special training
on how quickly happiness declines
as a function of your wealth.
So we leave all these areas to other people.
We specialize in something that we actually have something
to contribute about without implying that the thing
that we study is the only thing that counts.
Okay. So in this case,
a CalVix efficiency could be something that is important.
It's not by any means the only important thing,
and we focus on it just on grounds of division of labor,
rather than it's the only thing that counts.
So that is, if you think it's reasonable to me.
But again, this is just an issue that I raise.
All right.
Now, questions about efficiency before we move on?
All right.
Then let us move on to probability.
So I assume all of you have heard about probability at some point,
and even calculated a probability of something at one point.
And if you've been around here since you've been around for your semester,
hopefully at some point someone has challenged you to give a probability of something.
Hopefully a weird thing.
Like, what's the probability that if Hitler hadn't been born,
there would have been another guy named Adolf Hitler?
Really high, probably.
In fact, there probably were a bunch of Adolf Hitlers.
There's a great documentary called Meet the Hitlers,
about a bunch of people whose name is Hitler,
and why they've not changed their name.
Most are not Nazi sympathizers at all.
Most of them are just people saying,
I was born a Hitler, why should I have to change my name,
just because there was one bad Hitler?
Yes?
How can we know how much them not being Nazis is social desirability bias,
rather than actual use?
Yeah, that's a great question.
So, interesting possibility.
So, one of them is just a teenage girl from North Carolina,
she doesn't seem to know anything about it.
I guess she could be hiding, but...
I mean, normally they were born with a name.
So, if your last name was Manson, would you change it,
just because it's Charles Manson?
One bad Manson shouldn't ruin the name for every Manson in the world.
And, you know, that seems reasonable.
There's plenty of Mansons out there, perfectly fine folk.
Why should they have to change their name?
But yes, it could be that they are just there,
claiming that they don't want to change their name,
because they like the name, but actually they're just Nazis.
There's one guy who definitely is a Nazi,
he's got a bunch of swastikas on him,
and, well, he named his kids.
One of them is like, I can't remember, but...
But it's like, there's more to it than that.
It's like Adolf Himmler,
you know, you change the spelling to make it more creative.
Really weird guy.
What was this called?
It's called Meet the Hitlers.
Going back to There's Really Weird People in the World,
it's a whole movie about people who refuse to change their name
whenever their name is Hitler.
It's like a new sitcom.
Yes.
So, yeah, it's all about these,
I think they're all documented cases.
All right, anyway.
So, what does probability language do?
It allows us to quantify uncertainty.
So we live in an uncertain world.
Very often, when someone asks you a question,
it's tempting just to say, I don't know.
But there is more that you could say.
There is more nuance that you can add
to your I don't know statements.
And what probability language allows us to do
is to actually put a number on it.
To go and say, well, look, yes, I don't know.
But what's your probability of having it?
90%, or 10%, or 3%, or 1 in 100 billion.
These are all possible probabilities.
Now, there are two different interpretations of probability.
There is the least controversial one,
which is objective probability.
Objective probability.
All right, so even when we don't know what's going to happen,
we can definitely talk about the relative frequencies
of various observed events in the past.
And if you know any Austrian economists here,
or if you read them, they will say,
we have no problem with objective probability.
Objective probability is fine.
So all you're doing is getting a tally
of everything that's ever happened,
and then going and saying, this is the percentage of times
that all the doors I've ever seen are open,
the percentage of times that they were closed.
So the objective probability that a door is closed
is the ratio of times that I saw doors closed
to the number of doors that I've ever seen.
OK, something like that.
All right, so you can always talk about relative frequencies.
But objective probability, though there are no
philosophical complaints about it,
is problematic in a lot of ways.
The biggest problem is that according to objective probability,
you cannot talk about the frequency of unique events.
Because unique events has either already happened,
in which case it's got a probability of 0 or 1.
But then this doesn't tell us anything about anything
that's ever going to happen, because those events
are going to be unique events too.
All right, so that is the problem.
And here's the thing.
If you really take the idea seriously,
how many real world events are in fact unique?
All events are unique.
This event is unique, just like every other event.
If you just think about, well,
so what is the, like, all computer monitors
in this room that have ever been in this room
that have been tipped over by me
on the first Monday of class in 2017,
and now we're already down to unique events.
It's the only one that fits that description.
Or if you go and apply it even to games of chance,
you say, what's the probability of royal flush?
Well, what's the probability of getting a royal flush
tonight in the MGM Grand Casino
when a guy in a top hat just walked by,
when Baz Luhrmann's musical is playing
across the street in three hours,
when just add on a number of conditions
and pretty soon you've described a unique event.
And then you have the objective probability
of something that is never going,
that you see that it will never happen again.
So then what is the use?
In any event you can describe that way.
For anything that's happened, you can say,
well, once you add some detail on.
I remember when I was a kid, sometimes I would get
this sense of metaphysical awe when I'd realize,
you know, I'm probably the only person in the world today
who read Encyclopedia Brown
and then went and watched the Power Rangers
and then went and got punched by his brother Gregory Randolph
and then went and fed his cat, B-I-C,
which stands for very important cat.
So this is probably the only person,
I'm the only person out of billions,
and I'm the only one, I'm unique.
And that was like, wow.
You just need to add on a few layers of detail
or if you have ever listened to your music mix on Shuffle,
five songs, what are the odds that those five songs
have ever been listened to by anybody else on earth
in that exact order?
Probably very low, unless you're like,
you've only won an album on your player.
Okay.
Alright, so anyway, if you take this idea seriously,
you realize every event is strictly speaking unique,
so you can never apply probability to the real world.
When I made this point in a debate with Walter Block,
he just said, great, even better.
I never liked probability anyway.
So you can't even apply it to poker anymore.
You can't apply it to the lottery.
You can't apply it to dice.
So it just doesn't apply.
Of course, most people find this idea odd.
You can never talk about probabilities of anything.
You can't say, look, well, we've never played the lottery
on February 1st, 2017, so we can't actually talk
about the probability of winning.
It's just not allowed.
There's no way we can say it.
Any claim about it is meaningless.
So that seems like a strange conclusion,
although you can always bite these bullets if you want to.
Alright, so this leads us to a much more useful
but of course more controversial concept of probability,
which is subject to probability.
Subject to probability is simply the degree of belief
a person assigns to a proposition, and that is all.
Alright, probability is some simple axioms.
Beliefs range from impossible to certain,
possible corresponding to probability of zero,
certain to probability of one.
Are there any math majors in this room?
Okay, so if you are a math major,
you know that technically speaking,
an event can have a probability of one
but not be truly certain, and you can have a probability
of zero but not be impossible.
There could be an infinitesimal probability,
but we're not going to worry about that.
Alright, okay, and since something always happens,
right, something always happens,
then the sum of all possible events must equal one,
because it is certain that something will happen.
Okay, so the idea of subjective probability is for any event.
So how confident are you on the spectrum
from it being certain with probability of zero
to be certain or possible with probability of zero
to certain with probability of one?
You could be 0.9, so I assign probability of 0.9 to it,
probability of 0.3, 0.78,
there could be any probabilities that you can assign
to any event, right, all, and I'll have,
where do these probabilities come from?
Just from inside your head.
How confident are you of this?
Now of course, the fact that someone states
high or low confidence doesn't mean they really believe it.
One of the best ways of eliciting probabilities
that people genuinely, sincerely, honestly, earnestly believe
is to offer to bet them based upon their announced probabilities.
And if you know anything about me at all,
this is one of my favorite things to do,
is when people say things that I don't believe
even they believe, I challenge them to bet me on it.
And usually I find that when you do this,
people run for the hills like frightened rabbits
because they are just shooting their mouth off
and they are using language that appears
to be very quantitatively precise,
but actually is just hot air.
There's also a lot of great empirical research
on subjective probabilities.
So beginning in, I believe, the 60s,
some psychologists went and tried to find out
for the average person, what does,
what does the English phrase probably mean in numbers?
So when someone says X will probably happen,
what probability between zero and one does that correspond to?
And what they found was, frighteningly,
the range is somewhere between 20 and 90% for people.
That's what they think of as probably.
And then there's many other things.
How about almost certain?
Almost certain varies from, like,
65% up to 100%.
And again, this is not just like the most and least extreme.
This is, again, this is maybe like
the 25th and 75th percentile of answers.
So, you know, like, to me,
at least I always thought, look,
probably clearly means 0.5, you know, greater than 0.5.
Like, how could it mean anything else?
I don't know.
Actually, English is way vaguer than I realized, most people.
Now, this was actually done in the context of
the United States Intelligence Services,
and after it was pointed out, a suggestion was made
that they replace all this verbiage with numbers,
and a decision was made to not do that.
To keep using vague adjectives rather than precise numbers,
which does reduce conflict among the people making,
writing the reports,
although in terms of actually conveying useful information,
on the other hand, it's terrible, but...
Is it possible people writing the reports
care more about getting along with each other
than actually conveying accurate information?
There is overwhelming evidence that this is so, I would say.
All right.
So, in any case...
So, you know, so...
The idea of subjective probability
is to assign a number between 0 and 1 corresponding to it.
We might hope that this is just giving
a little bit more structure to normal English adjectives,
although when we actually talk to normal English speakers,
it appears it's going way beyond.
It's taking words that we use almost as gibberish
and replacing them with a number that finally means something.
Right? Of course, even that has problems,
but at least my.2 is not different from your.2.
All right.
Now, the main objection to subjective probability
is just that it's unrealistic,
because normal human beings rarely assign
explicit probabilities to events.
It is, in fact, weird and nerdy,
and you might even say aspie,
to walk around all day saying,
I assign a.37 probability
that the next item served by the McDonald's server
will be chicken nuggets.
So, if you live your day like that,
just, you know, like, offering and requesting probabilities
for every event, someone says,
yeah, I think she'll show up,
and that probability would correspond to.3,.7,.95, what?
All right.
So, and it's true, of course, normal people don't do this,
and in fact, you will make many people uncomfortable
just by asking them for these probabilities.
Many people will not want to be your friend anymore,
so if you do this too rigorously,
of course, other people will just start saying,
you can't really put numbers on stuff, man.
All right.
I just did, so it would be helpful
if you would join me in this blatantly doable process.
All right.
So, but anyway, it is true that it is rare for human beings
to assign numerical probabilities to events,
but I would say this.
You know, people almost always have some probabilities
in the back of their minds.
Probabilities are like willingness to pay.
Like, I've never known an economist
to have a problem with the concept of willingness to pay,
even though that, too, is rarely explicitly discussed.
It's very rare that when you say,
well, how much would you pay for that?
Oh, I'd pay a lot for it.
Would you pay $203?
How many dollars exactly would you pay for it?
I don't really know.
All right.
So, this is normal human behavior in general
to just avoid being that specific
and to use vaguer adjectives to describe things.
It doesn't mean that there is any deep problem with it
or that people don't have a willingness to pay.
Right?
And again, of course, the classic way to find out
willingness to pay is just to have an auction
where you keep raising the price,
and finally the sign goes down and they stop bidding.
All right.
So, you did have a willingness to pay,
and the willingness to pay was $717.83.
And that was what the answer was
to the question that you acted like was a dumb question
and actually was a totally clear-cut question.
All right.
And the same thing, you would say that for a probability.
And again, you could think about the odds
that you would have to offer a person to get them to bet you
as the one way that you might be able to elicit probability.
Again, of course, that's not perfect
because there could be someone
with religious scruples against betting,
or there could be someone who's just especially risk-averse,
or even when they think they've got 90,
when they sincerely have 99% probability,
that last 1% makes them so nervous they still won't bet.
Did you have a question back there?
Yeah, I was just going to ask,
what do you think of the claim by some subjective probabilitists
to say that if you assign like a 95% probability to something,
that means you would rather take that bet
than a bet on a roulette wheel with a 94% chance of winning?
Yeah, I mean, it's a very reasonable claim,
although it's not strictly true,
because again, there could be a person
who has a superstition against roulette wheels.
Right? He said, no, no, no, I wouldn't take the bet on a roulette wheel.
I wouldn't bet on a roulette wheel at all.
I don't care if the roulette wheel is all black
and I can bet on black.
No, I believe the roulette wheel is the implement of the devil
or something like that.
So yeah, but that is, for normal people,
I'd say that's a very reasonable way of thinking about it.
But of course, again, they have to understand what roulette is
and believe that the wheels are on us and everything else.
Okay. All right.
So probability, in my view, is like willingness to pay.
It's something that, for any belief, you've got one,
although you probably don't have a book
where you've written it down anywhere,
and you might have to think about it a bit
to figure out what your probability really is,
but it's in you somewhere in some sense.
Now, further objection, people who ask difficult questions
will often just say, I don't know.
But what if you have to guess?
What if you have to guess?
And to realize you often must.
So you have to guess that if you cross the street,
you will survive.
And then once I had kids, I said, wow,
I've got two kids plus me,
and I'm now going to bet three lives
that I can cross this street without us dying.
So I'm going to look to the left, look to the right,
look to the left, and cross the street.
And I'm gambling three lives.
And the reality doesn't actually give you any other options.
Right now I'm gambling that that won't fall on my head
and crush me in the next five seconds.
Five, four, three, two, and I win.
I win the bet that it would not crush me.
Okay, so what if you have to guess?
Real life requires you to guess all the time on everything.
You have to guess that every bite of food is not poisoned.
And so far, you have gambled correctly, I believe.
At least not fatal poison.
Not food poisoning.
All right, now a common sophism,
and you guys all remember what sophisms are in modern English.
So modern English, a sophism is a statement
that sounds wise, but it's actually not.
It's actually foolish.
So a common sophism associated with probability is to say
no one can know X.
No one can know whether there's microscopic life on Mars.
No one can know whether there are,
whether the moon has a block of green cheese
in the center of it.
No one can know these things.
All right, and if this means no one can know X with certainty,
then it is obvious, but who cares?
Fine, all right, so no one has absolute certainty
on these questions, so what?
On the other hand, it means no one has any idea at all
about X, and it's clearly false.
How do we know that it's clearly false?
Because the person who was expressing the doubt
will not take an even odds bet on the question.
So if you say, well, look, if you say nobody can know
whether there is life on Mars,
or how about whether there's going to be
a Martian invasion tomorrow, let's make the example crazier,
then how about you bet me at even odds,
and I win if there isn't a Martian invasion,
and you win if there is.
You say, no, I don't want to take that.
Those are really like even odds for that.
You already have a probability.
You're acting like it's unknowable,
but you yourself have a probability.
So instead of asking me where mine came from,
why don't you tell me where yours came from?
Right, and in fact, people assign probabilities
to all kinds of things, and in general,
they are not terrible at it,
because reality would have destroyed you
if you were terrible at assessing these probabilities.
All right, and in fact, people seem to be pretty good
at even realizing when they have spoken at a school,
and they have made a claim, and then someone offers to bet them,
and suddenly, whoa, whoa, whoa, no, no,
I don't want to bet on that.
Yes, all right.
Now, there are many philosophical complaints
about subjective probability.
One that Pete Betke has given me several times
is subjective probability theory rules out
the possibility of surprise,
and I've told him several times, no,
that's not a surprise at all.
The occurrence of improbable extreme events
is inherently surprising.
Winning the lottery is super surprising,
and you have a very good idea about the odds.
You'd still be like, oh my God, I won the lottery.
And actually, at Pete's 40th birthday party,
I was there, first of all, I'd come as a friend,
but second of all, I had a camera that I was waiting to snap,
at the moment, everyone said surprise,
so I could have a picture of him surprised,
and then say, now you were aware
that for that birthday party, that surprise parties exist, right?
And yet, somehow, you assigned a probability to it,
but somehow you were surprised,
you had the emotional surprise, nevertheless,
as evidenced by this picture.
Right?
So anyway, in practice, economists almost always
use the subjective interpretation of probability,
but it's common to add on extra assumptions
so that objective probabilities feed into the subjective ones,
so that subjective probabilities have to fit objective probabilities.
This is what the rational expectations assumption is all about,
if you remember it, we will talk about it
and review it in more detail later on.
Alright, so last topic, and actually, before I go,
we should do a Q&A,
so I will go through this in my form of a Q&A
and teach you, in person,
what our main assumption is,
there is an estimate of what the number of turns
that our guy actually takes
vendor sizes,
whether it was the value or the number of standard miles,
that 1st would be the given69th,
Before I do the last topic, let me hand out the first homework, which is due next week.
Last topic, conditional probability basis rule.
So subject and probability puts no constraints on what we call pre-eventual beliefs, where
you start. Whatever probability you start out with, subjective probability theory lets
you be subjective, whatever you want it to be. But it still mathematically imposes restrictions
on how you have to update your beliefs when new evidence comes in. So there is the conditional
probability formula, which says the probability of A given B, and whenever you see a probability
P with A and a vertical line and another one, always read that probability of A given B.
So probability of A given B is equal to the probability that A and B happen divided by
the probability of B. So for example, the probability that you get two heads given that
the first flip of a coin is heads equals the probability of two heads divided by the probability
of the first flip is heads, which equals 0.25 over 0.5, which equals 0.5. Then of course
we can apply this to more fanciful examples like, how about the probability that a child
really saw a monster given that he says he saw a monster. So you may have heard children
claim to see monsters at some point. You may have even claimed to have seen a monster at
some point. So what's the probability that he really did given that he says he did? So
this is equal to the probability that he saw a monster and there was a monster divided
by the probability that he says he saw a monster. So for example, the probability that he saw
a monster and there is a monster is one in a billion. So one in a billion, and that seems
if anything low. There's all kinds of weird things the kid might encounter. So what is
the weirdest animal that qualifies as a monster? So certainly a dinosaur would have to be a
monster, right? So if a kid said there's a monster in my room and there's a dinosaur
in there, what do you say? Wrong, it's a dinosaur, not a monster? No, of course it's a monster.
That's a monster of the kind dinosaur, without a doubt. And you might go down the list of
other weird animals which could possibly qualify as a monster, but a lion isn't a monster,
an elephant, no. Even a snake, not really a monster. But anyway, if it gets extreme
enough, monster. And then what about the possibility that it's just an animal you've never encountered
before? Like a really scary looking one, that could be a monster. My sister always tells
me that my brother believes in Bigfoot, which I'm scared to ask. But, alright, so anyway,
if you were right and Bigfoot showed up, that's a monster right there. I just called a big
primate, it's Bigfoot. How could Bigfoot not be a monster? So anyway, so that's going on,
so if the probability says he saw a monster is 10% because kids make stuff up to get attention,
then the conditional probability comes out to 1 in 100 million. Important point, conjunctions
can never be more probable than either component, so we'll talk about this after when we do
psychology and economics. Now there's a more advanced formula called Bayes' Rule, which
is the one that economists talk about a lot more. So, Bayes' Rule links the probability
of A given B to the probability of B given A. So Bayes' Rule states the probability of
A given B is equal to the probability of B given A times the probability of A all over
the probability of B given A times the probability of A plus the probability of B given not A
, tilde means not, times the probability of not A. And that is Bayes' Rule, which I'm
I'm sure everyone just immediately looks at it and sees that's got to be true, of course.
I use this all the time.
Whenever I get new information, I just plug the facts into the formula and then do it.
All right.
So anyway, that is Bayes' rule.
So here we can have something like the probability of the child saw a monster given that he says
he saw a monster is equal to the probability of the child says he saw a monster given he
saw a monster times the probability he saw a monster.
All this divided by probability he says he saw a monster given he saw a monster times
the probability you saw a monster plus the probability of the child says he saw a monster
if did not see a monster times the probability he did not see a monster.
So for example, if the probability he says he saw a monster is given he saw a monster
is 1, he's not going to keep it a secret, he's going to scream, and the probability
saw a monster if he'd not see a monster is.1, 10% chance the kid will make something
up to get attention.
Say the probability you saw a monster, let's make it the 1 in 10 million, the probability
he didn't see a monster is 1-1 in 10 million, then the initial probability works out to
to 9.999991 times 10 to the negative 7.
Now, why are economists so interested in Bayes' rule?
Many reasons.
One of them is it gives a very natural framework
for relating scientific hypotheses to evidence.
So let A be your hypothesis and B be some evidence,
and then we can calculate A given B. So let's take one
that economists have been talking
about for 20 years now.
So back in the early 90s, economist David Cardin
and Alan Kruger did some studies on the minimum wage that found
that the minimum wage did not cause unemployment.
All right?
You can go and read the details if you want.
But, you know, keep on Googling and get a large discussion
of what they found and all the criticisms, subsequent work,
and so on.
But anyway, so they went and did some studies on fast food,
found no disappointment effect on the minimum wage,
and then published the results.
All right.
Now, so how do we apply Bayes' rules to this?
Well, so the probability
that the minimum wage causes unemployment,
given the Cardin-Kruger results.
This is what we're interested in, right?
So we've got some science.
We've got an hypothesis.
We've got some science.
What's the probability of the hypothesis given the science?
All right?
And then to figure this out, we need to go
and apply the formula.
So suppose that the probability that Cardin-Kruger findings,
that you get Cardin-Kruger findings,
minimum wage does cause unemployment is.3.
Now, why would you get?
So as I said, the results found
that the minimum wage did not cause unemployment.
Suppose that minimum wage really did cause unemployment,
but Cardin-Kruger studies said the opposite.
Well, how could that happen?
An empirical study that's wrong, how could that ever happen?
Yes?
There might be some sort of emitted variable bias.
Yeah, there could be emitted variable.
That could be emitted variable.
Could be that there was a data coding error.
Could be a graduate student messed up.
Could be that the econometric software was bad.
Could be, I'm certainly not saying this,
but could be that they lied.
Could be that they had a subconscious bias towards
getting their results.
There's so many reasons that it could happen.
Right? So even very good econometric studies probably
aren't that good.
So in that case, there's definitely a chance
that a study could go and confirm the view that is wrong.
Right? Similarly, suppose you get the probability
that Cardin-Kruger findings give the minimum wage does not cause
unemployment, so that could be.8.
Why not 1?
Because again, it could very well be that the minimum wage
does not cause unemployment, so it could be that they're right,
but nevertheless, you wouldn't get the findings
because there could be some emitted variable bias
or coding errors or econometric software errors
or anything else that mess things up.
All right?
And then, suppose we start off with a very strong prior
to the minimum wage does cause unemployment, like 99%,
which to me, I will confess, sounds perfectly reasonable.
Why is it reasonable?
Well, I've got a 99% chance, a 99% probability the price
control on asparagus would have the usual effect,
99% probability the price control
on bottled water would have that effect, 99% probability
that all these other things would, so why not this?
Seems totally reasonable that would be set.
All right?
In which case, the probability
of minimum wage does not cause unemployment would be 1%.
Then, when we go and plug all this into Bayes' rule,
we will get.3 times.99 over.3 times.99 plus.8 times.01,
and what do we get?
We get 97.4% that the minimum wage causes unemployment
despite the results.
How is that possible?
Because if you start off with a strong prior, and if the test is
not that great to begin with, either way, then you are going
to move in the direction of the results.
So, we move from 99% chance the minimum wage causes
unemployment down to 97.4.
So, Bayes' rule moved us in the expected direction,
but it didn't move us that much
because we actually started off very confident, at least I did,
and we also started off with relatively pessimistic views
about how good econometrics actually is.
All right?
And now, we will stop.
So, homework one is due next week,
and you should know enough to do it,
even though we have a little bit to finish up here.
All right?
And see, I still have a couple of spare copies of the syllabus.
So, anyone missing the syllabus, we're going to get them.
Oh, yes. So, there are two options for turning in homework.
You may turn in a hard copy in class.
You may also directly email your homework
to the class teaching assistant, Julia Norgaard.
So, I will email you her email address so you can send it.
You should either hand it to me in class or through her
by email.
Email it to me, and then that just increases one link
in the possible chain of mistakes
that would lead you to that particular thing.
But I will send an email to remind you
of the process of doing that.
I'm going to register my selfishness.
