Alright, so last topic, intertemporal consumption.
If you could get the door back there please.
Alright, so remember we've been doing general equilibrium theory.
And a lot of general equilibrium, in fact, if you're not paying close attention, you may think it's exactly the same as intermediate micro.
What general equilibrium adds though is the additional assumptions to understand what the whole economy does given every individual's optimization.
So in general equilibrium you do start with solving every individual's utility maximization problem, right?
Which you probably did in intermediate micro one years ago.
But then, given all of these optimization functions, you try to figure out what the equilibrium prices in the economy have to be.
And that's where general equilibrium theory adds something new to what you learned in intermediate micro.
Because you are actually deducing the behavior of the entire economy from the individuals in a way that is totally self-consistent if you've done it right.
Or almost totally self-consistent.
Remember there is, as long as we have a finite number of agents, there is this small inconsistency that everyone acts as if they have no effect on the price.
Or if you look really closely at the equations, you'll see that everybody does have a very small influence on the price.
So if you pay really close attention to the equation, we assume that everyone assumes that they can't affect the price at all.
Which is what we normally do when we are buying corn, right?
So if no one has ever bought a can of corn or a stalk of corn and then said, well I better not buy two, that might raise the world price of corn.
Is anyone worried that they are affecting world prices with their behavior?
So, that assumption is actually not so weird.
In fact, most of us use it most of the time.
But if you go and look at the actual equations that we are driving, they do apply that the price depends just a little bit on the behavior of the actors.
And the way to make it self-consistent is if you actually replace a finite number of agents with an infinite number of infinitesimal agents, and then it's all perfect.
Alright, so, and if you, this seems weird, you know, say, you know, Zeno's paradoxes and calculus, origins of calculus, remember anything about this?
Anyway, but for all practical purposes you don't need to worry about that.
Alright, and then we are applying, showing how general equilibrium theory has been used to understand markets where you have intertemporal markets and contingent claims markets.
Where this is a market where you are selling something where whether or not you have to deliver the good depends upon the conditions.
So you might sell someone oranges at the temperature in Florida is over 80 degrees.
And that is not a contract for oranges, it's a contract for contingent oranges, which only occurs under certain circumstances.
And that one of the great applications of those ideas is the idea of betting markets.
Which have actually been used in a number of real world circumstances.
They've been used enough for us to know that they are better predictors of future outcomes than anything else that people have.
There is great prejudice against betting markets, of course.
Betting markets.
So at the time that Robin Hanson was involved in the so-called terrorism betting markets scandal,
one of the critics said, well clearly the way to be finding out whether there is going to be war between India and Pakistan is not by betting.
We need to go to the intelligence community and they'll tell us what's going to happen.
They could bet too if they really knew something.
But maybe they don't want to bet.
And there has been quite a bit of work on the psychology of what's going on in the intelligence community
where we see all kinds of extremely suspicious practices such as using words that are not falsifiable.
And why do you use non-falsifiable words?
So no one can ever prove that what you said was false.
And including things like refusing to give actual probabilities.
Instead just say there is a distinct likelihood.
Which means what?
Well there is actually empirical literature on what a distinct likelihood means in terms of probability.
And it means anything between 10% and 90% of people.
It is a phrase that is so vague that it means almost anything.
Which makes it really easy to deny that you have ever been wrong.
Of course if you are making claims that are very different from everyone else,
and everyone else says they are being right and you have been proven wrong, that is kind of embarrassing.
So it is also a good idea to use the same kinds of vague adjectives that other people are using.
So if there is an error, it is like no one could have foreseen this.
How many people need to be in the betting market in order to get this?
So that is a great question.
So Robin would know, would have the best answer.
I know that experiments with 10 people, you are getting a lot of value out of that.
And furthermore, even when you have betting markets where the stakes are capped at a fairly low level,
so like $100 a bet, those markets are not as good as ones where you can make millions,
but you get a lot of the value just out of having a little bit of money on the table.
And in fact if you know the work of Philip Ten Block who has a great book called Superforecasters,
you get a lot of value out of merely making people on the record say what is going to happen
with mathematical precision with no stakes at all other than their reputation.
So just making people say something specific and precise in advance,
before you have the information, and then seeing who was right and who was wrong and announcing it.
That by itself actually gives us a lot, so betting markets add something on top of that.
But just to get people to the point where they specify what they mean is a tremendous achievement
beyond what is normal in the real world.
Like surely when wives are on the line, people would not just hide behind vague adjectives
in order to save their own skins.
It's a pressing world, but it does happen.
Alright, now last application of general equilibrium theory we are going to do.
By the way, one that often pops up on exams and often times half the students have forgotten,
so don't be one of them, is for intertemporal consumption.
So you may remember back in macro, so let's see, who do we have? Carlos Ramirez?
Alright, so do you remember doing the small country model?
So the small country model is just the internationally denounced version of the individual who is so small
that they don't have any effect on the world.
So just like you don't think that you're worried that you're going to change the world price of corn,
Luxembourg does not worry that they're going to change the world price of chocolate.
It's just one tiny country, they're not going to be changing anything.
So anyway, it's very common for macroeconomists to go and apply general equilibrium theory ideas to countries
and say let's assume that these are all small countries, no one country can change the world real interest rate
or anything else, so then how do you move from analysis of individuals who are optimizing their consumption over time
to small countries, or it could be individuals, small countries that optimize their consumption over time.
So again, it's the same trick, so you want to find the prices that induce agri-consumption to equilibrate endowments.
So you need to find the prices that convince people to not consume more than exists at any point in time.
Because what is the most that we can consume in 2018?
Or what is the most the world can consume in 2017?
Well, we consume whatever we save from before, plus whatever we ever make this year.
What about 2018?
Yes, we can consume whatever we save from before, plus whatever we make in 2018, and so on.
So it is not possible for us to eat our 2018 production this year.
So that is not possible.
So what you are going to be looking for is the prices that persuade people not to eat more than exists.
Now is it possible for one individual to consume more than they have from last year, plus what they make this year?
Of course. What is that called?
Borrowing.
Borrowing. So any one person can go and consume more than they have made this year, more than they had last year.
All they have to do is borrow.
So now of course in intertemporal markets we have a special word for the price that persuades people to not borrow too much.
And that is the interest rate, of course.
So this is a standard problem.
So imagine we have a world populated by infinitely lived agents.
So this way math works out more nicely than if people lived for 78 years.
So infinity is easier to do the math in 78 years.
It can be done for 78 years if you really want to.
So one time a professor said he was going to go and figure out the effects of life extension on world interest rates.
And I said, but don't we already have a model that assumes people are infinitely lived and are immortal?
So we have already figured out what happens when we get maximum life extension.
I mean really the innovation would be to do the opposite thing.
Oh man.
Anyway, so if every individual is going and maximizing the discounted sum of their utility.
I'm going to assume log utility here.
So log of consumption period T.
So what this is saying is that in period 1 your utility is given by your log of consumption.
In period 0 your consumption is given by log of consumption period 0.
But then you're also maximizing that plus beta times the log of your consumption in period 1.
Plus beta squared times the log of your consumption in period 2.
And so on.
So that beta measures your impatience.
A high beta means that you are impatient or patient?
Impatient.
High beta, no.
High beta means that you're very patient.
Remember if beta is 1 then you care about the future just as much as you care about today.
On the other hand if beta were 0 then let's see.
So if 0 raised to the 0.
I guess there's a division by 0 problem there.
But if it were really close to 0 then you put almost all weight on your first period,
on your consumption period 0 and then almost no weight on the future.
So is that like 0.001? That raised to the 0 would be?
What is 0 raised to the 0.001?
0.001 raised to the 0.
Is 0 raised to the 0? Is that anything? Is that defined?
Is it undefined? I can't remember.
I guess it would be 0 over 0.
So if that were really close to 0 that would show that you're super impatient.
That you do not care very much at all about anything other than the immediate situation.
So if everybody has utility function like this,
then if you just go and solve this using your intermediate micro or your intermediate micro slash macro,
then you will find that in equilibrium every individual is going to set their consumption in period T plus 1 equal to beta
times 1 plus r, the real interest rate, times their consumption in period T.
So this is what you get for individual optimization.
This is what any one utility maximizing person wants to do.
And this is saying that if the interest rate is higher then you want to consume more in the future, less now.
And if you are more impatient, or rather if you are more patient then you want to consume more in the future, less now.
And in fact, if beta times 1 plus r equals 1 then you have a smooth consumption pattern.
If this thing is actually less than 1 then you have declining consumption over time.
And if the product of beta times 1 plus r is greater than 1 then you're going to have an increasing pattern of consumption over time.
But now, what happens in general equilibrium?
So in general equilibrium we have to figure out what value of r, the real interest rate, do we need in order to make the system stable?
What interest rate will convince people to not consume more than exists?
So let's suppose that endowments are constant and there's no way of saving consumption,
so you have to consume this year's production in this period.
And if everybody also has identical preferences then it is pretty clear.
So if you need everyone to consume a constant amount over time then an equilibrium of that thing has to be 1, right?
But remember, which of these two variables here is up to the individual?
Yes, beta. So your impatience, that's just inside of you.
How patient of a person am I? That's you, that's not society, at least in a simple model.
So what has to change is r, the real interest rate has to change.
And how does it have to change?
Well, very simple, we need to have 1 plus r equal to 1 over beta.
And does that intuitively make sense?
Well, remember high beta means that people are going to be more patient.
So and of course if something, so as beta gets, so beta is small meaning you're impatient,
then 1 over that is, so if beta is small then 1 over beta is big,
and therefore you're going to have a high real interest rate.
On the other hand, if beta is close to 1 then you're going to have,
this will also be close to 1 a little bit more, but you'll have a very low real interest rate.
So which again makes a lot of intuitive sense.
Alright, now you can imagine what if instead of having constant endowments we had growing endowments.
So what if every period we had economic growth,
so your consumption is going to be not whatever it was,
or production will not be whatever it was last period, it will be 1 plus g times whatever it was.
So imagine if every period consumption ct plus 1 is going to be equal to 1 plus g,
the growth rate, times consumption period t.
Alright, now what has to happen, well sort of first of all intuitively,
so suppose you know you're getting an inheritance next year.
What would you like to start doing today?
Consuming more, right, borrowing against that future endowment.
Now imagine the whole world knew it was getting rich next year.
What would the whole world want to do?
Yes, we all want to go and borrow.
Can the whole world borrow?
No, the whole world cannot borrow, right,
because that production gain is happening in the future.
We can't start eating our future production yet,
so if people start expecting to get rich in the future, even though they're not rich today,
then again, what could change?
So that doesn't mean it's not going to be your patience changes,
and again, in a simple story, it's not going to change the rate of growth that's just given.
So then what is left to change?
The interest rate.
And if everybody wants to borrow, what has to happen to the interest rate to change their minds?
It's got to go up, right?
So this gives us the general equilibrium result,
and the anticipation of economic growth raises real interest rates right now.
So people can't borrow from one another if everyone's trying to consume more,
but can't people consume more of their savings?
Can people save less if they think that there's going to be a...
Well, everybody can't save less because...
If you have a potential consumption, then there's an actual consumption.
The difference is your savings.
So in this model, what do you do if you decide not to go and consume everything you have?
What do you do?
Lend it out to somebody else.
And if you decide you're not going to lend it out to them, what does that person have to do?
They've got to borrow it from somebody else or cut back on their own consumption.
So yeah, I mean, again, the basic point that any one individual can change what they do is totally true,
but again, it's not possible.
In this model, it doesn't make sense for everyone to be saving
because everybody wanted to save, what would happen to interest rates?
They would go down, and then people would say,
you know, with those lower interest rates, I don't feel like saving anymore.
I feel like borrowing. Let's have a party.
So that is the idea.
So expected growth raises interest rates today,
and there are a few countries where people have argued that this mechanism has actually made sense.
So in Japan and Taiwan after World War II, economic growth got so high that it did look like people were like,
wow, things are going to be fantastic in the future.
So we're going to actually, it does make sense to actually start borrowing against our anticipation.
So anyway, this is just another application of general equilibrium.
It's popped up on many of the comprehensive exams.
For some reason, I guess they're called the preliminary exams
because they're preliminary to additional work, to subsequent work.
It's kind of a strange word, so comprehensive makes a bit more sense,
but there's no point in changing the word, so we know what they refer to.
All right. So now let us go and hand out intro to game theory.
One, two, three, four.
All right. So now we're ready to do intro to game theory, and here's the good news.
This is some theory you may actually use in a paper one day.
All right. So the odds that, I mean, almost anyone,
but especially George Mason students, would ever use general equilibrium in a paper,
I'm not sure I've ever seen that.
So it's good to have in the background, so you don't say things that are wrong,
but you don't say general equilibrium theory assumes something it doesn't really assume.
But anyway, there are lots of George Mason students who have used game theory papers,
so now we're going to start acquiring what may be some human capital for you,
and especially if you want to publish papers.
So even like think tank people and people in government jobs occasionally will use a little game theory.
So anyway, we're now entering something that is more directly useful,
so hopefully that will automatically make it more interesting. We'll see.
So anyway, so you can go surprisingly far with general equilibrium theory.
Like who would have thunk that general equilibrium theory could apply to any number of time periods
with any possible level of uncertainty about what could happen?
That seems pretty surprising that it could be so comprehensive.
Any number of people, any number of goods, any number of time periods,
any number of possible states in the world, all of these things general equilibrium theory can accept,
and they can deal with all of this complexity.
But in the end, most people find general equilibrium theory very unsatisfying.
In fact, there's only one well-known economist who seems to believe that general equilibrium theory
is the correct theory of the global economy.
Anyone know who this is?
Hanson?
No, no, Robin is way more subtle and sophisticated than that.
No, Fisher is more subtle and sophisticated than that.
Fisher Black, Fisher Black, yes, so best known
for the Black-Scholes theorem and they're like in,
like in financial markets and there's calculators
where you actually have the Black-Scholes function.
But, you know, Fisher Black has a book called Exploring General
Equilibrium, which is an, what's followed,
what's often called it's a very interesting book.
Because here you get to see someone who's clearly brilliant
try to force the entire world into a model
that he plainly loves on purely aesthetic grounds and then just
try to explain everything using this model.
So you get to see a great mind at work trying
to force a complex reality into a model
that to almost everyone else it doesn't fit.
But he's got a whole book, he's trying to tell you it does.
So Tyler's a fan of this book.
Ben Bernanke wrote a very positive review of the book.
Just, you know, like, you know, there's always a subtext
of this guy is crazy but he's a genius.
So that makes me want to read, you know, like,
if you're the kind of person that's crazy and wrong
but the author's a genius.
All right, does that make you want to read it?
Maybe. But anyway, so just to let you,
but he's the only person that I know does this
and he actually does try to use general equilibrium
to explain all the complexity of the world.
And, you know, like very energetically.
Right, but anyway, almost everybody else in economics
in the world finds general equilibrium unsatisfying.
Because again, the real world it seems
like we very often stand somewhere
in between the one actor on an island by himself,
the only strategic person in the universe,
or like in the world that matters.
And one where there's so many strategic actors that no one,
no one has to take into account the effect of a strategy
on anyone else's behavior.
Right, so there is the simple Robinson Crusoe model
where it's like one person on an island maximizing.
He never worries that the fish are going to come up with a,
with a plot to kill him so that they save themselves.
So there's that.
And that's the case where you don't worry about strategy.
And we also don't worry about strategy in general equilibrium
because even though everyone is, is carefully strategizing,
everyone knows, you know, to deal with the world,
everyone knows the world will not strategize back.
Because you're such a small person, it's not going
to change what the world does.
All right, so at these two extremes,
we can ignore the complexity of strategy where you have
to worry what if I do that,
that might change other people's behavior,
which then will change what I have to do,
which will then change what they have to do.
Okay. All right, so anyway, in the real world, it often seems
like people are in a very different situation,
and they're in some intermediate situation.
Like you are interviewing for a job.
Now are you, so like do you, so this is a case
where there's other people, and you know
that they are thinking strategically
about whether to hire you, but you're also thinking
strategically about how to get hired.
And if you go and change your strategy,
they might actually change their strategy.
But then you might need to change your strategy.
And so on, making the world very hard to understand.
And furthermore, it's also true that even when you start
out in a situation where it seems
like you have an infinity of options,
often after you make some choices,
you have removed almost all your options.
And then you are back
in a strategically complex situation.
All right, so here a good example is the mating market.
So if you are totally single, then how many people are there
that you might wind up with?
Millions of people.
So I have never actually examined a dating app,
but I have heard tell of them.
All right, so and I've heard, you know,
so there's just this vast number of people
that you might be with.
All right, so there's all these possibilities.
It's this incredibly, incredible market.
And if there's any one person, like I don't like his left tooth.
All right, so to swipe, would you swipe left or right,
which is the swiping where you eliminate this person
for a tooth?
All right, so swipe the person left, wrong tooth,
and you're gone.
All right, so here's a case where you could just,
and you're not worried.
Well, if I start doing that,
people might start judging me more harshly too.
Right, so you're not worried about any of this stuff.
So instead, you're just going, saying,
it's this vast market.
There's plenty of fish in the sea, and I'm going to find
out what works for me.
All right, now, of course,
you do have to consider what your market value is.
All right, so your market value determines what you're able
to get.
All right, but in any case, this is the way that things start.
But once you actually meet some people, and you're with them
for some years, and possibly get married,
or have some kids with them, then things become very
different.
Then it's not like, well, you have one flaw.
I'm just going to replace you with a person who's a,
identical in every way, except they don't have that flaw.
Right, and in fact, you may say,
I'm a person with super high mate value.
Why am I with a person with such low mate value?
Right, and the answer is, well,
but you have kids with this person.
So even the fact that your mate value is now really high means
that you would have to go and abandon your kids in order
to go and get your fair market value.
And a lot of people say, in that case,
I guess I'll just be underpaid for the rest of my life.
I will just endure this.
Right, and the other person may then,
may strategically respond and say, well, you know,
this guy's not going to leave me just
because I've lost all my teeth.
So why do I need to bother brushing anymore?
Like, I can just let my teeth rot now.
And you say, but what about my market value?
Right, we're no longer in that situation where we started,
where we had this near infinite number of options.
Now we're down to one option where you have,
or the one option where you can keep your kids,
and then you have all these other options,
but they're way worse in one way.
And that might actually lead to a very, to a situation
that seems almost incomprehensible.
Like, if you could go back in time and say,
this will be your end up, how could I have ended up there?
Well, you will go and get attached to this person
or this situation, and then it will be really hard to go
and back out, and it's not going
to be like perfect competition at all anymore.
It's going to be bilateral monopoly all the way.
And it might be bilateral monopoly
where one person is really mean and doesn't care
about other people, and the other person is really nice
and does, and then the nice person may suffer greatly.
All right, so this is a situation
that any person might end up in.
Right, and of course, this could work on a job, too,
generally not as extreme on a job.
But it could very well be that you go and move to North Dakota
to take advantage of the great opportunities
in the oil industry there.
And then once you move there, you find, well,
I'm in a town where there's one employer,
and it was a great deal at first,
but now things aren't going so well.
And it won't be that you say, well, things are 1% worse,
so I'm just going to go back to where I was.
Instead, given that you've taken all the trouble to move
to North Dakota, you probably will settle
for a considerably worse deal
than what you originally were expecting.
Right, or one of my favorite questions,
why don't I ask it right now, right?
So how many people here have a job of some kind?
All right, how many people were in a job
where there was one person that is known to,
or that is mutually agreed to,
generally agreed to be incompetent?
Yes, so, you know, fewer hands than normal.
Usually, I, actually, usually I get about 90%
of employed people agree there is a consensually agreed upon
incompetent person at the firm.
So then, would this person have been hired
if people knew what the person was like in advance?
No way. Then why are they still there?
Because of this. Because after they hire them,
you find out about the person, you've gone and poured the
training into them, and also after they've made some friends
there, and people feel sorry for them,
then it's no longer the same as it was
when you had this vast possible realm
of all the people you might hire.
Instead, it's like, well, we've got a person who's
like in the 30th percentile of what we were hoping for,
but we wouldn't really fire the person unless it were
at say the 20th, 15th percentile.
Yes?
So if you expect you can reasonably do better,
in what way is that a sub-cost fallacy kind of thing?
Ah, well, the key thing is, so, again, it's, let's see,
what's the right way of putting it?
So, you know, so classic sub-cost fallacy is refusing
to walk out of a movie that you hate.
That's a sub-cost fallacy.
It's not a sub-cost fallacy to walk out of a movie
that you would pay $2 to see if you already paid $10.
Because, well, like, do you get your money back
if you walk out?
No. So you're getting, so you find
out the movie's way worse than you thought,
but as long as you're getting some surplus out of it,
after a conditional upon having paid the $10, then you'll stay
as long as you get anything greater than zero.
So similarly, if you've already gone and paid the training costs,
you're not going to go and fire the person because you wish
that you hadn't wasted, spent the training costs.
You'll only go and replace them if the improvement,
in addition to paying the training costs a second time,
justifies getting rid of the person, which is fairly straight.
Right? And then, of course, on top of it,
there's also the name the puppy phenomenon, where once you get
to know the person, you feel sorry for them
when you fire them, which might be that the boss feels sorry,
might be the other workers feel sorry.
There is the great George Clooney movie, Up in the Air,
where he's a professional firing consultant.
And what does he do?
He fires people so the boss doesn't have to fire them.
Now, anyone can fire a person.
It's just opening your mouth and saying you are fired.
But it's a very unpleasant thing to do.
And so in the movie, George Clooney actually is paid to fly
in around the country and do it.
I did some research.
So there is not, there isn't literally anyone
that has been found who has George Clooney's job.
So there's no such thing as someone, as far as anyone can find,
who only fires people.
There's a more general occupation where you do
that plus other things.
But it's not, but there's no one who just fires people all day,
every day, and they fly around the world firing people.
Yes. You know, they're consultants, and they may be
like human capital consultants or whatever.
And one of the things they do is help you fire people.
But they would also give you other advice, too.
Yes, my wife was once at a law firm
where there was one partner who brought in much less money
than anybody else.
And a condition of him remaining a partner was that he had
to do all the unpleasant things that the other partners didn't
want to, including firing people.
So he was the guy who had to personally fire people,
which was considered enough that they would keep treating him
because he got to be a partner even though he wasn't bringing
in nearly as much money as other people.
So, well, he might have been allowed to earn the money
that someone who was bringing in a million dollars
for a business would earn.
So he was, so no one would have to feel mean.
All right.
So that's another case where it starts off,
before you actually hire a person,
where there's so many different people you might hire,
but once the market proceeds, then the universe shrinks.
And then there is, again, a lot of room for strategy.
And, of course, also room for psychology, as this is suggesting.
Whereas in general equilibrium,
there's not much room for psychology.
Again, you don't have to sit around worrying.
But how will they feel if I do this?
Like, how will the corn workers feel if they know
that I didn't buy this can of corn for fear
of raising the price?
Will they resent me?
Right? In general equilibrium, they have no idea who you are
or what you've done, so they can't resent you.
They can resent the general nature of customers.
Right? So if you remember the movie Clerks,
where the video clerk says,
this job will be great if it works for the customers.
So in general equilibrium,
the clerks can resent customers in general,
but they won't resent you personally.
Because they don't know, they don't even,
they don't even, aren't even aware you're alive.
They can say, I don't like that job,
because dealing with the public is bad.
But you cannot personally convince someone
that they want to quit by being in charge of them.
In general equilibrium.
All right.
Anyway, so what game theory tries
to do is analyze situations where strategy does matter,
where we're somewhere in between the extreme poles of one man
versus nature, and one person versus,
or an anonymous person versus the entirety of society.
Okay. All right.
So, now game theory generally ends
up with much less precise answers
than general equilibrium.
General equilibrium is noted for giving very precise answers
but if you think the answers are completely wrong,
the precision is no longer so good.
Right. There's a line that Richard Thaler repeats a lot.
I don't know whether he started it.
It's a line of I would rather be vaguely right than clearly wrong.
So I'd rather write a book saying game theory can kind
of illuminate a bunch of situations to some degree,
which is true, rather than write Fisher Black's book saying
general equilibrium theory predicts everything perfectly.
And it's like, well, it predicts everything precisely,
but the very precision lets us know that it's wrong, it seems.
All right.
So how many people here have done at least some game theory
at some point?
Okay. So a lot of this will be review, but I've known people
to mess this up long after they've seen it a bunch of times.
So let's go over the review again.
Okay. All right.
So the standard consumer theory still provides the building
blocks for game theory.
So we still have utility functions in game theory.
So we still have utility functions.
There is one change in the packaging,
which is that in game theory people often talk
about payoffs instead of utility.
But payoffs is just another word for utility,
so there's nothing new here.
It's just other than a new word.
All right.
So the concept is the same.
So just like with utility, the whole idea of utility is
that x is a higher utility than y, and you have choices,
but you can do either.
You do the thing with higher utility.
So payoffs, by definition, if something is a higher payoff
than another thing, it means that you do the thing
that is a higher payoff rather
than the thing that is a lower payoff.
Okay. All right.
Now, there's just a little aside in case you know more about,
you know, know something about expected utility theory.
If you don't, don't worry about it.
We'll talk about it in the lecture after the midterm.
But just in case you were curious, in game theory,
we usually use the term utilities
as von Neumann-Morgenstern utilities.
Right. Von Neumann-Morgenstern.
If you've seen Dr. Strangelove, the guy who played Dr.
Strangelove is based on von Neumann.
All right.
So in any case, I'm like a super genius German
with possibly homicidal tendencies,
but a great strategist, but perhaps lacking in decency.
But anyway, so there's a particular version
of utility theory, which is called von Neumann-Morgenstern
utility theory.
And the utilities in game theory are generally interpreted
as these special utilities in order to avoid all questions
of risk aversion.
If this completely confuses you or seems weird,
don't worry about it.
We will talk about it in week eight.
But anyway, so at any point I'm lecturing, you're saying, wait,
why is it you get to go
and just have people maximize average utilities?
Don't we need to worry about risk aversion?
The short answer is no, this is actually okay,
because we are making an assumption
that will be explained later about why,
which allows us to do that.
So anyway, don't worry about that.
Okay, all right, now there's a game that's going
to be represented in two distinct ways.
These two ways are known as extensive form and normal form.
So what extensive forms do is they display every possible
course of game events turn by turn.
All right, so when you're showing the extensive form,
like this, extensive form,
then you will show a initial decision,
oh this is where we start,
so that symbolizes our starting point.
And then that actor might have three choices,
and then another actor gets to act.
And that might have, this might lead to two choices
in this part of the tree, three choices here,
maybe only one choice over here.
And then that could go and branch out to other things.
And it could go on, so on.
And then eventually it always terminates in some final result,
and then we write down payoffs.
And the way payoffs work is they are always ordered sequentially.
So if this were a four-player game,
this would mean that player one gets three, player two gets seven,
player, wait, player one gets three, two gets seven,
three gets ten, player four gets a payoff of 13.
All right, so at the end of each node,
there will generally be parentheses with a series of numbers in it.
And each number in order corresponds to the payoff that each player gets.
So player one, player two, player three,
player four, all the way up to player n.
In practice, economists almost always look at games
with only two players, which simplifies things a lot.
Once in a while, I guess I've seen a three-player game.
I'm not sure I've ever seen a four-player game.
I guess I've seen like infinite number of player games.
So yeah, one, two, three, and then infinity is the other case that we do.
All right, if you were applying game theory to a real-world problem,
of course, you would want to think about it a bit more deeply than that.
And say, well, I can't think of anything like, sure,
there's way more than three players involved,
but I've only worked out models of three players,
so let's assume away all those other people.
So by the way, so I'm going to mention this again,
but now just seems like a good time.
So when we get to the exams, there will be two kinds of questions.
There will be one kind of question that says,
in a certain model, what happens?
When a question is like that, do you need to discuss the outside world
in order to answer the question?
No. Should you discuss the outside world in order to answer the question?
No. If it asks what happens in a model,
then you just work through logically what happens in that model,
and that's the end.
And in general, you don't need to say anything else.
If it doesn't say discuss whether the model is realistic, you don't do it.
On the other hand, I also often have a question that says,
in the real world, when you have a question like that,
is it okay to just go and say, well, in general equilibrium,
this is how it works, the end?
No. Not unless you actually say,
generally, it fits the real world in this particular case.
So this is one of the ways,
so whenever you hear about people learning to think like economists,
one of the scary things to me is,
in the process of learning to think like an economist,
many students will actually stop talking about the world at all,
and then even when you ask them about the real world,
they'll say, well, here's a model that is somehow related,
and I'm just going to tell you what happens to that model,
and since what I say does happen in the model,
I've answered the question,
even though the question didn't ask about the model at all.
So anyway, I will remind you about this when we do the exams,
but I have been disturbed at this one bad side effect of learning economics,
which is forgetting that it is ultimately supposed to be about
understanding the real world.
At least you're not supposed to lose your ability to think like an economist.
You're not supposed to lose your ability to understand the real world.
So you're supposed to enhance that ability,
not to just change the subject into models.
It's useful to understand the models to see whether they want to
understand the logic to know whether they do fit the real world,
but that's not the same thing as understanding the real world.
Anyway, all right.
So this is an extensive form here,
and as I said, so they show every possible thing that might logically happen,
turn by turn, and we see how things branch out from every possibility.
For this reason, these are often also called decision trees.
Notice it's like an upside down tree.
So really to look like a tree,
we flip it around so that would be the roots of the tree,
and then the trees will only branch out that way.
You know what trees look like.
There are some weird trees that aren't like that.
Still, I love them so much that I'm going to throw them in here and say,
You have a unique ability to manipulate what's going on today.
I really want to learn the there's a particular world that is
different than what we Alabama is,
where you can do many things and change many things.
like the Everglades, but with multiple roots going in.
And we're like, that's weird.
But anyway, normal trees have one root,
and then they spread out from there.
That's the idea of extensive forms.
So a simple example could be your career game tree.
So each node, you can choose, you can keep going to school,
or you can get a job and get your payout.
So this would be a one-person game
where there's two choices.
You can drop out or go on.
If you drop out, then you might get your high school dropout
wage.
And then if you go on, then you'll
have the further choice of stop or go on.
And then if you stop, then you'll get your high school
wage, or you go on, and then you could go and stop and go on.
Go on, and then you could either get the college wage,
or you keep going on to your PhD, say.
And this is go on.
Let's see what I'm doing here.
Let's see here.
That's high school dropout.
That is finished high school.
That's finished college.
And yes, actually, you could just stop there.
Or you could go on to that, say, your PhD.
And then we could add on with getting a second PhD,
and that would be worse.
So you get exactly one PhD, no more, no less.
Anyone getting a second PhD right now?
When I was getting my PhD, there was
a guy there who had actually not only already had a PhD in math,
he had been a math professor.
And we're there taking PhD microwave with a math
professor.
But he was saying, I could barely
get any kind of decent job as a math professor.
Whereas here, I'm just like a titan towering over you.
So you guys don't understand any of this stuff, do you?
So that is a case of extensive form
where you've only got one player.
Now, a more interesting case, there
is a movie from the 70s with Gene Hackman called
The French Connection, where there's
a policeman who is strangely named Popeye.
I don't, and I still am confused by why he's named Popeye.
Why did someone write the story like this?
Where they say, well, no one's going
to confuse Gene Hackman, the policeman,
with the cartoon character of Popeye.
Some of you don't even know who Popeye is.
You know who the person is?
Popeye.
All right.
Anyway, so there's a character, a policeman named Popeye.
And he's hunting a criminal in New York.
And the criminal runs onto a subway.
And then Popeye gets onto the subway.
But then the criminal gets off the subway.
Then Popeye gets off.
And then they just sit there looking at each other.
Because Popeye wants to be on the subway with the criminal
to find out what's going on.
And the criminal does not want to be on the same subway,
be on the same place as Popeye.
Because the criminal does not want the cop
to know what is going on.
So you can think about it as an extensive form
where we start off with, let's see,
with the criminal decides to be on or off of the subway.
And then Popeye decides to be on or off.
And then when we're thinking about the payoffs,
so the criminal is the first actor.
So the criminal is their number one.
And the cop, Popeye, is number two.
So if they were both on, then which person
is going to be getting the low payoff?
The criminal.
Yeah, the criminal's getting the low payoff.
Let's call that zero.
And the policeman's getting the good one of 10.
He's happy.
But then there's the other part.
So if they're both on, on the other hand,
if the criminal is on the subway and the cop is off the subway,
then the criminal is happy and the cop is unhappy.
If the criminal is off and the cop is on,
then it's the same thing.
So the criminal is happy and the cop is unhappy.
And if they're both off, then it is
the cop that is happy and the criminal that is unhappy.
So we have all of those possibilities.
Now, there's a bunch of complications
about how you would deal with extensive forms.
So one of them is, what about nature?
What if there's also a possibility
that lightning strikes the subway?
And how does that change the game?
And the way that you normally model nature
is just put it in as a player that plays everything randomly.
So sometimes you actually put nature in as a player.
And then you'll say, well, either we're
in state of the world one or state of the world two
randomly.
And so if nature is a player, why does it act randomly?
Well, it would have to be that nature
has the same payoffs in every situation,
so it's indifferent between all outcomes, which
is just a philosophical claim.
The universe doesn't care about you.
It's either one way or the other.
Now, there's also an issue with information sets.
And that is, well, what about simultaneous moves?
And the way that it is handled with extensive forms
is to say, well, there's really no difference
between moving simultaneously and moving sequentially
without knowing what your opponent did.
So think about this.
Suppose we either play rock, paper, scissors sequentially,
where we both play and we reveal at the same time.
Or you could go and secretly write down
what you want on your strategy.
And then I go, and then I, without seeing
what you wrote down, announce what I'm doing,
and then you open up the paper.
For all practical purposes, those are the same thing.
Either we play simultaneously or we play sequentially,
but I don't know what you did.
So the way that we handle this simultaneous play
with extensive forms is simply to say,
that's just the same as making a decision without information.
So then it's conventional to go and draw a dotted box
around different places if you can't tell
the difference between them.
So if you don't know, did he do rock?
Did he do paper?
Or did he do scissors?
If you don't know what he did, then rather than saying
that you know what node you're at,
we just draw a dotted line around all the nodes
that you can't distinguish from each other,
and then play strategically from there.
So simultaneous moves are equivalent to sequential moves
with uncertainty, which means that we
can keep the nice tree format even if people
are moving at the same time.
Because if you, because otherwise it
would be hard to understand what do you do if people
move at the same time.
How can you show that in a tree?
The answer is we just treat that as if everything is sequential,
but sometimes you don't know what's happening.
And then we sort of spray paint some of the nodes
to show that you don't know where you are in the tree,
but it still looks like a tree.
You just don't know where in the tree you are.
All right, so extensive forms are done occasionally,
especially for simple games.
But it is more common for economists
to use what are called moral forms.
Someone write on that?
Yes, someone write on that?
Oh, that is, yes.
All right.
I didn't do it.
If you draw over it with the whiteboard marker,
it should erase.
Yeah.
It's mine.
As long as it stays wet.
Ah.
Oh, wow.
All right.
Amazing.
How could that be?
You broke the rules of the simulation.
Yeah.
It's a solid.
It's a legitimate change.
Does this work generally?
Can you get rid of stains on clothes the same way?
Mark on it with a marker.
All right.
Well, before I throw something out, I'll try it.
OK, so now the other way of value-driven games
is what is called a moral form, also called a strategic form.
Same concept, different word, different phrase.
So what you do here is you display a complete grid
of strategy profiles and payoffs.
It's a complete grid of strategy profiles and payoffs.
And the grid is one dimension per player.
As you might guess, then, very often used for two-player games
because it's really hard to go and draw
three-dimensional grids.
So if you just imagine what it would be like,
so you'd have to actually be putting the payoffs
in this three-dimensional grid.
And then four-dimensional grids are really hard to draw.
So when people do things like that,
normally they'll just go and give you the equations,
and they'll give up on actually trying to draw the grid.
So the grid is one dimension per player.
And the interesting thing about moral forms and moral forms
is that they will often contain irrelevant information
about what you would have done in situations that would never
happen, even where you ended up, which is strange at first.
But there is actually good reason for doing this.
And as we're going to see, actually,
your behavior in situations that don't occur
can actually strategically change
what happens in situations that do occur, which at first
sounds totally counterintuitive.
But I'm going to try to make it intuitive as we go on.
So let's think about normal form of your one-player career game.
There could just be, I don't think
I'll even bother writing it down.
So if you drop out before high school,
that could be a payoff of 10.
Finish high school and stuff, 15.
Finish your bachelor's degree and stuff, then 20.
Finish your PhD and stuff, then 30.
And finish two PhDs and stuff, that would be zero.
And then, of course, what you should do is get one PhD.
Exactly.
Now, number of PhDs exactly equal to one.
All right, now for the French connection game
gets a little more interesting.
So there, again, we can show criminal, followed by the cop.
And then we go and we show, here's the third possibility.
So they can go on or off, on or off.
And then we just go and put down what the payoffs are.
So 0, 10, 10, 0, 10, 0, 0, 10.
Now, let's see here.
Now, an important thing is player one
is always shown on the left.
This, of course, is not a law of nature.
But it is a convention that is universally followed.
So you should learn it, too, so that no one is confused.
So I was teaching game theory to my 14-year-olds.
And one of them did switch the axes.
And then, well, he said, well, why can't I do that?
Well, you can, but you will confuse everyone else
who knows this.
So you just need to do it the conventional way for clarity.
So anyway, this is always player one there.
That's always player two.
Every time I've ever seen it, it's been that way.
So you should do it the same way.
All right, now there's an example for preps.
So here he has player one chooses capital A or capital D.
And then he plays D, the game ends.
If he plays capital A, then player two
chooses alpha or delta, alpha, alpha, or delta.
And if he plays delta, the game ends.
And if he plays alpha, player one chooses little a or little
d.
And then either way, the game ends.
And then we can write down the normal form.
And notice this normal form is going
to do what I mentioned, which is include information
about irrelevant possibilities.
So here we've got all the possible combinations
of capital A, little a, capital A, little d, capital D,
little a, capital D, little d.
And those are all player one's options.
And then here we've got alpha and delta.
And here we have 3, 1, 4, 3.
2, 3, 4, 3, 1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2, and 1, 2.
All right.
So in terms of common sense, you might say, well, look.
If he plays capital D, the game ends.
So what does it mean to say that he would have done a or b
or a, little a or little d in a situation where he never
does those things?
And that is an important question, which we'll come to.
But never mind.
And that is an important question, which we'll come to.
But notice that the normal form includes that information.
So every possible scenario, so what's the right way?
Even things that could never happen given earlier choice,
still we go and write them down in the grid for completeness.
Now, is this purely a mathematical fetishism thing
where we go in, which you wouldn't put it past
mathematicians, just saying.
We need to cover all our basics, including the basics that
cannot be occupied.
But no, actually, it turns out there's
some economic intuition to doing this, which I think
we'll be able to get to around the end of today.
All right.
All right, so you can look at the situation now.
From this, can you write down the sense of form?
And of course, the answer is yes.
All right, so as I said, so player one
chooses a, capital A or capital D. And he plays D,
the game ends.
Now, based upon this normal form,
what are the payoffs from over there?
What happens?
What always happens when capital D gets played?
1, 2.
1, 2, yes.
So 1, 2.
All right, and then if you play capital A,
then there's alpha or delta possibilities.
And again, if you play delta, the game ends.
So what happens then?
So what are the payoffs if the first person plays A,
second person plays delta?
4, 3.
So we got that.
And then finally, for this, then there's
capital A or little a, little d.
And then for those, we've got, so A, alpha, A.
So that's 3, 1, and 2, 3.
So that is the sense of form of that normal form.
OK.
All right, questions?
Yes?
So how do we know if the players play simultaneously?
So the answer is, if we don't actually
put those dotted lines around two or more of the nodes,
they play sequentially.
Is what we're seeing here.
So in other words, if you didn't know where you were,
then we'd have to go and put dotted lines here around them.
OK, all right.
Now, all that we've done so far is
we've learned some vocabulary, some notation.
So none of this actually tells us anything
about the real world so far.
Now we get to the first answer to a really big question that
has many answers.
There are many answers to this question.
But the first answer to the question,
so what does game theory say that people actually do?
All right.
Well, normally in game theory, people
begin trying to solve a game using the weakest
possible assumptions and see if they get an answer.
And if they get an answer, then they say, all right,
let's test to see whether that answer is true.
If they can't get an answer using weak assumptions,
then they strengthen the assumptions a bit
and then see if they get an answer
and then test if that assumption is true.
And so on.
So start with some relatively weak assumptions,
then strengthen them until a plausible answer emerges.
Now, the weakest assumption that game theorists use.
The weakest assumption is that nobody
plays what are called strictly dominated strategies.
So slash through it.
Nobody does those.
All right, that is the first and weakest assumption
that game theorists use to try to solve models in game theory.
So what is a strictly dominated strategy?
A strictly dominated strategy is one
that is worse for you in all conditions of the world.
No matter what your opponents do,
if a strategy is worse for you than another one,
that strategy is strictly dominated.
And the assumption is that people
don't play that strategy.
All right, that sounds really reasonable, right?
If there's something that is always a bad idea,
no one will ever do it.
So of course, if you know any psychology or psychology
economics, you will know some counter examples.
But people do do things that are bad for them no matter what.
So in any case, we're just starting out in a simple place.
All right, so people don't play strictly dominated strategies.
And so if there's a strategy that is worse for you,
no matter what your opponent does, you don't play it.
Now, the way you get more mileage out of this
is that if nobody plays strictly dominated strategies,
then sometimes once you realize, well,
that guy will never play that strategy, then you'll say, ah.
So then actually, I can eliminate something else
because I know that he'll never do that thing that
is always bad for him.
So I can ignore it when I figure out what to do.
And I'll act as if that possibility doesn't even exist.
And then I will perhaps be able to eliminate some strategies,
which might mean that he'll be able to eliminate some more.
And then I'll be able to eliminate some more.
And so on, it may be that we wind up with only one thing
that we do, right?
Even though on the surface, it looks really complicated,
it might not actually be very complicated after a while
when we really play through.
OK.
Now, if eliminating all the strictly dominated strategies
finally leaves you with only one equilibrium,
then we have a special name for that.
We say that the game is dominant solvable.
It's dominant solvable.
The classic example, of course, is the prisoner's lemma.
Everyone here has seen the prisoner's lemma at some point.
So the whole idea of the prisoner's lemma,
or there's many versions, but the classic version is,
the policeman has two suspects for a crime.
And he tells each of them, look, you can either
confess or not confess.
If you confess and your partner doesn't,
then you're going to get a light sentence.
And your partner, rather, is going to get a heavy sentence.
If he confesses and you don't, then you're
going to get a heavy sentence.
And he's going to get off lightly.
If neither of you confesses, then I'll
go and pin on a small crime to you.
You'll both get a traffic ticket or something.
But if both of you confess, then you both get a harsh penalty,
although not quite as harsh as being
the person that refused to testify when
your partner did testify.
So it's all based upon the criminal justice system.
That's why it's called the prisoner's lemma.
And notice where the apostrophe comes.
Is it before the S or after the S?
It's after to show it is a lemma that collectively belongs
to the two prisoners.
And the prisoners are in a difficult strategic situation.
Right now, there's a very strong intuition
that if the prisoners can just talk and say, don't talk, OK,
no way I would ever talk, that this changes the game.
But in terms of the actual payoffs and the logic of the game,
it doesn't change it at all.
We think that talking would change the outcome.
By the way, is there experimental evidence that
talking does change outcomes?
Yeah, there is.
But it's not because of the economics or the game theory.
It's because of psychology.
It's because when people talk, this changes the way they feel.
It's not because it changes what is actually in your interest.
Because again, in terms of the actual payoffs
in the prisoner's lemma, after you say,
I promise I would never betray you, so don't betray me, OK?
OK, brother.
And then as soon as you leave the room, say, all right,
you totally did it.
And that is, again, in terms of the game theory, what happens.
So part of it's that sentimental commitment that you've made.
I think you're also identifying the probability
that these boxes are different.
Well, in other words, you could also
say you're just identifying whether the person underneath
understands the game, right?
And there's actually a whole class of models
based on the idea, well, maybe your opponent
is just clueless, right?
You're like, so the Nobel Prize winner,
Reiner and Zelten, got his Nobel Prize
for some work like this, but of course,
doing it very mathematically, right?
Or, you know, then there's the other possibility,
yes, maybe it turns out that you don't understand
the payoffs, so maybe actually you learn,
oh, he's not the kind of person
that would be comfortable doing that.
Sucker, ha ha.
All right, so, or, you know, oh, well,
I would never betray someone like that.
Okay.
All right, so, you know, the classic example
is the Prisoner's Lemma, and again,
the logic of the Prisoner's Lemma,
the people try to weasel out of it
with great effort, but as long as you stay
within the game theoretic framework,
there's no weaseling out of it, right?
If those really are the payoffs,
if that's what people, if that is what everybody knows,
and if they really, and you correctly capture
the utility functions with those payoffs,
then that is what they're going to do.
All right, so that's as simple as that.
Of course, you say, well, what if we experimentally
tested this wrong?
Well, there's something wrong with the assumptions,
isn't there?
All right, so, the model is not actually very good.
Okay.
All right, so anyway, so if all players think this way,
you can extend the idea to success and strict dominance,
which, as I said, allows you to eliminate
even more possibilities than you might think,
if your opponent would never play a strategy,
you can cross out or erase that row or column,
which may then clean up the game, right?
And then when you clean up the game,
so you'll then, it may be, okay,
now I understand what I'm going to do, right?
Like if you've ever had a homework problem
where you're stumped and then you say, wait a second,
player two always plays A.
That simplifies things a lot, doesn't it?
Right, so, or again, you can claim,
you have lots of ways to clean up a game,
saying, oh, well, perfect competition,
so they always set prices with a marginal cost,
so we don't need to worry about what they are doing.
We know, we now know what they are doing all the time.
Okay, all right, now a fun fact,
which I will state but not prove,
is that the order of iteration does not matter.
So there's no danger when you're doing strict dominance
that you might go and eliminate something
before something else, and that will change the outcome.
However, whichever way, whichever route you proceed,
as long as you are only eliminating
strictly dominant strategies,
you will end up with the same answer.
I'll just tell you that's proven by somebody.
All right, now we think about a dominant,
solvable, normal form for creps.
So here we've got, let's see here,
so we have player one has choices of playing S1 or S2,
and then we have player two has choices of playing T1,
T2, or T3, and we go here, and we've got,
so four and three, two and seven, zero and four,
five and five, five and negative one,
negative four, negative two.
All right, and then we just start looking around
for things that we can eliminate.
Yes, and remember here, so the first payoff
goes to this person, the second payoff
goes to this person here.
So if you're just taking a look at this,
does it ever make sense for player two over here
to play T3, and the answer is it doesn't
because if player one plays S1,
then T3 gets you four instead of seven, right?
And if he plays S2, then it gets you negative two
instead of negative one, so there's no reason
to ever play that, right?
And we can then eliminate that one,
eliminate that column, right?
And then once we're here, we can say,
well, does it ever make any sense for player one
to play S1 rather than S2, and again,
the answer is no because you get five for sure
if you play S2, but you get either four or two
if you do S1, so you can then go and eliminate that one.
Then finally, once we've done that,
does it make any sense for player two
to play T2 rather than T1?
Right, well, if you play T2, you get negative one
instead of five, so that doesn't make any sense,
so there is our strictly dominant strategy.
So that is the dominance, this game is dominant solvable,
and that's the equilibrium.
All right, questions?
Yes.
So just to make sure I understand this correctly,
so assuming no strictly dominated strategies,
no matter how many times we play this game,
it's always gonna come out to this S2, T1.
Well, yeah, yes, well, actually,
sort of, you just said to be careful,
so this is, so we're only thinking
about one-shot games right now,
so the way you put it, it almost sounded,
it sounds a lot like repeated games
where no matter how many times you solve it,
you play it, play it.
So in other words, if we do independent games each time,
it's gonna come out to that.
Yes, yes, if the solution concept is actually correct,
but yes, this is a way that we can look at that game
and try to solve it, of course,
then you might wanna look at the real world
and see, you know, like you could run experiments
and see if we give people this,
does it really, is it really true
that people always end up there?
Which might be, but of course,
that is an empirical question if you want to look at it.
So it's player one that eliminates column three.
Let's see, no, player two, player two,
because remember, player one is always on the left,
player two is always on the top.
Right, so.
Yes, yes, so player two,
player two decides he would never,
there would be no point in him ever playing T3.
Yes, so in other words, I see what you're saying.
So since player two will never play T3,
player one can say, for all practical purposes,
I'm gonna eliminate that.
Is that the reasoning?
Yes, yeah, yeah, exactly, yes.
So if your opponent will never do something,
then you may as well say,
it's as if it doesn't even exist,
as far as, for all practical purposes.
And player two says,
he knows that I would never play three,
so he's already eliminated column three.
I'm not gonna play.
Brilliant, brilliant.
Okay, thank you.
All right, all right, all right.
So, other questions about this in the reasoning?
Okay, now there's a further refinement,
which says if a probabilistic combination strategy
strictly dominates another
for any probability distribution,
that too may be eliminated.
Now, if this seems weird,
the key phrase here is for any probability distribution.
So it just says, look,
for, you know, like, you know,
so you're gonna, you have to, you know,
you have to have some probability distribution, right?
Right.
All right, well, tell me what,
if for any conceivable one, no matter what it is,
there's always something that's better,
then it will never be played.
Right, and again, so like,
but doesn't that need to make an assumption
about what my probabilities are?
No, because it's saying that,
if regardless of what your probabilities are,
you just tell me the probabilities,
and for any possible probability,
there's something that doesn't make sense to do,
then we can say that no one would ever do it,
because you always have a probability, right?
That's where you learn to be quiet.
Okay, and of course, if you have some Austrian objections
or frequentist objections, whatever,
then you can go and say, no,
I refuse to go along with this.
But if you accept that you always
have to have probabilities for things,
then if there's something that is a bad idea
for any possible probabilities,
then it doesn't make sense for people to do it,
because no matter what your probabilities are,
you don't want to do it.
On the other hand, if there's something that makes sense
for some probabilities and not others,
then we don't eliminate that.
We only eliminate things that makes,
that would make sense, that wouldn't make sense
regardless of what your probabilities are.
All right, so what do you mean?
So probabilistic combination strategy
strictly dominates another for any probability distribution,
that too can be eliminated.
So then there's this normal form of graphs,
which we can put up.
So where should we go?
I guess we'll just look at this here.
Let's see.
Erase.
Okay.
All right, so here we got a new payoff matrix,
S minus two.
All right, so T1, T2, T3.
All right, this, we got 410, 30,
130, 210, 10, three.
All right, and here the idea is,
so T3, that gives us three,
but now you say, well, what probability do you assign
to player one playing S1 versus S2?
Okay, and you look at this.
So suppose that you say that I give it a probability of.6
that player one plays S1 and.4 that he plays S2.
In that case, your expected payoff
from playing T1 is greater than T3, right?
Because, so S1 is, you know,
played with probability.6,
then your expected payoff from playing T3 is three.
Your expected payoff from playing T1 is gonna be six.
All right?
But then you say, well, what if your probability,
probability S1 was equal to.4?
In that case, you would wanna go and play T2, right?
Because then you would go and get an average of six
from playing T2 versus three from playing T3.
And if you might notice, so actually,
so suppose we have S1 equals.5.
In that case, it'd be a different,
but on average, you would get five from playing T1 or T2,
whereas when you play T3, what do you get?
Only three.
All right, so actually, we can show that
whether the probability is greater than.5,
then you'd wanna do T1.
The probability is less than.5,
rather than you'd wanna do T2.
And if they're equal, then you'd be indifferent.
But in no case is T3 on average better for you.
So again, the idea of this refinement is to say
we can eliminate that one too.
Okay, so we can get rid of that.
And then once we get rid of that one,
then we can actually go further and say,
hey, well, in that case, why would player one
ever play S2?
Because when he plays S1, he either gets four or three,
whereas if he plays S2, he gets zero or two.
So we can eliminate that.
And then once we're down to this,
then what makes no sense for player two to ever play?
T2, yeah, why play that, which gets you zero,
when you can play the other one, which gets you 10.
So actually, it turns out that you should have assigned
probability of one S1 all along.
But we didn't notice, we did not actually beg the question
when doing that.
We just said, look, let's just start out
assuming we don't know anything about what's gonna happen,
but just tell me a probability, just give me something.
I don't care what your probability is,
but whatever your probability is, I'm gonna tell you,
I'm gonna give you a reason not to play T3.
All right, and since no matter what answer you give me,
I can give you a reason not to play T3, you won't play it.
And once we erase that, then we can solve the game.
And then it turns out that your probability
should have been actually one, that player S1 gets played.
All right, oh yeah, I guess we can keep going.
All right, now it may happen that a strategy
is sometimes strictly worse and never better than another.
All right, so this is called a weak dominance,
or a weakly dominated strategy.
So it's where it is sometimes strictly worse
and never strictly better.
So sometimes the payoff is greater
and it's never actually relevant.
All right, so this gives rise to another concept,
which is using weak dominance to solve a game.
So that's also on the table.
But unfortunately, weak dominance,
the order in which we proceed can matter for our answer.
So, and actually probably for that reason,
theorists rarely use weak dominance,
even though the difference between strict and weak dominance
and common sense terms is very slight,
because the intuition, like I said,
think about this, so if you tell someone,
look, what you're doing is always a bad idea.
That seems like a pretty good reason not to do it, right?
But also if you say, look,
it's either better for you or no worse.
That also sounds like a really strong argument, right?
If you say, heads you win, tails you break even,
what are you gonna do?
Flip the coin.
Right, that sounds like a very compelling argument to me.
Right, if it really were true that you flip a coin,
if it comes up heads, you make money,
if it comes up tails, then nothing happens,
flip the coin, right?
And that is the idea, the intuition behind weak dominance,
which is if this is sometimes better for you, never worse,
then all of them do that thing.
Don't just sit there saying, I don't know,
might be no better.
Yes, but it might be better, and it's never worse,
so do it.
All right, yes, and this,
I think I have made this argument many times
when students have stubbornly refused
to put a paper in the mail.
It's like, look, this paper will do you no good
if you don't put it in the mail,
or now, of course, you do online submission,
but same idea, and you'll look,
either they will accept it,
and then it will be a big boost to your career,
or they'll reject it, you'll be no worse off before
when you sit here paralyzed with fear, doing nothing.
Right, and this argument works maybe half the time.
I mean, if you, a couple times I've actually said,
to a little student, look,
I'm just gonna sit here and stare at you
until you submit this paper.
Just do it, but no talking, do it.
Like, if my experience counts for anything,
if you want any help, just do this thing
for your own sake, please.
And I'm, no, I can't really do that.
All right, yes, very aggravating, yes.
Would the potential objection they might raise be,
I have a choice between submitting now or doing it
after I've actually submitted?
This is for people who are paralyzed,
this argument works for people who are paralyzed with fear.
Right, or alternately, if you just say, look,
you know, this paper, there's a clear ceiling
on where it can go.
There's only one journal in the world
that would take this paper.
And there's no sign that this paper is going to approve.
Right, and then furthermore, there's the general wisdom
of, look, you can either sit here trying,
spending months of your life trying to make this paper
more satisfying to a randomly selected person,
or you can send it in, hope that you get a revision request,
and then actually deal with the complaints
of a specific individual.
Right, so again, now we just,
strictly you can say, well, there's always,
I don't know, there could be a chance of something.
All right, so, but yes, nevertheless,
if ever this concept has an application,
it is in this case, so you miss 100%
of all the shots you don't take.
Yeah, all right, okay, so why don't we go
and take a break now?
Let's see, and then I believe we got another homework due,
so let me, so when you come up,
please get the answer key for homework two.
And then.
You don't trust me to write it to a written report?
I guess you could.
Yeah.
I'm like, well, don't you agree?
See, I was trying to, I was trying to not,
I was trying to not throw it in there.
All right.
Okay, so questions about using dominance to solve games.
Everyone's happy with using dominance.
Can we have more than one equilibrium?
Pardon?
Can we have more than one equilibrium?
Oh, yes, that's, and that's totally possible.
In fact, using strict dominance,
you might be able to eliminate nothing.
And then you have, then you've got no answer, possibly.
So yes, it's totally possible
to have multiple equilibrium.
Okay.
That's a very good question, actually,
because multiple equilibrium will come up.
Yes, and also, on the comprehensive exams,
I said, actually, officially known as the preliminary exams,
on the true and false part,
it's very common to have questions
asking basic facts about different games.
And I'm amazed at how many students get them wrong,
because it seems to me like you just come up
with a little table of all the games we've talked about,
and all of what their equilibria are,
and just memorize that,
and then you would never get these questions wrong.
But instead, it seems like a lot of people get to the exam,
and then it's like, all right, well,
let me see if I remember how this works.
Or they mix up, too, they mix up games.
So it seems like it would have been
a fairly small amount of work
to have simply had to write down the table
and have it all clear in your head, but yes.
So let's see.
So in educational psychology,
there's a lot of work on how teachers
do not use the most effective teaching techniques,
and students certainly don't use them either.
There's a lot of techniques that are very popular
that actually have been shown to be ineffective,
such as highlighting.
Anyone do highlighting?
Highlighting, actually, there are plenty of experiments
saying highlighting does not improve knowledge.
You do not learn better from highlighting.
So what should you do?
It'd be far better if you would do flashcards,
something like that, some kind of actual active learning.
Actual active quizzing of yourself.
Or you could just save the pens
and you would be no worse off.
All right, this course is all on average, it's possible.
There is a human being out there
who learns everything by highlighting.
If you ever had a person
who just highlights everything on the page,
you learned it all by putting a marker over it.
It's great.
So backwards induction.
All right, so in any game of perfect information,
we could say that every node that we're at
marks the beginning of what you can think of
as another game of perfect information.
So you think about every subpart of the game,
if the game is perfect information overall,
each subpart now,
if you have perfect information, that we're here.
All right, and what happens if we apply a procedure
that is called backwards induction?
It's called backwards induction.
Where we apply strict dominance
to each of what we can call these subgames,
these subparts of the tree.
Right, and the intuition is,
well, if we got to this part of the game,
no one's ever gonna do these different things,
so we just arrange that part.
And then do it again, and do it again, and do it again.
All right, so modest answer is you can eliminate
more possibilities than before.
So let's see here, on the last page,
we got a couple of normal forms from Chris.
Okay, all right, and let's see here.
So I got figured out, so let's see, two, five.
All right, so here we've got a normal form,
an extensive form, so we can take a look
at this extensive form.
Let's see, work through it.
So here we've got player one has the choices
of capital U or D, or capital D,
and then over here, let me just get a redraw,
so it looks normal, looks too weird.
All right, so we've got capital D or capital U,
and then if we play D, then player two has the choices
of left or right, and the payoffs will be three, one,
or zero, zero, over here, two, two.
And then backwards induction would be saying,
all right, look, so here we,
although, like, what happens if we get to this part?
Is there any reason for player two to ever play right?
No, so why don't we just go and erase that part of the tree?
And now when we get up here, we can say,
is there any reason for player one
to ever go and play U?
No, so we end up with a very pruned down tree, right?
And actually, so you can go and eliminate
some more answers that way.
All right, now, yeah, that's the modest answer,
is you can sometimes eliminate some stuff.
The immodest answer is that any finite game
of perfect information without ties
becomes dominant solvable using backwards induction.
So as long as it's finite,
and as long as we got perfect information,
then we can solve anything by using dominance.
So there's chess.
Did you know that...
Chess must have an answer.
There is a solution to chess.
It has not been solved yet.
Checkers was solved some years ago.
So anyway, there's an answer to chess.
There's an answer to checkers.
I don't remember what it is.
Either white always wins or black always wins
or there's always a stalemate is the answer.
And chess also must have such an answer
because chess is a finite game.
He's like, can't a game of chess go on forever?
No, if you actually go and read the rules,
if something hasn't happened for a certain number of time,
the game ends in a stalemate.
So it actually does have a finite limitation.
So essentially, if you can imagine
going to every conceivable outcome of chess at the end
and then going one step before we know what can't happen
and we'll erase that, and one step before that
and we can start eliminating things
and do that through, again, I think the number
of different possibilities exceeds the number of atoms
in the universe for chess.
But anyway, that's just a question of application.
It's nothing to do with math.
So chess must have a solution.
So there's the case of chess.
Now, one that's kind of fun is what's called
the centipede game.
So this is what you can see in figure 12-6.
This is one of the most famous games in economics,
the centipede game.
So the idea of the centipede game is that
either I can go and stop the game right now
and keep whatever I have,
or I can go and continue the game.
If I continue the game, then our joint resources increase.
But the problem is that they don't increase evenly.
Instead, I need to have the game go on for two more turns
in order to actually profit from the game going on.
So if I go and say, fine, let's continue the game,
and then my opponent says, sucker, game's over,
I've actually lost.
But if I say, let's continue the game,
and my opponent says, do less, and then I'm better off.
Now the key thing in the centipede game is that it is finite,
so it has exactly 100 turns.
So if the game ends immediately,
as soon as the first person starts,
says, I don't want to play anymore,
you each get a reward of one.
If it goes on for the full length of 100 turns,
each of you gets 100.
So common sense says that the game will go on until the end.
Why won't we just cooperate so that instead of getting
one each, we get 100 each?
But because of the structure of this game,
it doesn't work out so nicely.
Because as you can see, in the turn right before the last turn,
the second to last turn, the first player gets 98,
and the second player gets 101 if the game ends there.
And it is player two that decides
whether the game goes on or not.
So if you are one turn away from the end,
you can say, well, I can either go on for another turn
and get 100, or I can stop it right now and get 101.
So the selfish thing to do is to end the game right now
and I get 101.
But if the opponent knows that I'm gonna think this way,
why should he cooperate with me in the second,
cooperate me in the, so I said,
so that was the first to last turn
that you wouldn't want to cooperate.
Why should he cooperate with me in the second to last turn?
But if that's what I, but then why should I cooperate
with the third to last turn?
Then why should he cooperate with me
in the fourth to last turn?
And so on.
So it's called a centipede game because it has 100 turns.
And it looks like it is in everyone's interest to cooperate.
And yet when you pay attention,
it is in the, at the very last turn,
the player in charge is incented
to end the game prematurely, one turn early.
But then the other player, if he knows this,
wants to end the game two turns early.
But if I know that he's gonna do that,
I want to end it three turns early.
If he knows I want to end it four turns early and so on.
Right, so if we go and go and start solving this
by backwards induction, in that second to last turn,
the second player can either have 100 or 101.
So what's he gonna do?
Get 101.
So we can go and erase that last possibility
that'll never happen.
Right, and now the first player will say,
well I can either go and have 99 or 98.
Which one do I prefer?
99, so I'll go and erase that part of the centipede.
And then he'll go and erase it,
and erase it, and erase it, and erase it.
And we erase all the way back to turn one.
And then in turn one, the other player just says,
well I see where this is going.
I refuse to play this game at all.
I'm just gonna get one.
Because otherwise I'm gonna get zero.
Right, so you notice if the game ends in turn one,
player one gets one.
But if it ends in turns two, player one gets zero.
All right, so here is a use of backwards induction,
which yields through an external force of logic
a very surprising result.
Namely that even though it seems like total common sense
for the two players to work together,
they will not work together at all.
There's a variant of common sense which says,
fine, cooperation will break down towards the end sometime.
But backwards induction doesn't say
it'll break down towards the end sometime.
It says it'll break down immediately.
Because people say, what, towards the end sometime?
That's not a time.
No, no, no.
So it'll definitely have broken down by the last turn.
So there's no point cooperating the second to last turn.
So no point cooperating in the third to last turn.
So no cooperating in the fourth to last turn.
All the way back.
And the game does what we sometimes call unravel.
Game theorists say unraveling.
If you ever were a kid and you had a string on your clothes
and you started pulling and pulling and pulling and pulling
and eventually you had no clothes left,
just a pile of thread.
I don't think I would have caught that far,
but I definitely did ruin a shirt or two.
I was laying on my end.
And I'm like, oh, it's not my fault.
It just happened.
Didn't happen, you pulled it.
Why didn't you leave it alone?
I don't like leaving things alone.
I try to fix them.
You see, it's clearly getting worse.
There's also the great example of the mosquito bite.
How many times have you been told,
don't scratch a mosquito bite, it will make it worse?
In my experience, this is true always.
And yet, how many people scratch mosquito bites?
So tempting.
It's like, I can't just sit here suffering, doing nothing.
I've got to do something that makes it worse.
And I believe this is a metaphor
economists really need to push.
Look, we all know about mosquito bites
and how we make problems worse
by trying to solve them, right?
That one's undeniable.
Maybe there's other things like that in the world.
Maybe there's economic problems,
which we amplify by trying to solve them.
And if someone says, but I can't live with this problem,
I say, well, can you live with a worse problem?
Because that's all you're going to do, is make it worse.
But anyway, that's the centipede game.
Now, as you might guess, in experiments,
do people actually go and immediately stop cooperating
and turn the light on in the centipede game?
They do not.
All right, and in fact, that common sense prediction
of people, cooperation will break down
somewhere near the end.
That actually is pretty right.
So like somewhere between turns 95 and 98,
that's about when people stop cooperating.
And as to when exactly that is varies,
and of course, there are some people who do it
to the very bitter end,
but like sometime in the 90s
is where actual cooperation normally breaks down.
So here, this vague intuition about,
of course, they'll cooperate,
but it will kind of break down as the end approaches,
that turns out to be more true, certainly,
then there will be no cooperation.
But in any case, the concept backwards deduction
does logically imply that there will be no cooperation
at all in this game.
All right, so and again, why is that?
Well, we're going to talk about some models
that might explain real world behavior.
Although, again, the longer I stay in economics,
the more I am partial to asking,
well, what would psychologists say about this?
Isn't that clearly true?
And then we could go and try to model that,
or we could just say that they actually
have more predictive science in this case.
Could it be that psychologists know more than us
on a bunch of things?
I don't know why not.
So when I was in your shoes,
like the word psychology can never be said
without sarcasm, italics.
Well, you just want to be a psychologist about this.
So you can never even say the word without hostility,
but we do need to learn to use the word without hostility
because it has so much to teach us.
Whenever you're cackling with glee
about some psychology experiment failed to replicate,
there's a lot of other stuff that does replicate.
So of course, there's a lot of economic theories
that haven't even been shown to work once.
So I don't know if the CentiB game
has ever been confirmed at all,
like the backwards induction version
where 100, 100 turn game,
cooperation breaks down immediately.
You'd have to really think about how you would
make it break down.
Like maybe if you had it played by couples
in the middle of a divorce,
then maybe they would play this way.
Maybe, even there I don't know.
Okay, so questions before we move on?
All right, so now let's move on
to pure strategy Nash equilibrium, right?
And this is a concept that is only a much more
practically useful than the ones we just done.
So you can only go so far
with strict dominance type reasoning.
Backwards induction seems really awesome
when you first hear it,
until you realize it only works
for these games of perfect information anyway.
All right, so and how many interesting situations
have involved perfect information?
I've never found one.
All right, so I ran into that little friend
who says that something,
let's see, I guess they're on Facebook.
There's like, what are the odds
that Roe versus Wade gets repealed under Trump?
And then a bunch of people say zero.
Zero?
How could it be zero?
Come on.
That's crazy.
How could it be?
Like I said, 15%, that's the answer.
All right, now my answer may be wrong,
but I know that's a way better answer than zero.
Which is just ridiculous.
Friend said like, there's zero chance
of a war between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
Zero?
I mean, it's more likely than like the US and Canada,
isn't it?
So they can't both be zero.
If one's more likely than the other.
All right, in any case,
so very few interesting situations
do we actually have perfect information.
Of course, there are some people think chess
is the most interesting thing in the world,
in which case, fine, all right, chess, that's it.
Chess to me is a very boring game.
I like games where people are laughing when they play
and I don't see anyone laughing playing chess.
So, if you aren't, if it isn't funny, it's not worth playing.
That's my view.
All right, in any case,
this leads us to a very different equilibrium concept
that comes from me with a totally different intuition
than strictly dominant,
than the strict dominance or weak dominance.
And that is the pure strategy Nash equilibrium,
which of course is a comes from John Nash.
How many of you see us all beautiful mind?
All right, so okay, movie, the book is way better.
And yes, I have an article brawling heavily on the book
because while the movie shows Nash being subject
to a disease totally outside of control,
the book actually, Nash's own story, how did I get better?
I just decided to stop talking about nonsense.
That's how I got better.
All right, well, that's what he said.
It's also part of where son with the same problems
has said, look, mom takes care of dad
and doesn't make him do anything.
Why can't she give me the same deal?
All right, sounds like there's a lot of self-awareness there
which is not reflected in the movie.
Anyway, so John Nash and to then after everything else
died in a taxi a couple of years ago.
So like a weird ending to the two,
which of course is years after the movie.
Any case, so named after John Nash, right?
So instead of player strategies
is a pure strategy Nash equilibrium abbreviated PSNE.
This is one of the acronyms you must learn for this class.
All right, not many, but this is one of them.
PSNE, pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
All right, so if you set up player strategies,
a pure strategy Nash equilibrium,
if no player could do strictly better
by changing strategies,
holding all other player strategies fixed.
Okay, so what does that mean?
Well, imagine asking all the players one by one
if they would like to do something different.
If all of them answer no,
then you have a pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
Like what do you mean do something different?
Do something different given what everybody else is doing.
So for example, here's how we test
for pure strategy Nash equilibrium
in the seating arrangement of this room.
So I go to you, given where everyone else is seating,
sitting, do you want to change your seat?
No.
No, given where everyone else is sitting,
including the first two, do you want to change your seat?
No, given where everyone else is sitting,
including the first two people at your desk,
do you want to change your seat?
No.
I go through the entire room.
If 100% of the people say no,
I do not want to change my seat,
given where everybody else is,
we've got pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
If one student says yes, I would.
We don't have a pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
But again, it's not that I would like
to trade seats with that student
because that student is in the seat.
It would have to be like,
you don't want to go and evict them from the seat.
It's got to be that given what they're doing,
you actually want to do something differently,
which could be saying,
would you mind changing seats with me, sir?
Which if you have back trouble, you should try this.
In general, I found that when you plead a medical excuse,
people usually switch seats with you.
So there's no need to be suffering
if you see a better chair around.
It's unusual for someone to say no.
So anyway, some practical advice for this.
But don't be intimidated by what appears
to be pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
Maybe you actually could improve your situation.
If you have back pain,
that's one of the worst kinds of pain in the world.
That's the kind of pain that if you have it,
you don't not have it at any point in your day,
you are feeling pain the entire time.
In my experience with back pain,
unfortunately I don't have it now.
So it sounds a little bit to me that PSNE
is kind of like Pareto efficiency where...
Oh, let's see.
You get no, so no, again, like I said,
it's, let's see.
So I guess you could say that there's no room
for a unilateral Pareto improvement is a way of putting it.
So there's no way for any one person to be better off
holding constant when everybody else is doing it.
Right?
But so I guess there is some similarity,
but again, it's not thinking about like,
you know, like in, like, you know,
but it's still logically possible that say,
there could be a Pareto improvement
by like moving everybody one seat to left, for example,
or make everyone move closer.
So that is, that could still be Pareto improvement
even though no one person has to do it.
So I actually take it back.
There's actually no connection.
They're unrelated.
Okay, I get it.
Thank you.
Sure, sure.
All right.
So now from this definition, as well as from this example,
it should be obvious that there could be multiple
pure strategy-equilibrium,
or the pure strategy-equilibria,
that says the plural of equilibrium.
So for example, suppose you show up here
and you find that someone else is in your regular seat,
it is quite likely that you will sit someplace differently.
Right?
And suppose that the first people show up
sit in different seats and this could throw off
the entire, the entire room.
And it could be that in the end,
no one is in their regular seat.
Right?
That's pretty cool.
And if you showed up in this room
and everyone in your regular seat were unoccupied,
would you go and make a big deal about it
or would you just go and get another seat?
And knowing normally human beings,
well, you'd probably be too scared
even to ask the other person.
Right?
This is the way human beings around the world are.
So having to ask, right?
If you have kids, like the level of maturity
that you need for a kid to receive money
and go and buy something from someone,
like they need a lot of maturity actually to do that.
Look, look, you want an ice cream?
Yes.
Here is money.
That is the person whose job it is
to give you ice cream in exchange for money.
Go to the person, tell them you want the ice cream,
give them the money, we'll give you the ice cream.
Can't do that.
I mean, I'd be like teenagers,
I'd be like, I couldn't possibly.
Why not?
This is the whole system.
And they will do it.
So, surprisingly hard to get people to do these things.
So anyway, it is likely if someone's in your seat,
you will just meekly go and sit in a different seat.
So there could be a totally different equilibrium
based upon one person changing their seat.
And then that would be the equilibrium.
And then given where everybody's sitting,
I could have done this lecture and said,
anyone, does any one person want to move your change of seat?
Give them a round of applause, and everybody else says no.
Fine, that's a Nash equilibrium.
There could be an endless number of Nash equilibria.
All right?
And also, less obvious, but still demonstrable,
is there could be zero Nash equilibrium.
Right, so there could be no Nash equilibrium at all.
Like, what would that be like?
Well, imagine that one person in the room
smells really bad, but everybody gets lonely.
All right, so what happens?
Well, there's one person who smells bad,
and then everybody tries to move away from this person.
Right?
So everyone tries to sit further away.
But then the person who smells bad feels lonely.
So what does the lonely person do?
Try to get close to the other people.
And then what do they do?
Move away.
And then what does that person do?
Try to get closer.
And this could just move around the room forever
without any equilibrium.
That is possible.
All right, so it's possible there just is no equilibrium,
and it's just a world of chaos.
That's theoretically totally, completely possible as well.
Another example, I remember when I was in fourth grade,
we had a Christmas exchange where we go and bring it,
everyone brings in a present,
and then the first kid goes and takes a present and wraps it,
and then they have to keep that present.
But then the next kid comes up and gets a present.
They unwrap it, and if they don't like their present,
they can do a forced trade with the first person
and say, okay, well, I don't like my present,
so you get mine, and then I get to keep it.
And then when the third person comes up,
they can go and swap their present
with either of the first two, right, and so on.
So now the most valued present that year
was something called magic sand.
All right, magic sand is special sand
that you put into water, and it'll make shapes,
and it will keep its form,
and then you can drain out the water, dry it out,
and you can use your magic sand again.
That's magic sand.
So the way that it worked is every kid
wanted the magic sand.
Now, there was a rule that you're not allowed
to immediately swap back.
All right, so the magic sand comes up,
there's already some presents there,
and then, of course, the next kid goes
and grabs the magic sand, and then that kid goes,
and he's not allowed to immediately take back the magic sand,
but then he'll go and grab another present,
but then that person, I think he can go get the magic sand.
So the magic sand was cycling around and around,
and then finally the teacher just saw what was happening
and just declared a cessation,
as in you can't keep grabbing the magic sand,
although then when the next person opened up,
the magic sand was up for grabs again.
So again, it could very well be this magic sand
would just keep cycling from person to person
to person to person, because everybody loved the sand,
and there would be no equilibrium,
so that would be possible.
All right.
So anyway, so a game could have multiple
linear strategies in Nash equilibria.
It could have none.
Of course, it could have one.
There's all these different possibilities.
Okay.
So questions?
Questions about Nash equilibria?
Let's see.
Oh, actually, let's see.
Oh, yeah, so there's one other example here,
which, so this is out of the movie A Beautiful Mind.
Let's see here.
So in the movie, they actually try to explain Nash equilibrium
and they have one of the worst possible examples they could give
that directly contradicts the theory.
All right.
So here's the example.
So if you haven't seen the movie,
a young thin Russell Crowe played John Nash.
All right.
So your views about current Russell Crowe may vary.
But anyway, back then was considered extremely good
looking by almost everybody.
All right.
So Russell Crowe plays John Nash.
Now he is in a bar with four other mathematicians
who they're also actors so they're also better looking
than actual mathematicians.
But still, there's a clear hierarchy of attractiveness
where you can rank them very easily.
Right. And then there are the fine mathematicians
who are looking at four women across the bar
who also can be clearly ranked in terms of attractiveness.
It's a movie.
All right.
So it's completely clear what the rank ordering is
for almost everybody.
And then, you know, and then John Nash slash Russell Crowe
goes and explains his theory of Nash equilibrium.
And he says, well, look.
So you see, you know, you might think
that the best looking woman is going
to be asked out by all of us.
Right. And they're like, yeah, yeah, all right.
But no, that's not what's going to happen.
Why not? Because then we will all block each other
and then she won't want to go out with anybody.
Right. And then also, no,
and then also the other woman will feel offended
that they were second choice.
So then no one will get a date if we do that.
And they're like, oh, of course, you're a genius,
Janet and Nash.
And so then what will happen?
He says, well, look.
The only equilibrium is one where we all ignore the best
looking woman and then we each go and get a second,
and then we go to, and then she's completely off the table.
Then we only talk to the less attractive ones.
And that's the equilibrium.
But you are Russell Crowe.
How could that be the equilibrium?
Right. You know, the obvious equilibrium
in all movies is the best looking man
and the best looking woman end up together, right?
And that's what everybody expects would happen.
Right. And again, in terms of Nash equilibrium, if every,
so if the most attractive woman is being ignored,
and then John, and then like one person is going to go
and say, wow, the most attractive one is being ignored.
I might as well ask her out because apparently people
believe this crazy, you know,
crazy misapplication of Nash equilibrium.
So now she's available for the least attractive mathematician
to say, hi, I'm, I appear
to be the only man that will talk to you.
We're all brainwashed by John Nash over there.
He said that logic required us to ignore you.
So anyway, like what would be a much more sensible Nash
equilibrium to propose in this situation?
Like what, well, you know, movie logic
or real world logic actually are the same in this case.
Well, Russell Crowe asks out who?
Most attractive.
The second best looking mathematician asks out?
Second most attractive woman.
Third most attractive man asks out third most attractive woman.
So that is at least a plausible Nash equilibrium.
You could say, well, there's more going on.
There's personality or maybe one,
maybe the third most attractive woman is also a mathematician.
So actually she's a better match.
All right, so there are other possible considerations.
But still, at least the one where it's a matching model
where the higher your mate value is,
the higher the mate value of the person you end up with,
that one at least makes sense.
Whereas the one where the most desirable person gets ignored,
that one makes no sense in Nash equilibrium terms.
So anyway, if you remember the movie,
that scene is a terrible explanation of Nash equilibrium.
But I believe it's also the only movie that ever tries
to explain Nash equilibrium.
So 100% of the cinematic efforts
to explain Nash equilibrium are terrible.
All right, as far as I know.
Okay, so questions about the concept
of pure strategy Nash equilibrium?
All right, so let's start with one example.
All right, so here's one where we've got player one can do up
or down, player two can do left or right.
And this is actually one where if you look at it closely,
we'll actually want to go through it.
All right, so we can go through all the options
to see whether we've got zero, one,
or more pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
So here we've got left, here we've got right.
All right, and we'll go through all the options
to see whether we've got zero, one, or more.
All right, and then we've got 15, 10, eight, 15, 10, seven,
and six, eight.
So to find the pure strategy,
to test whether any given equilibrium is in fact
a pure strategy Nash equilibrium,
we have to go one by one.
And for each one, say, does anyone want to change
what they're doing given what everybody else is doing?
If the answer is yes for anybody,
then we can exit out,
not pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
If the answer is yes for all players, that is one
pure strategy Nash equilibrium,
but can we then stop and not bother checking the others?
No, we must check them all if we want to find all of them.
All right, so we can take a look here.
So does player one want to do something different?
Would he rather have 10 instead of 15?
No, he likes 15 better.
How about, but would player two rather have,
rather, does player two want to have 10 rather than 15?
No, so we can X that one out.
That doesn't work because player two would want to deviate
given what player one is doing, right?
Because player two would rather have 15 than 10.
Right, so player two is choosing between these two things.
Player one is choosing between these two things.
So player two is going to want to change.
So that's not going to work.
What about this one?
So this one is not going to work either
because player one would rather have 15 than 10,
so we can X that one out.
All right, how about this one over here?
This one over here, we can see that player two
would rather have 15 than eight,
so we can X that one out.
All right, so now that we're down to one,
we don't need to check the last one, right?
Do we need to check the last one?
Yes, of course.
There could be no pure strategy and Nash equilibrium.
That's possible too.
All right, so this last one here,
we can say, all right, so player one,
is eight better than six?
Yes, so it doesn't want to change.
Player two, is 15 better than 10?
Yes, so there we are.
We do have a unique pure strategy and Nash equilibrium
in this particular game.
So there it is, we found it.
All right, now is this any different from strict dominance?
Actually, in this game, no.
Here, we actually, actually,
strict dominance would give us the very same answer,
because we could go and take a look here,
and we could say, let's see,
so for player, let's see, for player one,
is down ever better than up?
In fact, down is always worse than up,
so you never want to play down.
And then once we eliminate down,
we can then say, for player two,
is left ever better than right?
No, so we actually could also solve this by strict dominance.
So here's the key thing, is every strictly dominant
equilibrium is automatically Nash equilibrium.
Right, so if we have solved a game by strict dominance,
then whatever that equilibrium is, is automatically Nash.
Let's remember, the whole idea of strict dominance
is that any one player who changed
what he was doing would be worse off.
So if everyone would definitely be worse off changing,
then is it possible that strategy is not Nash?
No, it's gotta be Nash, right?
Because no one, does anyone want to do something
that is always worse for them?
No, no one wants to do that.
Well, in that case, everyone is content with the status quo.
Then we have Nash.
Yes?
But going back to your bar example in the movie,
I mean, even if you did have a situation where
the most attractive male and the most attractive female,
you know, and I found that you'd always have a situation
where a less attractive member of one
would like the more attractive member.
Ah, you could as well, yeah, I mean that.
From my understanding, that happens all the time.
Not much.
That doesn't mean that it's going to happen however.
Right, because you need to have,
oh, you know, because it's not slavery.
So you actually have to have the other person on board.
Okay, all right, so now we can think about
another case, so here's another one.
We can look for pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
We can look for the equilibria,
because we want to grammatically leave open
the possibility that there's more than one.
Okay, so now we have another one,
so again, we just have the options of up, down,
left, right, anything else?
Up, 10, 10, zero, 15, 15, zero,
negative five, negative five.
All right, so we can go here,
and we can start off with 10, 10.
Is that going to be Nash equilibrium?
And of course, the answer is no,
because player one is better off
if he places and switches it down,
and also player two is better off if he switches to right,
so not that one.
All right, then we can look at this one here.
So player one, 15's better than 10,
so it doesn't want to change.
What about player two?
Is zero better than negative five?
Yep, all right, so that's one Nash equilibrium,
but we are not done.
We've got to check them all.
All right, this is like, this may be gross,
but this is like checking kids in a preschool for lice.
You don't check one and then say,
he doesn't have it, so we're fine.
So you check every single one.
This one kid, that ruins everything.
So, I guess I may have a small amount
of personal experience with this.
Yeah, all right, so.
I did shave my head once.
All right, so I felt like Walter White.
I'm sorry.
The scariest I've ever been.
All right, so over here, all right, how about this one?
All right, so is zero better than negative five for player one?
Sure.
Is 15 better than 10 for player two?
Yes, so that's another Nash equilibrium.
And this one over here is obviously not going
to be a Nash equilibrium because these are the minimum,
minimum score, minimum payoffs for both players,
so that's not gonna work.
So there we've got two possibilities, right?
Now, this is interesting because we have two Nash equilibria,
but one of the Nash equilibria is really good for player one
and the other one is really good for player two.
So which one's gonna happen?
Could be either, right?
And by itself, the constant Nash equilibrium doesn't give
us any help in picking out which one's gonna happen.
Could it suggest there's gonna be a race
that player one is gonna go down?
Player one's gonna try to go down before player two.
Player one may immediately try to go down
and then say, sorry, I don't change my mind.
Once I start, I start.
I don't ever back down, right?
And then player two may say, well, what a coincidence.
I'm the same way, except I'm playing right.
And then you may have a standoff, right?
So all the Nash says is that these are the two pure strategy
Nash equilibrium.
OK.
All right.
And again, how is this different from strict dominance?
Because there isn't a strictly dominant thing.
So again, just to make sure I'm following entirely
and everything.
So player one, it's always played sequentially
and player one always goes first.
So no.
So actually, so here, actually what you'll see
is that there is no sequence.
Sequence is not even shown here.
Sequence is not even shown in this diagram.
So hypothetically, player two could go first.
Yes, yes.
So if this were a game where player two got to go first,
then we would be able to solve this by backwards deduction.
So think about this.
Yes, so if there were an order, say,
we're first up, down, and then we're left, right, left, right,
then actually we could solve it by strict dominance
and we'd have no either Nash.
And then it would just be, we can just work this out.
Yes, so up left, so 10, 10.
And then, let's see, up right, 0, 15.
And then down left, 15, 0.
And then finally, negative 5, negative 5.
And then, yes, this is actually a good chance
to solve another thing by backwards deduction.
So let's just do it together.
So over here, so at this node, which thing
is never going to happen?
Remember, this is player one.
This is player two.
So player two gets to here.
Which thing is he never going to do?
L.
Yeah, he's never going to do L, so we can erase that thing.
And over here, which one will player two never do?
R.
R, so you can erase that one.
And now you're player one.
And you see, wow, I can either go and do up and get 0,
or I can do down and get 15.
Yes, so yes, then, just erasing that whole thing.
And then we have solved this game through backwards
deduction.
All right, so it is a finite game of information.
So yes, so actually implicit here in showing that,
in showing multiple equilibrium, is precisely
that it's simultaneous.
So again, as I said, so you can either say simultaneous,
or you can say sequential, but you
don't get to find out what the other person did
until you have decided upon what you're doing.
That's a very good question.
And let's see, then we could go and take
a look at one more game.
So let's take a look here.
It's actually, do I still have it up on the board?
Oh, yeah, I do.
I don't have to draw it again.
So let's see, is it exactly the same?
Is it slightly switched?
Let me just quickly fix it.
I'm going to do it.
OK, zero.
All right, so remember that game with Popeye,
where Popeye wants to be on the subway with the other guy.
The other guy wants to be on, but doesn't want to.
Popeye just wants to be with him.
It doesn't matter if he's on or off.
And the other guy does not want to be with Popeye.
All right, so if we go through and try to apply this,
so can on be an astral equilibrium?
No, because who wants to do something different
if it's on on?
The criminal wants to get off.
So that's not one.
How about if it is off on?
Then is that a possible equilibrium?
No, because then, so if the criminal is off,
then what does Popeye want to do?
He wants to get off too, so then you track him.
So that one's not going to work.
What if the criminal's on and Popeye's off?
No, same reason.
Then Popeye would want to get on too.
What if they're both off?
Is that going to work?
No, because then the criminal wants to get on.
And that's another case where we have no Nash equilibrium,
which is also possible.
So pure structure Nash equilibrium concept
is the most used in all of economics and game theory,
and probably all social science, actually.
So it is used all the time, tons of papers.
It's totally possible you guys will one day have a paper
where you will use Nash equilibrium.
It's a little bit odd, because it
seems to assume away strategic interaction, which in a way
was what game theory was adopted to address.
Because notice, with Nash equilibrium,
no one is ever thinking ahead and saying, well,
if I change, then he'll do something different,
which might make me even worse off than it was before,
so I'm just going to sit here.
Like, for example, you might say,
I'm not going to change my seat.
I would like that other seat, but if I change that seat,
some other people will change their seat,
and there will be a chain reaction.
And in the end, I'm actually going
to like the equilibrium less, because my friends won't
be sitting next to me anymore.
And so I'm actually better off not doing what appears,
what I actually would make me better off holding constant
with other people do, because what other people do
won't be constant if I change my behavior.
OK.
All right, so anyway, so a more strategic player
might think I'm not going to switch just
because I'd be better off holding my opponent's action
constant.
Maybe it'll respond in a way that makes me wish
I hadn't changed in the first place.
The standard game theorist answer to that
is we can just go and expand the game
and add more structure to the game
in order to take it out of that.
So that's not totally crazy, although it's more often
they just say that without ever doing it.
But in principle, could be, yeah.
All right, so questions about pure strategy Nash equilibrium?
Yes?
Is the Nash equilibrium always prior to efficiency?
Because from the example you gave.
Oh, absolutely not.
So remember that, as I said, every strictly dominant outcome
is Nash equilibrium.
And remember that in the prisoner's dilemma,
that is a textbook case of an outcome that is actually
prior to inefficient.
So in the prisoner's dilemma, both people confess,
and they're both worse off than if neither confessed.
Remember that?
And that's actually a perfectly good Nash equilibrium
for them to both confess.
So yeah, there's no promise at all
that this is going to be prior to efficient.
Other than what I said in week one, which
is everything the real world is because of all those things
I told you.
But again, in the context of a game,
even on a homework problem, there's
no presumption that a Nash equilibrium will be efficient.
In fact, the very fact someone's bothering to give it
to you as a homework problem, probably
you're going to have to prove that it's not efficient.
Otherwise, it's not a smart homework problem.
Because you might give 10 homework problems
and three are efficient and seven aren't.
And then you have to figure out which ones are which.
So that might be a homework problem.
Now, notice that I immediately started
talking about pure strategy Nash equilibrium
when it seems like I'm giving you
two extra letters for no reason.
Why is it pure strategy Nash equilibrium?
Can't you just say Nash equilibrium?
And the answer is that I am predistinguishing
pure strategy Nash equilibrium for the other kind of Nash
equilibrium, which we will now talk about,
which is the MSNE, the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium.
And that is the other thing to think about whenever you're
talking about Nash equilibrium.
After you have done what I've just talked about,
where you go over every one of the cells
and see whether it's a Nash equilibrium,
that will yield a list of all the pure strategy Nash
equilibrium.
But then you are not done.
If you have been instructed to find all Nash equilibrium,
then you must go and search also for the mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium.
Mixed strategy Nash equilibrium.
So instead of asking whether any players incentive
change strategies, you can also ask
whether any players incentive changes probabilities
of playing different strategies.
So instead of saying, do you want to change what you do,
you could say, do you want to change the dice you're rolling
for what you're doing?
Do you want to change the pattern or the probability
of the frequency with which you play different things?
So first, as a technical matter, how
do you solve for mixed strategy Nash equilibrium?
Now, this is one of the ideas that people
find most counterintuitive in all game theory.
But it's simple.
It just doesn't make sense to people at first.
You have to convince yourself by doing it a bunch of times.
Although I'll also try to convince you intuitively
once we see how to solve for it.
See, I feel like I have some modest success.
But it's ultimately the kind of thing
you've got to convince yourself.
So how can this be?
So how do you do it?
Here's the answer.
Each player must play a mixture that leaves
all other players indifferent.
And you're like, what?
Why would I do whatever makes other people indifferent?
Or the way people often think about it is,
why should I wake up in the morning
and say, you know what I'm going to do today?
Whatever makes other people indifferent.
That seems like a very strange goal.
That's not the right way to think about it.
Rather, what we need to say is, look,
what is the only thing that is stable?
in all the world.
The only thing that is stable in all the world is
for everybody to be indifferent.
And how can everybody be indifferent
if everyone else but you is making you indifferent?
That's the idea.
So the only way that a distribution can be stable is
if everyone is indifferent.
And the only way everyone can be made indifferent is
if everybody but themselves does what makes them indifferent.
Now this does not answer the question
of what motivates them.
Rather it says, look, we don't need to worry
about what motivates them, all that we're thinking
about right now is what is stable.
And there's only one thing that's stable that's saying,
well, I guess the stable thing seems like it would happen
because the other things, all of them break down.
So what else could happen except for the stable thing?
So that is at least the mathematical intuition,
although we'll see that we can do better
than that intuitively.
All right.
So each player must play a mixture
that leaves all other players indifferent.
So let's see here.
Let's see, return to the game.
I don't think I actually have this game.
I don't think I have this game originally.
Now the spotlight is back.
So we'll just do this game and solve
for the pure strategy, or solve rather
for the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium.
Okay. So actually, why don't we just go and quickly check
for the pure strategy ones.
I don't even remember what they are, but let's just do it.
Just to hone our skills.
Okay. So we got 10, 115, 12, 0, negative 9, negative 5.
All right.
So take a look at this one.
All right.
So is this one going to be a pure strategy Nash equilibrium?
No, because the player is going to want to shift from U to D.
Player 1 will want to shift there.
All right.
How about this one?
Let's see.
Is this one going to be a pure strategy Nash equilibrium?
Looks pretty good, because player 1 is going
to get 12 instead of 8.
Player 2 is going to get 0 instead of negative 5.
So that one's good.
And then this one here.
All right.
So here we can have 1 or negative 9, rather than 1, right?
And then you could have 15 or 8, 10 or 15 or 10.
So that one's good.
And then of course, this one again,
these are the two worst payoffs for each player.
So not going to be 1.
So here we've got two equilibria.
Two pure strategy Nash equilibria.
Nash equilibria.
Nash equilibria.
All right.
Now let's go and see whether there is a mixed strategy
Nash equilibria.
Hit. There is.
In fact, there is one.
All right.
So let us, so what the two,
there are two questions we need to ask.
When is player 2 indifferent between playing left
and playing right?
And then when is player 1 indifferent between playing up
and playing down?
All right.
So player 2 is going to be indifferent between playing left
and playing right under the following conditions.
So let the probability of up be equal to sigma.
And then of course, down is going to be equal
to 1 minus sigma, because there's only two things.
They can do.
Okay. So then player 2 will be indifferent as long
as 10 times sigma plus 0 times 1 minus sigma equals 15 times
sigma minus 5 times 1 minus sigma.
Why? All right.
So now we're trying to find
out when player 2 will be indifferent.
So if player 1 is playing up with probability sigma,
down with probability 1 minus sigma,
then if player 1 plays left, he gets 10 with probability sigma
and 0 with probability 1 minus sigma.
So that's 10 with probability sigma,
0 with probability 1 minus sigma.
So that's the first side of the equation, the left side.
On the other hand, if player 2 plays down, excuse me,
so let's see, excuse me, if player 2 plays right,
then he's going to get 15 with probability sigma
and negative 5 with probability 1 minus sigma.
15 with probability sigma, negative 5
with probability 1 minus sigma.
All right.
So do you see where all the numbers are coming from?
All right.
So this is what, so this is what is expected value
from playing left, and that's the expected value
from playing right.
And we're now going to find what value
of sigma makes him indifferent.
And it turns out sigma equals.5 makes him indifferent.
But we don't have a mixed strategy Nash Equilibrium yet
because we've only found out the probability
that makes one player different.
We need to have probabilities that make everybody different.
It's only two players, so this is one more do.
All right.
So now we need to find, so when player 1 is indifferent
between up and down.
So let player 2's probability of playing left be equal to 5,
and his probability of playing right, then of course,
is going to be 1 minus 5.
Okay. Now we can go and just do a simple alpha problem,
one equation and one unknown, where we will have,
see let me put it up here, 8 phi plus 1 times 1 minus 5,
must equal 12 phi minus 9 times 1 minus 5.
Okay. And again, where is this coming from?
So now player 1.
So player 1, if he plays up, will get 8 with probability phi,
1 with probability 1 minus phi.
So that's the first half of the equation.
If he plays down, he will get 12 with probability phi,
and negative 9 with probability 1 minus phi.
That's the other part of the equation.
And again, if we solve that, then we get phi equals 5 7's.
So the mixed strategy Nash Equilibrium
for this game is going to be sigma phi equals.5 comma 5 7's.
All right.
So when player 1 plays up with probability.5,
and players who plays left with probability 5 7's,
neither player can do better by changing the mix.
Right now, they wouldn't do worse either,
because they both made a difference.
But at any other probabilities,
one player could do better by changing his mix.
These are the only players
where neither one has any affirmative incentive
to change, where anyone gets anything extra by changing.
At any other probabilities, at least one
of the players would want to go and change their probabilities.
Questions? Questions?
Questions? All right.
Now, now is the part where I try to convince you
that this concept not only makes sense, but makes more sense
than anything else we've done today, actually.
All right.
So, and by that I mean, it's more useful
in the real world, actually illuminates new things.
You know, like all that stuff
that a good scientific hypothesis is supposed to do
for you, like novelty, you know, so forth.
All right.
So, anyway, a lot of people find it bizarre,
and especially in pure theory, there's a lot of hostility
to mixed strategy Nash equilibrium,
because pure theorists are basically mathematicians,
and mathematicians on some level don't
like anything other than certainty.
So, when you come up with a list of, when you say, look,
we can't give you an answer,
but we can give you a distribution of probabilities,
standard mathematician is like, it's not a real answer.
A real answer would be a number, not a distribution.
But why? You just don't like it.
So, like it.
I mean, even though, you know, Nash, of course,
a lot of his theorems actually, in fact,
are about mixed strategy Nash equilibrium,
because in fact, so as you notice
with pure strategy Nash equilibrium,
you often aren't able to go, and you know, it's quite possible
that a pure strategy Nash equilibrium doesn't even exist.
So, what Nash actually shows is that there will always be a Nash
equilibrium, but if there isn't a pure strategy one,
then it will have to be a mixed strategy one.
So, that's a big part of the theorems
that Nash actually proves, is a Nash equilibrium will exist,
though if a pure strategy does not exist,
then it will be a mixed strategy.
So, he doesn't show that a mixed strategy is always a
mixed strategy, but he does show that if there is,
if a pure strategy does not exist,
then a mixed strategy will exist, again, under, of course,
a list of assumptions, which, however, for this are quite weak.
I don't think Nash actually called his own Nash equilibrium.
I'm not sure about this.
Okay. All right.
So, anyway, what I say is that the whole idea
of mixed strategy Nash equilibrium,
it accommodates the strategic complexity of the real world,
you know, when there's interaction
with small numbers of people.
So, think about it this way.
You make your opponents indifferent so that, you know,
so that there's nothing, there's nothing in your behavior
that they can exploit.
So, for example, think about sports.
Suppose that you're playing a game like racquetball.
All right.
Now, what happens if a person always goes and serves the ball
so it shows up in the left corner?
Where does their opponent go and wait for the ball?
The left corner.
The left corner.
What if they always put it in the right corner,
or the middle center, or whatever?
So, if there is a predictable pattern,
then the other person will go and see you and exploit it.
So, what is it that a good player does?
They randomize.
They actually try to eliminate patterns
of behavior that could be exploited.
Once both players have eliminated the patterns
that we exploited, we have a pure strategy
Nash equilibrium.
All right.
So, you know, you can see this in things
like do you hit the ball hard or soft?
If you always hit it hard, you just back up
so that you're ready to get it when they're far distance.
If you always hit it soft, then you scoot in.
But if you randomize, then you've eliminated a pattern
that can be exploited.
All right.
So, you can see this in many kinds of sports
where you look around and say, why are they doing that?
Why don't they all just do this thing?
Well, if they did that thing,
there would be a simple strategic response to it.
So, that's why they don't do that thing.
Instead, you do things that are unpredictable
or that are a response to average conditions
in a way that you can't be exploited.
All right.
Or you can see this in a lot of strategy games.
So, in many strategy games, if you always do the same thing,
it is very easy to defend against it and to beat you.
All right.
So, anyone play the game diplomacy?
Yes. So, if you know what your opponent's moves are,
and you're a decent player, you can win all the time.
Yes. So, once when my kids were really little, I said, all right,
look, I'll give you five countries.
You give me two, but you have to move first,
and I will still beat you.
All right.
Yes, they couldn't do anything to me,
because whatever they did, I was like, well,
just block exactly what you did
and ruin every move you have.
All right.
So, but again, the game is normally played simultaneously.
But if you could predict what the other side was going to do,
which was the point of my exercise,
then there would be an easy way of winning.
So, the reason why you randomize in the real game is
so people are not able to figure out what you're going to do.
They aren't able to optimally respond
to exactly what you're doing.
Instead, you try to be unpredictable,
to leave uncertainty.
So, then they cannot simply do exactly the thing they want
to do in order to beat you.
This is clear, so all in the famous game
of rock, paper, scissors.
Right? So, everyone knows rock, paper, scissors.
Yes, so this is a way where you play rock.
You can play paper, or you can play scissors.
Right? And as you remember, yes, so paper covers rock,
and scissors get paper.
And then the other one, of course,
is rock smashes scissors.
All right.
So, this is the game.
All right.
Now, what would happen in this game
if you always play scissors?
Yes, the other player would say, you always play scissors?
Fine, then I will always play rock,
and I will always beat him.
All right?
And similarly, for anything that you always play,
there is a simple strategy.
So, what is it that just intuitively you want to work
out, what is the mixed strategy Nash Equilibrium for this game?
One-third, one-third, one-third.
That one makes sense.
That's the only one that can't be exploited.
If you did any one of those things more often than a third,
then on average, your opponent would be better off
by just playing the thing that beats that thing,
and they would on average tend to beat you.
Now, weird fact is there actually is a World Series
of rock, paper, scissors, and there are people
who are good at it.
All right?
So, somehow, there are people who can, like,
they don't know who you are.
They look in your eyes, and that guy's going to play rock.
And they are right more often than chance.
I mean, again, I'm very puzzled by this, and I feel
like I can at least get a tie against the world champion just
by going and randomizing on idiosyncratic things,
but maybe I'm wrong, and maybe that guy could crush me.
All right?
I don't know.
But anyway.
A table of random numbers.
Yes. You know, you were like, you were just like,
look around the room, and then, like, I'm going to base this
upon, you know, like, whether or not the seventh person
that I see is going to, like, is going to, I don't know,
like, has, you know, like, two hands on the table,
one or zero, you know.
Like, there's so many things that you can base it on,
and it seems like to me, like, each time I can just come
up with a new weird thing to base it on,
and I don't see how the World Series winner could beat me,
but obviously, there's a bunch of people who go against
that guy thinking that they could beat him,
and he beats them, so.
Or that he can't beat them, and he is, so I don't know.
But anyway, but normally, the, you know,
there is a clear equilibrium for rock, paper, scissors,
and that's one-third, one-third, one-third,
and if you don't play that way, and people figure it out,
you will lose.
So, I say this is another, another insight
into why the mixed strategy concept makes sense, right?
Or, you know, here is a real world application.
So, who does better in the world,
hard bargainers or soft bargainers?
All right, now, there's a lot of people here who just want
to answer as if there's a pure strategy answer, right?
So, of course, the popular answer is hard bargaining.
All right, so, hard bargaining wins.
Just go for the jugular and demand everything,
and then everyone will do what you say, and you will win.
All right, a popular answer,
but there is an obvious downside of this approach.
I mean, what if you meet another person like you?
Then there is no cooperation.
Then there is war, right?
So, there will be no cooperation.
So, it can't always be the case for everyone
that it's better to do this.
In a world where everyone acted like this horrible person,
you would want to be the one person who just says, sure,
whatever you want, man, it's all cool.
And you would be the one person who would go and trade
with everyone, get a small bit, while they just sit there
by knocking their heads together, failing to cooperate.
You would be the one person that could actually make trades.
In that world, you would be the one person
who is the Mr. Cooperative, the hippie, who just says,
I don't need much.
I just, the world is big enough for my needs,
but not big enough for my greed.
Say that kind of thing.
And, of course, it turns out that when I have this attitude,
I'm actually the richest man in the world.
So, you know, keep that in mind.
Now, on the other hand, you also, in a world of hippies,
however, then the very aggressive strategy starts
to pay off.
So, if you want to be the one hippie
in the aggressive world, and the one aggressive person
in the hippie world, what is the,
there is not a pure strategy Nash equilibrium.
There's going to be a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium,
where there is a mix of hard and soft bargaining, and some,
and the marginal person is going to be just indifferent
between the two strategies.
And that is a prediction that makes a lot of sense.
So, I do have a pet theory that actually,
despite all this logic,
in the real world soft bargaining actually is
on average a better strategy, because so many human attitudes
for a strategy are reformed during,
when we're in primitive tribes, when there's a big payoff
to knowing that, for people knowing
that you're tough and aggressive.
You know, there's only 20 people, and you're Mr. Tough.
People get used to, well, that guy, you know, he's pushy,
and so you better just give him what he wants.
But in the real world, almost of that,
most of that benefit has gone away.
We're dealing with strangers all the time
that we'll never deal with again.
There's no point in trying to impress them
about how tough we are.
They don't, they're never going to remember us.
We'll never see them again.
In a world like that, actually, you want to be the,
if other people are still acting like they're cavemen times,
and you're the one person
who realizes this is the modern world, I'm never going
to see you again, then the person who is more cooperative
and less aggressive will do better.
So, yes, while there are situations,
while being aggressive is advantageous, I do,
my view is if you do look around in the real modern world,
you will see that it is generally a bad idea.
You know, especially if you see a little boy
who is super aggressive, it is not reasonable to think
that kid is going to do well in life.
He could, but it's also very likely he's just going
to end up in jail, right?
A very reasonable thing to predict for a kid
who is really, really pushy and aggressive, and of course,
you know, if he resorts to physical violence, you know,
a lot of kids grow out of it, but then some don't.
And the modern world is very little tolerant
for people like that.
And if you say, well, I'll like beat the mummy out of everybody,
that is not a viable strategy in the real world.
So, you know, try, but it's just going to end in jail.
Maybe I'll be the one guy who never gets caught.
I don't know, I suppose, but you keep throwing the dice,
eventually you're going to end up in jail.
So anyway, so, but the general intuition
of which strategy is the good strategy,
the obvious answer is neither is the good strategy.
It all depends upon the mix in the population,
and in equilibrium, the martial person is doing equally well,
either way, right?
And otherwise, again, if hard bargaining was just always just
better for everyone, everyone would do it,
and then it wouldn't be good anymore.
Okay, questions about that?
All right.
Oh, yes, and another time that I use, that I use mixed strategy is
when I am picking exam questions.
So my goal is to give you incentives
to learn all the material.
There is not enough time for me
to actually ask questions about all the material.
Therefore, if you could figure out what I'm going to ask,
you could actually learn only a very small amount,
and then you, like, you could spend hardly any time
in this class, you just learn the kinds
of questions I'm going to ask.
You could read my mind.
You could actually get an A while doing almost no work.
But I don't want to let you do that.
So when I am writing, when I'm writing the questions,
I'm there thinking, okay, I need to be unpredictable now.
Okay, I don't want to ask the obvious questions.
So a lot of times I'll go back to past exams
and say what kinds of questions have I asked before?
All right, I'm not going to ask those questions again.
I'm going to ask different questions.
But then sometimes I say that's just what the students think I'm
going to do.
So then maybe I'll ask exactly the kind
of question I asked before once in a while.
Not often, but sometimes, just to keep them on their feet.
And this is exactly what I am consciously thinking
about as I write the exam, is trying to randomize the questions
so that you do the strategy that is best for dealing
with my strategy, namely to actually understand the material.
Yeah, so I'm doing the mixed strategy.
In order to pressure you to do the unmixed strategy,
you're just learning all the material.
So, yes, is it possible to have a mixed strategy
in Nash equilibrium where one person mixes
and the other person doesn't?
Yeah, it's totally possible.
Okay, all right, so anyway,
using this mixed strategy Nash equilibrium,
it cuts through all this complexity
of unlimited second guessing.
Where again, like in that Popeye criminal thing,
you might start saying, well, he thinks that I think,
that he thinks that I think, that he thinks that I think,
that he's not getting off, so I'm going to get on.
All right, but whenever you see this in a movie,
this all makes a lot of sense until you realize, wait a second,
what if he does the same reasoning with one more step,
then you get the opposite answer.
And there's no natural limit
to how many steps this reasoning should go onto, right?
Like why is seven the right number?
All right, now you might say, well,
maybe empirically there's a number that people do,
but of course, once you ask that,
then you're no longer doing normal game theory.
Interesting enough, there actually is research on this.
Like so, how many steps down of advanced reasoning
that people do, right?
Or let's flip it this way.
There is a number to assume that will maximize your payoff.
Because in general, if you assume infinite,
like other people are doing an infinite number of steps,
you will actually do very poorly
because your prediction will be way off
because normal human beings don't do infinite steps.
On the other hand, if you do no steps,
then often you'll generally do poorly
because most people are strategic to some degree.
So, at least for some games,
people have actually tried to measure how many levels
of rationalization should you ascribe to your opponent
in order to maximize how well you do?
And the answer is something like two or three.
So, there's, like if you remember, we'll talk
about this after the midterm, but if you remember
like the Akerlof-Lemons problem, don't worry about it
if you've never heard about it, but the equilibrium
in the Akerlof-Lemons problem in the standard form is
for all cooperation right down, but the actual best strategy
to play when you're playing against normal human beings is
to figure they'll do two steps of reasoning
and then stop and get lazy.
And then you just do what's optimum there,
and then you will actually do better than they will.
Anyway. Okay.
All right.
So, with mixed strategy and natural equilibrium,
you can get through all this complexity
of second guessing, third guessing.
So, you can think, you can interpret the number of layers
of thinking you do as another way of randomizing.
Since there isn't really any good story
for why someone will do one level of thinking, two, three,
four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven,
a million levels of reasoning.
If there isn't any good game theoretic reason for that,
then you can just think of all of this talk about what's going
to happen is really about the same as rolling a die.
Okay. Okay.
And, of course, we can go and, as I said,
so since if there is under very weak assumptions,
is that there's always a natural equilibrium.
Have I told you that?
So, under weak assumptions,
there's always a natural equilibrium.
It will always exist.
And in this game here, we just proved
that there's no pure strategy in natural equilibrium.
So, what kind of equilibrium must exist?
A mixed strategy.
So, there must be a mixed strategy in natural equilibrium
for this game.
Well, you can go and solve for it doing exactly this thing all
over here, although if you just take a really quick look
at these, you may immediately get an intuition
for what must happen.
Yeah, one half, one half.
And that's exactly correct.
So, since we have all these symmetric payoffs,
then the natural equilibrium is going to be,
there's a 50% chance that the criminal gets on the subway
and a 50% chance the Popeye's on the subway.
And then, given that probability distribution,
neither one wants to do a different probability
distribution because, of course, if either one went
up to 51%, then there's a clear thing you should do.
So, if you're the criminal, if the criminal plays 51% on,
then what does Popeye want to do?
On all the time, actually.
That one, on all the time maximizes his expected payout.
And if Popeye is on 51% of the time,
what does the criminal want to do?
Off all the time.
So, it's very clear why any deviation
from 50-50 is going to get you, is not going to be stable.
So, whereas if it is exactly 50-50, then it is stable.
Or, you know, that is an equilibrium.
And, by the way, so I'm not sure, but at least
in some earlier years, I knew some Austrian economists here
like talking about the Holmes-Moriarty problem.
You've heard of this?
So, this is Sherlock Holmes
and his archenemy Moriarty.
And Holmes wants to be in the same city as Moriarty,
and Moriarty wants to be in a different city than Holmes.
And as you might notice, it's exactly the same thing.
Right? And again, so in the actual books,
I think that Holmes says, well, I deduce
that you would definitely be here.
Right? And he gives some ridiculous argument
that makes no sense.
And, you know, again, it sounds logical because I reason
that you would reason that I would be here,
but therefore you wouldn't want to be here,
and therefore you went the other place, but I went there.
Ha! But Moriarty's supposed to be a genius, too.
So, I'm Moriarty, and I saw that very thing coming,
and therefore I did the opposite.
Then why am I here?
Because you saw it.
So, anyway, the simple explanation is
that Holmes found Moriarty because he got lucky.
And they both were doing 50-50, you know,
a mixed-value Nash equilibrium.
But, of course, half the time that will lead to Holmes winning
and the other half the time Moriarty will.
And then in each case, the other one could be gloating.
I guess Holmes would gloat in person, and Moriarty would go
and gloat by sending, putting like an ad in the Times
of London or something saying, ha, ha, Holmes,
you thought that you would catch me, but I outwitted you.
And the real thing, no one outwitted anybody.
All that happened is they threw the dice, and the dice came out,
favorably for Holmes.
All right.
So, yes. Why don't we go and stop here for today?
Thank you.
A little bit like Princess Bride, too, right?
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Yes, yes.
So, yes.
So, there.
Yes. Yes.
So, there I am.
