All right, so, end of last class, we were about to do the LA paradox.
All right, named after Nobel Prize winner Maurice L.A.
I don't think he got it for this, but it's actually what he's best known for, despite the fact that he got the Nobel Prize for this.
All right, so the LA paradox. So we've got a couple different gambles.
So we got 27,500 probability 0.33, 24,000 probability 0.6, 0 with probability 0.01, and 24,000.
So you've got that package, or you could have 24,000 for zero.
That's the first choice of two bundles.
Then you've got a second choice, 27,500 probability 0.33, 0 with probability 0.67, or 24,000 probability 0.34, or you know, the other one is 24,000 probability 0.34, or 0 probability 0.66.
When asked, people usually choose what between the first pairs do you think?
How do people feel about that 1% chance of 0?
Ah! 1% chance of 0, oh no!
All right, so people usually want 24,000 with certainty when they're given those choices.
On the other hand, when you give them the second one, when it's a 67% chance of 0 versus a 66% chance of 0, then how do people feel about that 0?
Hey, you're probably going to walk away with nothing either way, so why not go and get the one that has the really good option for just a teensy-weensy extra 1% chance of 0.
Now, of course, you can go to the first one and say it's just a teensy-weensy 1% chance of 0, but the first one is like, no, because one option is sure, and the other one you have a 1% chance, but the other one is not sure.
So in both cases, of course, the work is being done by the fact that there's only a 1% point change in the probability of 0.
So if you satisfy the expect-utility axioms, then you will treat those as being a change of the same magnitude.
All right, so anyway, expect-utility theory shows this is impossible, and you get a chance to prove it on Work 8.
So I'll leave it there, but again, the intuition is just that people are putting this extra weight on moving from a 0% chance of the bad outcome to a 1%, which is terrible for most people.
I mean, just imagine going from a 0% chance of decapitation to a 1% chance, and how stressed people would be, versus a 67% chance of decapitation versus a 66% chance of decapitation, and then how are people going to feel about that?
Well, bad either way, but the 66-67, same difference, right?
So no, in both cases, 1% point change in the bad outcome.
Yes?
Just a quick question on homework. I don't know, maybe you can answer this. We can use these particular numbers in this example.
Yeah, exactly, but the key thing you have to show is that it doesn't depend on the expect-utility function.
Right.
So you don't have to assume risk aversion or anything.
Right.
Whatever your utility function is, it will show that expect-utility theory disallows this.
Yeah.
Which says expect-utility theory is not just a topology. It actually has some strong implications, which in fact contradict the data.
Surprising.
Sir, can you get the door back there, please?
Thanks.
All right, now moving on to loss aversion and prospect theory.
All right.
All right, now standard story of expect-utility theory is that in the real world people are risk averse.
This is an idea that behavioral economists have objected to, and they say, no, that's wrong.
People are actually something else that they call loss averse.
Loss averse.
All right.
And what does this mean?
It means people don't like losing what they have.
All right, what's the difference between not liking risk and not liking loss?
Well, so you know the old saying, it's better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all.
All right, that's actually a lot like risk aversion, where the fact that you had it once and then you lose it, it's like, well, easy come, easy go, no big deal.
Right.
But with loss aversion, it's not easy come, easy go.
Then it's like, I had something really good and then they took it from me and I've never been the same since.
It's like, well, you're no worse off than you were before you had it.
You went and ripped my heart out and showed it to me.
All right, bad idea.
Okay, so anyway, in regular spec utility theory, there's no sense of losing things because there isn't any,
because what you have does not actually change the way you feel about stuff.
Okay, so because in regular utility theory, preferences and endowments are separate things.
They've got nothing to do with each other.
Whereas to talk about loss, you have to actually put your endowment somehow into the utility function.
Right, make sense?
Good.
Okay, so anyway, so losing something you currently possess is worse than never having had it at all.
Right, when you think about it, you cannot express in a normal utility theory where utility would just be a function of your stuff,
not be a function of your past stuff that you don't have anymore.
This is how you have to modify utility theory to make this work.
All right, now one common critique of behavioral economics,
all they do is poke holes in other people's stories and they don't come up with their own.
So here is their big thing that is actually a positive contribution,
at least tries to be a positive contribution.
All right, it's called prospect theory.
This is actual homo theory.
And the idea here is they want to go and replace a usual spec utility function,
which has a shape like this, like u is equal to w, square root of w.
This is a normal risk-averse utility function.
Right, you'll notice how we've got this nice convexity here.
All right, let's see.
Hold on, I'm just teaching convexity to KB, my son, so now I'm pretty darn good at it.
Yeah, so.
It's his next son, KB.
Yeah, yeah, so when the line is below the function, then that is convex.
Yes, convex, of course.
Yes, convexity is when you want to mix things.
Okay, that's right.
All right, so in calculus they have like concave upwards and downwards,
which is really messing me up.
All right, anyway, so yeah, so we've got this nice function here where you risk-averse
and therefore you would like, prefer a sure thing to the gamble,
prefer a sure thing to the gamble, sure thing to the same expected value.
Okay, now this is the usual thing.
All right, so this is just regular.
All right, so regular spec utility with risk-aversion.
And prospect theory does something else.
It says, now, here's what people are really like.
What people are really like is they've got an S-shaped curve that kinks at the current reference point.
All right, S-shaped curve that kinks at the current reference point.
So you are actually, so you see how that's kind of like an S?
It's not that S-like, but yes, and then it has this kink here, right?
And that's normally thought of as, you know, that's your reference point.
This is basically where your endowments start.
So notice, so above that, then you've got a normal risk-averse utility function.
So that means that when you're above this point, then you want,
you prefer to get the sure thing with the same expected value as the gamble.
But if you happen to be below the risk of point, then you become risk-seeking.
Then you become risk-seeking, and then you're there to say,
oh my God, it's not acceptable to go and lose anything.
I'd rather take a risk of everything, but have a chance of getting back to where I originally started.
So I really don't want to go and fall below my special magic point.
So what exactly is determining the risk?
Well, of course, in an experiment, it's just going to be a piece of paper says you start here, and that's it.
Now in the real world, it's supposed to be some kind of psychological idea of where you're supposed to be.
Now, is that like what you have today?
Or is it like what you imagine your station in life entitles you to?
That's kind of it, actually.
So much of this stuff is clearly defined in experiments.
And then when you try to apply it to the real world, then it gets kind of hazy, unfortunately.
Yes?
You said below the reference point, you're risk-seeking.
Yes.
Okay, so would this be like gamblers who go into the casino with $100, and they lose a little bit of that money,
and they're like, oh, I've got to get back to the money.
Yeah, exactly. I've got to get back to the money.
I can't go home with losses.
That would be so terrible.
That would be so terrible.
Okay.
So your risk averse in games, like a normal person, but you're risk-seeking in losses.
So you get a choice of an extra $1,000 or a gamble of the same value.
They want what?
So you can either have an extra $1,000 for sure, or you can have a gamble of the same expected value.
What do these prospect theory people want?
Extra $1,000 for sure or a gamble.
Which one do they want?
For sure.
For sure.
However, if it's a chance of losing $1,000 for sure or a gamble of the same expected value, which one do they want to do?
Gamble.
They want to gamble.
Yes, that is the idea.
All right. So this is the simple version of prospect theory, and this is a classic case of a new theory that is reverse engineered to solve some problems,
but then it has a bunch of new problems, and in the end, like, gee, what do we do with all this work for?
So here's one really bad thing about it.
All right.
So according to this model, when do people want to buy what kind of insurance policies do people want?
Do people want to buy insurance policies for gains or losses, if this model is true?
Gains.
Gains. All right.
Now, what are all the insurance industries based upon insuring gains?
Hmm.
Hmm. I can't think of any.
That's bad.
All right.
What do all known insurance products, at least all the ones that normal people have heard of, insure against?
Losses.
Losses.
And prospect theory is right.
People no one would buy those policies.
So no one would want fire insurance.
No one would want health insurance.
No one would want life insurance.
So what kind of a theory is that?
That's stupid.
All right.
So it predicts the existence of a bunch of insurance products that don't exist,
and predicts the nonexistence of all the insurance products that do exist.
All right.
So it solves some experimental anomalies, but other than that, it doesn't seem too good.
All right.
And then it took a little while before behavioral economists realized, oh, wait, yeah, that devastating objection.
Based upon the entire risk industry as we know it.
All right.
And then they said, all right, fine, fine.
We're going to do the fourfold theory.
All right.
So if you ever heard of epicycles, right, where you keep adding extra parts of the theory to go
and desperately try to avoid it anyway.
So here is the advanced, the fourfold version of prospect theory,
and it says that people are all of the four things, all the following four things.
Risk averse and gains with high probabilities.
All right, risk averse and gains with high probabilities.
So that means that if you have like a 90% chance of getting a gain,
then you would be interested in going insuring to make sure that it's not, to turn it into 100.
All right.
But then you're going to be risk seeking gains with low probabilities.
You only have like a 1% chance of getting a gain, or you could go and have, or get the expected value,
then you want the 1% chance.
So like item two is designed to explain why people buy lottery tickets.
Lottery tickets have what, high or low probability of paying off in the network?
Remember.
Yes, love.
All right.
So this is, that's why people buy lottery tickets.
And then we got risk seeking and losses, risk averse and loss with low probabilities.
And number three is the proviso that explains all known insurance products.
And then finally you got risk seeking and losses with high probabilities.
This is like, either it's like a 90% chance of a loss or 100%,
and then you'd rather go and do the 90% one because then there's a chance you don't lose anything.
All right.
So anyway, if you think, you know, so in a lab you can go and set it up to try to make this work.
But, you know, the problem is that this is a theory with so much wiggle room, meaning like,
so notice just in those words, let's see, so the high and the low probabilities,
so not only do we now have wiggle room for what counts as a gain or a loss,
which is itself pretty vague, right?
You know, like if you missed your lunch today, is that a loss or a failure of a gain?
You know, again, you can set up an experiment where you say your loss is this, your gain is that,
and then you can say, see, the model perfectly describes these very little behaviors.
But you're trying to take it out into the world.
It's ambiguous what counts as a gain or a loss, right?
Because as you may know from small kids, a lot of it is just how they perceive it.
So like I said, if you want to go and lend something to a child without having them explode at you when you take it back,
you tell them, this is mine.
I am lending it to you.
In an hour you will give it back to me because it was never, ever yours.
It was an act of kindness that I allowed you to use what is mine, right?
And that reduced the chance the child would get really mad, right?
But this means that whether or not the child saw it as his or not, all that depends upon his own perception, right?
As well as how society tries to define what that perception is.
So is losing a job, is that a loss or not?
Well, in a society where people feel entitled to their jobs, you might say that's a loss.
On the other hand, if people feel like it's just like a contract and easy come, easy go,
then again, they totally vary from person to person as to how you feel about it, right?
And then similarly, it also doesn't explain how we decide what counts as a low probability or high probability.
Again, like an experiment you can like do 90 and 10 and then alright, fine, that's definitely what we do.
90 is definitely high, 10 is definitely low.
But again, the real world, what counts?
It's like a 1% chance of getting guillotined, is that high or low?
And which theory would apply?
Alright, so questions about prospect theory?
Alright, much beloved.
And you'll see why because it is a time where the evil economist Dr. Exow tried to say how things really are
rather than just pocket holes in other people's theories.
Alright, then let's go and do intertemporal anomalies.
Okay, alright, now let's see.
So, alright, now we've got perfect capital markets,
then basic microeconomics says that everyone will discount future payments by the rate of interest.
Why?
Well, suppose that you are more impatient than the rate of interest.
What should you have already done with perfect capital markets?
You've got perfect capital markets, right?
And you have a discount rate of 5% but the market interest rate is 4%.
What should have already happened?
You should have already borrowed until you have actually equated the marginal values.
Or similarly, suppose the market interest rate is 10% and your discount rate is 4%.
You should have already lent out so that you have equated your marginal value with the market interest rate.
Alright, now even with imperfect capital markets there are some definite predictions of interpersonal choice.
So, and behavioral economists have uncovered a number of these.
Alright, so here's one of the funnest ones which is borne out in real life right here in George Mason,
as I'll shortly explain.
And this is that sometimes people seem to have negative discount rates
even though there are plenty of ways to lend money out at positive interest.
Alright, and what would this be like?
Well, this is like choosing to be paid over 12 months rather than 9.
Alright, so someone says, would you rather be paid your whole annual salary in the next 12 months
or should we spread it out over 12 months to make sure you have enough money?
Well, what is that like?
It's like turning down free interest.
So, what can you do to make sure you have money in months 10 through 12?
Save it.
While you're saving it, what would happen in a normal capitalist economy?
It would earn interest.
So, the fact that someone says, oh no, no, no, no, don't give me that money yearly.
Take a mixture, I don't get it until I'm ready for it.
That seems to indicate a negative discount rate.
And actually, when I came here to George Mason, faculty used to have the choice of being paid over 9 months or 12.
And I chose 9, like all good economists.
And then, the university eventually decided that they were going to get rid of that
and they had to grandfather in all of the old timers who wanted to be paid over 9 months.
So, I'm one of a dying breed of people being paid over 9 months.
And I think it was Pete Bedke who went to some of the administration and said, why are you doing this?
They said, well, because the only people on campus who are choosing to be paid over 9 months are you economists.
So, we didn't see the point of having this system.
And I was like, oh, well, geez, the other faculty here are dumber than we thought.
But, of course, we're not dumb, we're just doing something that's hard to explain.
Or, here's another one.
People who persistently receive tax refunds.
How many people are glad when they get a tax refund?
Not seeming to realize there's something they could have done that would have been much better than getting a tax refund.
What can you do instead of getting a tax refund?
Save your money.
Just not pay the taxes in the first place.
And, Remy, what interest rate does the IRS pay on your overpayments again?
Zero nominal.
So, really what you want to do is, in fact, to be underpaid.
Now, you don't want to underpay maximally because the IRS does have a method for crushing people to do that.
Although, it is a pretty low, low borrow.
So, I think it's if you're, let's see, so if the amount you owe exceeds 10% of your total tax bill, two years in a row, then there's a fine.
So, basically, if you were high precision, you want to basically alternate between paying the bare minimum and then underpaying by 9%.
And then just toggle that back and forth forever.
So, that, and again, it's because otherwise you're giving the IRS interest-free loans with your money.
So, who wants to do that?
So, anyway, those are two cases that are rock solid.
There's no way that you can get around.
I can't explain those other than by other than people are just giving out free money.
Yes?
So, if you are aware of your self-compensatory problem.
Yeah, yeah, we're getting to that.
It could serve as a mean mandamus.
Yes, yes.
So, if somehow the money just spends itself, it's in your hand, you're like, no, don't buy it, no.
Then you might want to have it.
Now, there's also some evidence which is not as rock solid saying that consumers sometimes have discount rates far in excess of the market interest rate.
So, at least there are some studies claiming that people buy appliances.
They greatly underrate the cost savings.
So, that's not as totally solid, but at least that is the claim.
Anytime someone looks and says, oh, well, it saves a lot of energy, but I can't afford to buy this thing.
It's like, do you not have a credit card or something?
And if you've got a credit card and the interest rate is 10% on that, then if the energy savings would give you a better than 10% return, it would make sense to use the credit card.
If you've got a home equity line of credit, then you should be willing to borrow against that.
Or if you've got any kind of home equity, then normally you can borrow against that at exceedingly low rates.
And then also there's some evidence that people have different discount rates for gains versus losses.
So, in particular, there are some experiments that involve two hypotheticals.
One is if you could have a kiss from your favorite movie star this week or next week, which one would you want it?
And a lot of people say they want it next week because they want to spend the week going, oh, I'm going to get to kiss my favorite movie star.
Oh, it's going to be so great.
Whereas if it happens right now, then it's like, oh, well, then he'll look forward to it.
And on the other hand, there's also...
I think it's the same experiment like if you get a shot right now or in a week.
A lot of people say give it to me in a week so I'm not sweating over this.
This is the one that I relate to best because whenever I test scores I would be waving at
the minute that they're available or now when my kids test scores are ready.
Oh God, oh God, come on.
All right, so that's that.
All right, and then now we start getting into the really weird stuff.
So there's also evidence that discount rates vary with the total amount of waiting time.
All right, so people discount a year and a day versus a day or versus a year as virtually
the same which is what normal theory predicts, right?
366 days worth of interest, 365 days of interest, barely a difference.
But the people discount tomorrow way more than today.
All right, now notice what will happen if someone says hey do you want it in a year
or a year and a day and he says I don't really care.
All right, now 365 days pass.
All right, now is the choice between today and tomorrow.
And now a lot of people no longer say I don't care.
But what is one thing we know about what will occur in 365 days?
Something 366 days off will turn into something one day away, right?
That's basic math of time.
Okay, so if people have these preferences it means that there's actually not just an
intransitivity, there's an irreflexivity.
There's a predictable flipping of what you'll want.
So you can imagine that someone say, today someone says hey do you want to have fish
or steak for lunch?
And you say fish.
And the day happens and they say hey do you want to change your mind?
Well of course.
All right, steak.
It's like well then why didn't you just anticipate what you were going to say?
It's like well I didn't feel that way yesterday but, but of course it's just a random thing,
no big deal.
But if it happens reliably then there's something strange, right?
It's like every time I ask what he's going to want tomorrow he says A. And whenever tomorrow
arrives he says he doesn't want A anymore.
This is typical of many small children.
It's one of their more annoying features is changing their mind in a predictable way.
Okay.
All right and this implies what is called a dynamic inconsistency.
So as time goes on people predictably regret whatever they chose initially.
And people often see this as some sign of some kind of a self-control problem.
A self-control problem.
Okay.
All right.
So you know like class example.
So you want to save for retirement in the abstract but every day you want to buy stuff,
right?
Or you want to be thin in the abstract but every day you want to eat tasty food.
Baconators.
Yes.
Right?
And so on.
Right?
So or like you want to be in the abstract you want to be physically fit but each day
you want to watch TV and not go to the gym.
Okay.
All right.
And then the idea is that a person might want to have their money taken from them, right?
In order to overcome temptation.
Or you might want to not have any tasty food in your house so you just have to stock with
salad.
And then great.
Okay.
So now like you don't feel like you don't feel a temptation because all I have in front
of me is salad.
Okay.
All right.
So this is one of the most popular products of behavioral economics and it resonates with
a lot of people.
But at the same time let me just suggest it's much more confusing and less clear than people
would have you believe.
All right.
Like one thing to consider is why assume that the long run plan is the real plan and the
short run plan is the fake plan.
Right?
Maybe it's the other way around.
So maybe the real you is the person that doesn't like exercising and enjoys eating.
And the fake you is the person writing New Year's resolutions.
All right.
Because like you know how many days of the year are you the short run person?
364 days of the year.
How many days of the year are you this long run person?
31.
Are you even the long run person the whole day on that New Year's day?
Nope.
So you might think hmm.
And then furthermore there's also a frequent undertone of we all know that it's the long
run plan that's better.
Ever known anyone with really stupid long run plans?
Like you know like my brother is a classic example.
He's the kind of guy who would go and buy a lifetime gym membership before he ever even
tried exercising.
And then he'd do it for two days.
Like I hate this.
Oh wow I'm not going to go anymore.
And I'm like you know what?
I think you made a good choice there because you want to spend the rest of your life doing
like an hour of something you hate every single day.
Right.
And how strong is the evidence that doing this exercise makes you live longer anyway?
Right.
Like is it really that solid?
And you add up all the hours of misery.
Is it really actually increasing your number of years of happy life to be doing this stuff?
Right.
Or you know someone who only eats what they consider super healthy food, consider that
living.
Is that really actually a worthwhile life?
So you know I'll give an honest answer of how many extra years of healthy life would
you have to have to never eat meat or sugar again?
Yeah.
It's like some of my, two of my very favorite things in life.
Right.
So it was like well like is there anything, like what substitutes are available?
Let me try this.
I was like ugh.
No I don't want to do that.
So there's that.
All right now.
There you go.
Another point.
So I do have an article on this called Preferences, Constraints, and Mental Illness.
And that is that you know there is this language of self-control which is also closely linked
to the language of addiction of saying look what I really want to do is be a good father
but what I actually do is drink away the family money.
What I really want is for my children to have food but what actually happens is the money
somehow gets spent on alcohol.
And this is sad and I feel terrible about it.
Now there are of course behavioral economics has models like dynamic inconsistency where
you take people at their word and when you see someone spending the family money on alcohol
while crying about the hunger of their children you just say my god this poor, poor person
here to have to keep spending the money on alcohol and drinking it while their children
starve.
Imagine how they feel about this.
No wonder they drink.
They're so miserable from looking at the suffering of their children.
All right so anyway this is a model where you just assume that what addicts are saying
is true.
It's a correct description of their experience and then you come up with a model to explain
that.
Right now.
Here is now one of my less popular insights but it's almost undeniable if I tone it down
enough and it's this.
So what is one reason why most alcoholics aren't even more severe alcoholics?
Yes well because other people hassle them and nag them and get mad at them.
The other people in their lives are there giving them grief for being alcoholics.
All right.
Now all right so pretty simple point.
If you have a drinking problem the people in your life, friends and family generally
are not that accepting of it as an alternative lifestyle.
Instead they're not happy especially if your behavior impinges on them.
Like if you smash your friend's car while drunk and then you start saying this is terrible
and then your friend is like okay I understand that you have a disease but still you smashed
my car and they're mad.
All right now when you are in the situation of having people angry at you over your habits
suppose you have two different rhetorical strategies that you could use to try to deal
with the situation.
One is look I love my favorite beverages more than I love my family and I want you to know
it.
That's one thing you could tell them.
The other thing is you could say I'm an addict poor me I don't want to do this.
Which one is likely to get harsher punishments from friends and family?
The I prefer a beverage to you or I want to change, I want to change please help me.
Okay yes right now if you're in a world where people are more forgiving of the person who
says I can't help myself poor me what would you expect a lot of people to do regardless
of the truth of the matter?
I can't help myself poor me please help me I need help.
Now notice I have not made any extreme claim here just saying that there is a tendency
toward for people to exaggerate how little choice they have and how much they want to
change.
Right does that sound crazy, monstrous, unscientific?
To me this is so common sense and I just can't imagine a person denying it.
I haven't had people to say you don't know what you're talking about.
It's like look I've toned this down to a point I don't think you could really disagree with
it anymore and they go no I disagree.
Every single alcoholic, every person with a drinking problem the reason why they say
what they do is nothing to do with liking alcohol more than their family and everything
to do with being unable to change.
And then so in the paper I go over a bunch of different bodies of evidence that are relevant
such as you know their literature they estimate the price elasticity of demand for addictive
substances and what do you think it generally turns out to be?
Elasticity demand for alcohol, heroin, cocaine, marijuana.
I would assume that elastic demand.
Yes well you know it's even simpler.
What is the sign?
What is the sign?
Negative right?
Apparently there's a whole bunch of users even of very hard substances who do change
their behavior with response to price and if you change your behavior when the price
changes this strongly suggests that you were capable of changing before the price changed.
Right?
What do prices do?
Okay if someone said I'll pay you a million dollars to fly to the moon in the next five
minutes would that get you on the moon?
No because flying to the moon is outside your budget set.
It's not physically possible for you.
But on the other hand if it were to like get to the top floor of this building for a million
dollars well you do it right because that is in your budget set.
So and again note this is not saying that people are facing incentives it's just that
if a very strong incentive would change your behavior it shows that you could have chosen
something else and therefore it's not true that you were forced to do it or had no choice.
Yes?
I can make the argument that any increase in the price of heroin or alcohol or anything
like that could be outside the budget set of the addict too right?
Well again this is why we have to be empirical.
This is why we have to look at the empirics and say actually they find that it does have
a negative slope.
But that's what I'm saying.
So like maybe I mean so in some cases it would mean that it could have changed before the
price changed but the price could go up so much that they just can't afford the substance
anymore right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So again we will like again it can't go up so much they can't afford to buy any right
for example.
Yeah meaning of course normally like all price elasticity studies this is looking at moderate
changes right although in the paper I also do talk about psychiatric treatment programs
where they just where they use incentives to change behavior and wow even on people
that are diagnosed as being helpless somehow incentives change their behavior.
And now this doesn't show that every single person will have their incentives change every
single time but it nevertheless is quite different from a story of sheer helplessness of people
right?
Okay so then I've got a blog post called the Addiction of Social Desirability Bias where
I point out so suppose you ask somebody to go to their party and they say oh I can't
make it.
How often is it literally true they can't make it to your party?
Right I just can't help it.
I just can't do it.
Right now if they are in Asia and the party is in an hour then there may actually be no
form of transportation will get them there.
But normally in that case it would literally be true I can't come to your party it's outside
the budget constraint.
But normally when someone says I can't come this is a polite way of saying I don't want
to come I have something better to do it's too much like the benefits of attendance are
lower than the cost from my point of view.
Right a bunch of things which again notice how do people respond if you invite them to
a party and you say sorry the benefits are lower than the cost?
Are you likely to ever get an invitation from this person again if you respond that way?
So basically this is a case of people are lying to be polite and they are being polite
so in order to get what they want.
So what I suggest in this paper on Parkinson's and Transmental Illness is a lot of times
people use the language of addiction or helplessness it is directly analogous to I can't come to
your party.
I can't stop drinking is like I can't come to your party.
This is a case of both cases they are trying to avoid the social punishments for the truthful
answer of I don't want to stop drinking I like drinking you and the kids are boring
compared to whiskey.
All right so now is this a complete story of everything?
Maybe maybe not.
So in the paper I actually propose some tests for how you would ever know the difference
but does this explain a lot of what is going on in the world under the heading of addiction
and mental illness and so on?
It seems to me that it has got to.
And then of course why is my story so rarely voiced?
Because my story is also rude.
It is a rude unpleasant but truthful story.
So there was a while I tried to stop saying things like I can't come.
It is too vulgar.
It is just the way people have a talking but still.
All right so questions about that?
So I can't come to your party I can't stop using heroin.
Perhaps those are not just grammatically the same but also substantively the same.
It is reflecting preferences that are disapproved of and it is spread annually.
Yes of course just acting on preferences that are socially disapproved of is bad enough
and gets you in trouble but defending open loudly and openly and endorsing your socially
disapproved preference this is what gets you in earlier centuries say burned at the stake
or put in a mental hospital and lobotomized.
So see the case of what is it Rose Kennedy the Kennedy sister that got lobotomized and
why was she lobotomized?
Well she was sleeping with men below her social class.
Her brothers did that they were not lobotomized and that was it.
They were sleeping with women below their social class.
But anyway so there is a case where the family was very unhappy and she was defiant and so
put her in a hospital and lobotomized her.
Okay all right so there is a lot of striking examples of these things but what do they
mean in the real world?
So it doesn't seem like there is a lot of abundant opportunities to loan money to people
in 100% interest.
But now there is other things so anyone ever heard of a website started by a couple of
economists I remember called sick.com?
Yes one person has heard of it.
It still exists.
So this is a website where if you believe you have a self-control problem they have
the solution.
Namely this is a website where you can set up a contract and there are different ways
of doing it to overcome your self-control problem.
For example if you want to lose 100 pounds but you don't feel like you have a self-control
then you can go and use the website to basically you can go and pre-pay them and then you commit
to weigh in somewhere at the end of the year.
And then so suppose you go and pay them $10,000 and then at the end of the year sick.com refunds
$100 for every pound that you lost up to 100.
So this is a way that you can go and change your incentives in order to try to overcome
your self-control problems.
There are I think some thousands of people on earth who have used the website.
Now how does this compare as a percentage of people who claim to have a self-control
problem what is a few thousand people?
So how many people on earth claim to have self-control problems?
Billions and then how many are using the website?
Thousands.
So maybe like one person in a million who actually claims to have a self-control problem
and actually wants to do much about it.
And again by the way you don't have to use this website I'm also happy to help you solve
your self-control problems.
So it just consists in you pre-paying me money and then if you fall short of your goals I
keep your money and if you actually live up to these goals then I give you your money
back.
So I mean I'm available so to say like let the money flow in.
Now notice if the simple self-control theory were true then like this would be a thriving
industry people would love it.
But in fact there's almost no demand which again to my mind is further confirmation that
when people say they can't what they really mean is I don't want to.
Why do you go and form these grandiose plans that you don't want to live up to?
Like why do people go and have ridiculous New Year's resolutions like I'm going to lose
200 pounds?
Signaling.
Yes.
Well signaling but like that could be the sophisticated theory but like even simply
simpler like you don't even need any economics like why does someone go around saying you
know what I'm going to do?
Like why does a five year old say I'm going to be an astronaut?
It's easy to say.
Yeah like you just feel good about yourself you go and brag.
At least for a lot of people you know the good they feel about themselves when they're
puffing up their peacock feathers seems to be much greater than the shame they feel when
things don't work out.
You know like how could that be?
Well a lot of it is people don't remember what you said you were going to do.
And you even forget.
And then furthermore there's also it's very rude to point out that someone didn't live
up to New Year's resolutions.
Yes.
So on New Year's are you at parties and somebody has a resolution you're like I bet you won't?
I don't know anyone who does this anymore but yeah let's see.
I mean you know it depends upon whether I even matter to me if the person was mad at
me.
Right and you know so actually so like you know people with a bad temper then I wouldn't
want to deal with them because like if I did have someone that I thought was sincere and
they're a reasonable person then I might say well here's the offer.
I don't think it's too likely they would say yes but.
So in general I don't help people who resent me for helping them.
So it's a pretty good system.
When I was young I tried helping everybody.
But then I found out people hated it so I stopped doing it.
All right so we're now ready to move on.
All right so behavioral economics and rationality part two.
All right so we've done choice theory now we're going to do belief formation.
All right so in your basic micro in the first couple weeks of say Williams class belief
formation against the law of extension by their standard assumption.
So standard assumptions and most work relies on these assumptions.
All right and if you're an economist especially if you got your PhD after the rational explanations
revolution then you usually refer to the violations of these assumptions on the basis of the
belief formation as irrationality.
Irrationality.
Alright?
And no, irrationality is distinguished from mere ignorance.
Ignorance is when you just happen not to know.
Irrationality is when there's something fundamental
going on, some violation of basic logic.
Alright, and intuitively there's two different reasons
why you might make a mistake.
It's like lack of information,
or there could be what you call irrationality or stupidity.
So again, you could have a problem where logically
all the information you need is there
and you just fail to piece it together.
Or, you could simply be beyond your experience
and then you have no way of knowing it.
Alright, now, this distinction is uncontroversial in theory.
You know, like you could be ignorant
or you could be irrational.
But economists don't like calling people irrational.
We're seeing the old movie A Fish Called Wanda
where the Kevin Kline-based hitman
who's very sensitive about his intelligence
and he's really stupid, so people often call him stupid
and then he's rather tempted to immediately murder them
or take out his gun, don't call me stupid.
Alright, so many economists have the mentality
don't call anyone stupid.
Who are you to claim that some other person is stupid?
They're just ignorant.
That's all that's going on.
But, some claims about rationality are empirically testable.
So remember back in week one when we did Bayes' Rule.
When we did Bayes' Rule.
Bayes' Rule, alright.
So even if you don't put any restriction
on prior probabilities, there's some testable implications.
Like, the probability of A and B
must be less than or equal to the probability of A alone.
It's like, well, duh.
And yet, as we're gonna see, there are experiments
where they get people to not do that.
Again, so there are experiments where you get people
to violate even that really weak assumption.
And then of course, you can get people
to violate Bayes' Rule itself.
Right, and that's something that almost everybody does
until they memorize the theorem, right?
So, you remember the example that I gave
where there's a medical test
that has a 1% false positive rate
and it tests for disease that one person in 1,000 has.
And it always works if the person has it.
And then conditional upon testing positive,
what are the odds that you have the disease?
Right, and people wanna say 1%.
And the actual answer in the scenario
is usually really high, it's usually like 95%, right?
Well, let's see, I guess it's got 1% false positive rate.
Yeah, that'll be like 10%, okay?
Right, so you remember those problems, and again, why?
Well, there's 1,000 people that,
there's supposed to be 999 people who are healthy.
One is sick.
When you go and test the one person,
that person will test positive, right?
The 999 people, though, who are healthy,
if there's a 1% false positive rate,
how many of those people are gonna test positive?
Roughly 10, right?
And then there's gonna be 10 false positives
for every one true positive.
And so, given that you test positive,
what are the odds that you really got it?
It's like one in 11, all right?
And this is the kind of reasoning
that is very baffling to almost everybody
who is not trained in it.
And even people who are trained in it,
if you just take the problem outside the classroom
and you don't make it about a false positive rate
for a disease, instead, maybe you make it
for false positives for gaydar identifications.
Right?
Right, and you don't use the word false positive
just to cue people in, but it's like,
well, conditional upon a guy wearing a pink shirt,
what are the odds that he's gay?
All right, so, yeah, so again, that's one where,
right, like, you can easily,
we have this way, you can easily imagine people
failing to apply Bayes' rule
when they answer that question, right?
And instead, just saying, oh, well.
Okay, now, a stronger rationality assumption
would be rational expectations.
Remember, how we did rational expectations recently?
All right, key point, almost all modern economic models
assume rational expectations.
It's assumed so standardly that often when you read
the paper, they won't even tell you why they're doing it.
There won't be a part where they go and say,
and imposing rational expectations.
There'll just be a part of the math where somehow
the fact that in the real world, the probability is A,
somehow migrates into people's beliefs about the world.
Like, how does a fact about the world migrate
into people's minds without anyone explaining the process?
It migrates via the rational expectations assumption.
Rational expectations assumption,
which is so taken for granted
when you're doing this kind of modeling
that you may not even need to say why you did it, okay?
And rational expectations, as we've seen,
has a pair of implications.
So, no systematic errors.
If there's a pattern to the mistakes,
then you have violated it.
And then, errors uncorrelated with the available information.
And if you could predict errors using prior information.
All right, now, earlier model, even earlier models
almost always have something like
rational expectations in mind.
So, even before rational expectations,
if you read Adam Smith, there's something like
rational expectations even in Adam Smith
and people like that, how so?
All right, well, think about a standard story
about price controls we've been telling for centuries.
All right, so, we say,
well, if you go and impose rent control,
what's gonna happen is that landlords are going to go
and pull housing off the market,
and they're going to stop building.
All right, but suppose that landlords
were completely unaware of the real world.
Suppose that they systematically underestimated
the extent of price controls, or rent control.
So, suppose that the fact that rent control exists
did not migrate into the knowledge of landlords,
and they kept acting as if there were no rent control.
Then, is there any reason for rent control
to affect the quantity of housing supplied?
No, right?
You know, so, even a story is like,
if you take everybody's food away from them,
people don't wanna grow food anymore.
It's like, well, you're assuming that they're aware
that you took their food away from them.
You're assuming that they predict
that the future will resemble the past.
It's all just a bunch of assumptions.
Prove it.
And yet, of course, economists have been making arguments
like this for a long time, and very recently so.
People, usually, if you do something to people that big,
they notice.
But it's not a mathematical theorem
that people are not oblivious.
You know, just imagine a world where all the landlords are,
they're like 105 years old,
and then you impose rent control.
Like, do you really think the 105 year olds
are going to be saying,
oh my God, the rent control!
Well, I gotta get on top of this.
Right, maybe 105 year olds will just be like, what?
What does this say?
And then maybe they go to the tenant,
what does this say?
Nothing, okay.
All right, and maybe it's like that.
All right, so anyway, so we got a big empirical literature
that discovered deviations from rational expectations,
elemental probability theory,
and as we go through it, I'll be playing devil's advocate,
but I'll give you some reservations as we go along.
All right, let's see.
So we're a little behind, so let's just skip section two.
It's not integral to the narrative.
Let's move on to section three.
So belief, perseverance, and confirmatory biases.
All right, so Bayesian framework's all about updating.
Right, so what do Bayes rule?
You start with a prior probability,
and then what comes along to change
prior to prior probability?
Starts with an I.
Information, and when you take a prior probability
and adjust it for information,
that yields a blank probability.
Conditional.
Yeah, a conditional or posterior probability.
All right, so that is the whole idea of the Bayesian
framework, but there are experiments showing
what's called belief perseverance,
where people start with a prior,
and then you give them information,
and they either ignore the information,
or they may even respond perversely to the information.
Right, so, right.
Now, there are some experiments showing people
can be more accurate with less information.
So one famous experiment involves starting
with a somewhat blurry image,
and then you gradually clarify it
until it's only kind of blurry.
Right, so the key thing, you start off with it
quite blurry, and then you make it clear
to the point, but never totally clear.
So go from very blurry to somewhat blurry.
Right, and in the experiments, what they find
is that if someone starts off with it very blurry,
and then you gradually bring it into focus,
they're actually less accurate than someone
who only sees the final image.
And this is odd because both sides see the final image,
but the people that have more information,
but there's people with more information
who wind up being less accurate.
And the usual story is you see something very blurry,
and then you form a theory about what you're
supposed to be seeing, and then when it comes
into focus gradually, you tend to reinterpret
the evidence in the light of your initial theory,
which then actually leads to lower accuracy.
So again, this would be like watching
a whole detective show, and like at the beginning,
you get your theory about who the culprit is,
and then only five minutes before the end
when all the evidence is accumulated,
you have, there's actually evidence
that you will be less accurate than a person
that didn't see the whole progression of the show,
and just five minutes before the end
just saw a list of all the evidence,
and then made up their minds based upon
the totality of the evidence at once
rather than it coming in bit by bit.
Yes?
So like what a similar phenomenon being on a test
where like the professor gives like meaningless information
and the students like try to take it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that would actually,
that would also be a good example.
So yeah, give some extraneous information
and then the student, again, like you just throw away,
you know, like a theory just to throw away
the extraneous information.
Body of fact, again, like on a test you might say that,
you know, this is one where you might actually
be making an inference of the very fact
that he bothered to tell you,
show that it's of this importance.
So it's not as good an example of one
where you're actually trying to draw an inference
about just the world.
Well, the world presumably is not trying to trick you.
Right, although when you think about it more,
say wait a second, this is an experiment
designed by a psychologist who probably
wouldn't be able to publish it
unless people came up with dumb answers.
So then maybe it is more like a test when you think about it.
So that's a reason to be a bit skeptical of this.
All right, now, other experiments find
an even stronger effect and this is the stuff
that I find very interesting and also there have been,
there have been multiple confirmations of this recently.
So it's on pretty solid ground,
which is that at least for some kinds of bipolar disease,
once people believe them,
they tend to grow increasingly confident.
And why?
Well, because they're very likely to notice
anything confirming the initial evidence.
And if you give them some ambiguous evidence,
then they tend to misinterpret it as further support.
And this is a special name,
it is known as confirmatory bias.
Or also confirmation bias.
So you believe a theory and then you look around the world
and say, my God, my theory is so confirmed.
Everywhere I look, I see proof.
Right, and the standard common sense reply to this
is you say, look, I see so many pieces of evidence
in favor of my theory, so it's gotta be true.
It's like, well, did you look for evidence
that your theory is wrong?
And then you might find a whole lot of examples of that.
Right, like if I reside a theory
that all men have short hair.
I just look around and say, my God,
I see a whole bunch of theory,
well, like confirmation everywhere.
It's like, well, why don't you look for cases
that are, where that's not true?
A man with long hair.
And then you know, oh, hmm, all right.
But once you've got a theory, it's your theory,
then you start looking around for, let's work with this.
All right, so there is a great experiment
involving the death penalty.
Here's the design.
Step one, we find out who favors the death penalty
and who opposes it.
All right, great, so now, so this begins with actual views,
your actual position on the death penalty.
All right, then we randomly assign people
to two different rooms.
In room one, you are shown cross-sectional studies
that support the death penalty's deterrent effect
and time series that deny the death penalty's deterrent effect
In room two, you do the opposite.
In room two, the time series supports the death penalty
and the cross-section goes against it.
And what do you find occurs
to the confidence of all four groups?
They stick with, worse, they all claim vindication.
And how do you claim, how do the people
in all the rooms claim vindication?
Well, if the cross-sectional evidence is for you
and the time series evidence is against you,
it's just time for a little methodological reflection.
What kind of evidence is the good evidence?
The cross-sectional.
Yeah, whatever supports you is the good evidence.
What kind of evidence is totally meaningless,
irrelevant, debatable?
Yeah, government goes against you.
Right now, of course, if this were not an experimental
design, you could sit around debating
which kind of evidence actually is better or worse.
But since it's an experimental design,
we can show is that people, in fact,
will interpret whatever favors them to be the good method.
So it's a case of abject intellectual corruption,
where you pretend that you are applying
methodological standards, whereas really,
you are just finding out what gives the right answer
and then you are inferring what the good method is
and then using this inference as further support
when in fact, all that you could really,
the only honest thing you could say would be,
look, since this is true, then studies that find it are good.
But then, of course, if that's the way you're reasoning,
it's not really additional evidence, is it?
In order to be additional evidence,
it would have to be an amazing framework.
I'd like to link it by this way.
Suppose that you believe, so you think
the death penalty is great and you think
empirical methods are good and then you go
and get some empirical evidence saying
that the death penalty works as expected.
So when should that actually give you
genuine extra confidence?
If the study is even more supportive than you were expecting
and similarly, when should you,
wait, like suppose that the study comes out
in support of your view, but you expected it
to be supportive, so then you should actually
become less confident if the study
isn't quite as supportive as you're expecting.
This is a lot like a company can announce profits
and the stock goes down, why?
Why would the price go down when profits are announced?
Not lower than it is.
Yes, because people were expecting better profits,
even more.
Similarly, if the evidence is less supportive
than you were expecting, but still supportive,
this is a reason to actually reduce your confidence.
How many human beings do this for any juicy issue?
Yeah, very, very, maybe not quite none,
but yeah, very few.
It's very rare indeed.
All right, let's see.
And there was a Yale psychologist, Dan Kahan,
who came up and he was actually reporting
on studies of ideologically driven overconfidence.
And yeah, so this stuff is awesome.
All right, so it's very easy to show
that not only do people go and give the answers
that their ideology tells them,
even on things that are very technical,
where you might say, how the hell can a philosophy
tell you what elasticity of labor demand is?
And in fact, when people learn
about elasticity of labor demand,
how many people are smart enough to immediately see
whether high is good or bad for liberals or conservatives?
Almost no one is like, oh my God, okay, so now,
all right, reason it through.
So as long as you're just teaching it as responsiveness
of the quantity of labor hired, which is the wage,
then people are like, okay, boring.
Right, but then as soon as you say,
now you realize this is implications for the minimum wage,
it's like, oh my God, which way do I need to go
to give the answer I want to believe?
And it sure seems like it's easy to spot
this kind of abject intellectual corruption
in the way that people approach things.
All right, so and again, you can try to think about cases
where people on your own side believe in this, so yeah.
I'm a big fan of drug legalization,
and yet when fellow fans say,
there's no evidence that punishing people
for using drugs reduces demand
and reduces quantity used at all.
What?
That's crazy, of course it delays,
like this is at least the kind of thing
where there have to be a mountain of evidence
showing that it doesn't
because all common sense says that it does, right?
And again, if you think about it,
essentially it's a case where if common sense
supports your view, then common sense is true,
whereas if common sense does not support your view,
then it's like, look, I haven't seen a single scrap
of evidence good enough to say anything about this ever.
Shouldn't we just start with common sense
and then if no evidence comes in,
just stick with common sense?
No, no, we assume whatever is most favorable
to my world view until conclusive proof arrives otherwise.
And you know how often that conclusive proof arrives?
Never, never arrives.
Unless of course it finally supports you, like wow.
All right, okay, so anyway,
so Dan Kahan had these experiments on,
so not only do people just believe whatever's convenient,
but also people express an extraordinary level of certainty
for the issues you might think of
as extremely technical and far beyond their experience.
Then he has variations showing that
if you start charging people for making mistakes,
then the confidence starts going down.
And then he has a bunch of different interventions
and finally basically when he puts
as much pressure on them as possible,
he's able to get most of this bias away.
First of all, they have to be given the option
to admit they don't know.
Because people, and people like,
people don't use that option
unless you combine it with incentives usually.
So it's like, so is minimum wage,
reduce employment or not, or you don't know.
People usually don't use the don't know option
unless there's actually a penalty for being wrong.
So until you're wrong, everybody knows.
Right, or rather until you're penalized for error,
then everyone claims to have knowledge.
And then that's enough to get people to say,
all right, fine, I don't actually know.
I wish, I don't really know.
And then furthermore, if you start penalizing them for,
you know, like for, like the further they are
from the truth, then you can get confidence,
then you can get, express confidence down more.
All right, so on.
All right.
Okay, all right, so questions about death penalty
and stuff like this, right?
And to me, this is one of the most obvious,
obviously blatant facts about the way people do,
do the reasoning, especially the political reasoning.
I mean, like I am at the point where like
almost everything people say about politics
just seems so horrible and corrupt to me
and I just can't bear to listen to almost anybody.
It's just like, this is so terrible.
And including people who agree with me,
I'm like, I don't even want you to agree with me anymore.
I just want you to be quiet.
Because you don't see, like you're talking,
you don't know anything.
I'm like, I don't want your support anymore.
I just want, I just want like either be with me
for the right reasons exactly or stay away.
And I think I probably mentioned the work
of Phil Tetlock, a political psychologist before.
Yes, he's done a lot of work on trying to measure
how good you are at actually predicting things, right?
And there are many very common sense things
you can do to improve your predictive abilities.
One, get some sleep.
One is to settle upon a metric of success in advance.
Ooh, that's a really controversial one, right?
Because what happens if you wait for events to occur
before you announce the metric for success?
What do you think normal, weak human beings do?
Interpret whatever occurred as proof
of what it was that they believed.
And actually, people are even worse than this.
Often people will, if they make a mistake in their prediction
they will simply conveniently misremember
being right all along.
And that's where you'd want to have documentation
saying this is what you said, signed by you.
See, like, oh yeah, I guess I said
apartheid would last forever.
Well, all right.
And so, you know, Ted Locke has one book,
Expert Political Judgment, where he goes over
the big tournament among political experts
and shows not just how they did quite poorly,
but what's really striking is how people cope
with their own failures.
Because, you know, essentially there's almost no
intellectually honest coping that you can find in the data.
So, an expert on South Africa says apartheid will
last forever and then three years later it ends.
All right, so what do the experts say?
The first thing is he just misremembers his own prediction,
so that he was right all along.
And when you cut that away from him,
then, you know, like next stage is to say,
well, I was almost right.
I was almost right, you know, like, you know, like, right.
And then sometimes they'll say, well, you just can't
predict these matters anyway.
It's like, well, why didn't you say it was unpredictable
when you made the prediction?
Why do you wait until you have failed
and then start saying that predictions aren't possible?
Maybe they just aren't possible for you.
Maybe that, isn't that a better story
that you are a sore loser?
Right, now, Tadlock is so nice to them.
And also, he was all, it was all conditional on anonymity,
so he never outed anyone as a giant fraud.
You know, even though plainly, they're,
now they're the only, there were a few people
that were not in the tournament who just publicly
said ridiculous stuff, like Henry Kissinger, right?
A guy who, as far as I can tell, is wrong about
almost everything he's ever said in his entire life,
yet is considered a genius, a Machiavellian strategist
of the highest order.
It's like, you know, like, you were,
the North Vietnamese crushed you, like, what else,
what else, what's your other claim to fame here?
It's like, well, I have a very progressive accent.
You know, I sound really smart when I talk about things,
and I talk about this and mumble a bit, and, right?
So, anyway, Henry Kissinger, when he was asked
about his failure to break the end of the Cold War,
which he had many times given very strong predictions,
like there's no hope, and then he just said,
well, their crystal ball worked better than mine, ha ha.
So, what you're saying is, what, you are like an astrologer,
and the other astrologers got lucky,
but we shouldn't judge you negatively
because you're not worse than they are?
What is the theory here, is like, say, like,
that seems to be comparing himself to an astrologer,
which suggests to me that he is scum,
and should not be repeated by anyone,
and just be driven out, tarred and feathered,
and expelled from civilized discussion.
But, of course, that did not happen, right?
So, first of all, misremembering,
and then, I was almost right, I was so close,
or predictions are possible anyway, right?
And then there's also, like this one is one of the sleaziest,
say, look, sure I was wrong, but I made the right mistake.
And what does that even mean?
Basically, it means that you should be really risk averse,
and so I'm like the boy who cries wolf,
and that's good to be like the boy who cries wolf,
because maybe a wolf will come one day.
And that's what these people have,
and it's like, what?
That, you know, so, you know, like out of people
who predicted that there would be a horrible,
you know, like horrible terrorism, or a horrible war,
or genocide, or whatever, and then it doesn't happen.
Quite a few just say, look, fine, I was wrong,
but we should always plan for the worst, right?
So, basically, you're admitting that you were lying to us.
And why?
Because you think that if you tell the truth,
then people will say, that's low probability,
it's not worth many resources,
which is, in fact, the reasonable thing to do, generally,
is not to put a ton of resources into things
that are really bad, but hardly ever happen.
Certainly, if you've got things that are really bad,
and happen a lot, and other things that are really bad,
and hardly ever happen, which should get more resources,
things that are really bad, and happen a lot.
Yes, please.
I just wanted to point out, and then, later in the book,
one, experts who got things right,
they never give people who got things wrong any of the,
Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes, also good, yes.
So, the people were right, you know,
like they claim it's scale.
So, if I'm right, it's scale, if I'm wrong, it's bad luck.
So, again, suggesting even the ones who got it right,
there's something very fishy about these people.
All right, now, the main thing you can say
in favor of Tetlock's experts is that there is that
he only asked questions that were controversial
in their experts, and so, it really wasn't possible
for the average expert to do well in his study.
So, and he explicitly said, like,
I've never asked questions like,
will there be a war between Norway and Sweden?
So, when people summarize it saying,
experts don't know more than regular people,
no, they do, they know more about
the uncontroversial stuff.
But, of course, experts have a lot more fun
arguing about the controversial stuff.
That's more likely, probably more likely to be televised,
but the debates are real.
All right, and then Tetlock has his follow-up book,
Superforecasting, where he runs huge tournaments
trying to find people who are able to do
what his experts were not able to do,
which is accurately predict the future.
And furthermore, he goes and does the obvious test
to make sure those people didn't just get lucky
by rerunning tournaments and seeing if the people
that did really well the first time
do above average the second time,
and with many different experimental variations,
and yes, there are actually people who can break the future,
and they have a number of interesting traits,
which we can all try to emulate.
But basically, it starts with being the opposite
of those experts I just described.
All right, okay, so questions about this?
Everyone ready to repent and live a totally new kind of life?
Yeah, so, Tetlock himself is so modest
and such a nice Canadian guy,
and I'm kind of like the apostle,
like just berating people for like,
the prophet has told us how we must live,
and you are sitting against the vain Tetlock, right?
And Tetlock's like, oh, all right.
But really, he just, after reading him,
people are so disappointing.
But this is inspirational.
I don't wanna be like regular people anymore.
I wanna be like, I wanna be a super forecaster,
and how can I do it?
All right, now, more general terms,
there's some evidence of systematic overconfidence.
So again, the simplest way of testing for overconfidence
is just to graph, say,
let's suppose this is a true-false question,
so it only makes sense to go and show probability
being 0% or 100% because you thought the probability
you're right was less than 50%,
you'd give the definite, you'd flip your answer, right?
All right, and so this here is the probability
that this is the actual percentage correct.
So this is like actual likelihood that you're right,
and this here is the perceived probability
that you're correct, right?
So if you're on the 45-degree line,
then this means that you've got
what's called perfect calibration,
where if you say 90% chance,
then you've got a 90% chance, okay?
All right, now, in practice, as you might guess,
people are quite a bit less likely
to be correct than they perceive, right?
So if, say, you say 60% chance of being right,
then you are going, you know,
then it's gonna be more like 55,
if I say, let's say, 60,
and, you know, like, if you say 100,
then, again, like, usually you're probably
only like 80% right if you say 100,
so again, like, if the true line looks like that,
so this is the 45-degree line,
and this is, like, the actual line, all right?
So in that case, this would indicate overconfidence, right,
where you think that you are right
with a greater probability than you, in fact,
objectively are, right?
Okay, all right, so, you know,
this is pretty easy to find
if you go and ask people question by question
how well they're doing,
although this is one of the results
that is more sensitive to the way
that you ask the question,
so if you change the question around and say,
like, how many questions total do you think
are right in this exam?
There's quite a bit less evidence
that people are overconfident,
so there's a German psychologist, Gerhard Gigerentzer,
that has spent a lot of his time just saying
that the results that behavioral economists
get excited about are, in fact, overstated, right?
But, you know, there are, you know,
clear cases of overconfidence on things
that are very close to people's self-image.
For example, there's tests on, you know,
asking professors, do you think that you're
more productive in the media
than the rest of your department?
And, yeah, what do you think?
Almost all professors say, yeah,
they have, like, 90% claim to be more productive
than the media in their department.
Similarly, with, like, compared to driving ability
of the media, overwhelming majority of people
think that driving ability is better.
If there's one study of high school kids
that asked the 2,000 kids, like, you know,
would you say that you are better, average,
or worse than average at relating socially with others?
And they got 2,000 kids surveyed,
and zero said they were worse than the average kid.
Which, you know, I think it means I was not in the survey.
I'm pretty sure I would have said I was worse.
But I don't know.
But anyway, so there's that.
Okay.
All right, so, questions about this stuff?
Happy?
All right, so why don't we go and take a break now.
Please, back to work, please.
All right.
All right.
So now we will continue our journey
through people's cognitive failings
when we are ourselves somewhat tired.
But does an economist care about being tired?
No!
We are not daunted by this.
We are not subject to these normal constraints.
And so we will proceed at the full height of our abilities
as we look down upon the failures of others.
All right.
All right.
So, availability and representative-ist biases,
two of the ones that economists have talked about the most.
All right.
So, people often estimate probabilities
based upon the ease of thinking of examples.
And this is known as the availability heuristic.
The availability heuristic.
So, can I think of examples easily?
How many examples can I think of?
If you can't think of many, then you say,
well, then I guess it must be unlikely.
Right, on the other hand, you know,
if you can think of a lot of examples really easily,
then it must be likely.
Okay.
So, you know, like people with dogs.
All right.
Well, you can think of a lot of people with dogs,
so probably high probability of people with dogs.
People with chinchillas.
Hmm.
Can't think of anybody like that.
So, probably the odds that the person has one is low.
All right.
Now, sometimes this is a useful heuristic.
In fact, probably a lot of times it's a useful heuristic.
Can I think of any time that it's ever occurred?
No, well, then it probably hardly ever occurs.
All right.
So, but it does sometimes generate
reliably biased estimates.
In particular, if things are vivid or memorable,
things are vivid or memorable,
then we tend to overestimate probabilities.
So, the main one that's been done experimentally
is pretty dry, and it says, well,
are there more words in the dictionary
that start with the letters A
or have the word, where the letter I
is the third to last letter in the word?
All right, so they still, so,
probability that a randomly selected word in the dictionary
starts with A, versus probability
that a randomly selected word in the dictionary
has I as the third to last letter.
Can you think of a lot of words that start with A?
Yes.
Can you think of a bunch of words
that have I as the third to last letter?
Yes.
Well, if you've got the trick, then it's easy.
If you're like singing, dancing, running,
if you remember that the ing suffix
will give you an infinite number of words like that,
at least a ton of words like that, you're fine,
but if you don't notice that,
if that doesn't dawn on you,
then you might have trouble thinking of any words
with I as the third to last letter.
All right?
Okay, so anyway, so,
what you would do in an experiment
would be something like,
you take half the people in the room,
and half the people just say,
you say, all right, go and make a list
as many words that you can think of
that start with the letter A,
as many words you can think of as words
with the letter I in the third to last position,
and then over in the second room,
those people don't know anything about that.
All that they're asked is,
what fraction of the words in the dictionary
do you think start with A or have I
in the third to last position?
And what you'll see is you can use
the enumerated lists of the first people
who were in the people experiment
to predict the probabilities of the people
in the second part of the experiment.
All right.
Now, again, the problem is that
sometimes it's just easier for people
to access certain kinds of examples,
which then leads people to think
that they are more or less likely,
and human beings find a lot easier
to rank words by the first letter
than by the third to last letter,
which is hard, right?
Or, this has been used to explain
that people have a fear of flying.
When a plane crashes,
they're like, how memorable is that?
How vivid is it?
It's like, oh my God, a plane crashed.
How many newspaper headlines are there
about car crashes?
Very rarely.
I mean, here's one of my favorite factoids.
Roughly how many people have murdered
on Earth on an average day?
Roughly how many people are on Earth
even have murdered on an average day?
What do you think?
You look like you've got a guess.
Half.
No, probably.
I'm going to guess 10,000 murders.
10,000 murders a day?
What counts as a murder?
Crimes of international crime statistics
we're voting as a murder.
It's really the main thing.
We're not counting war deaths or anything?
Normally those would get counted, actually.
Anyway, so the actual answer is about 1,000 a day.
So actually if you thought it was 10,000 a day,
the world problem is way worse than you.
It's only 10% as bad as you thought.
Right?
Yes?
So can we say that even though I was wrong,
I was pretty close, right?
Yes.
We were close.
Closer than half the world population.
Yeah, you're only closer than half the world population.
You're going to the right questions.
Now, how many headlines have you ever seen
about the statistic in your entire life?
Zero?
All right.
However, if there is a terrorist attack
that kills 10 people in Japan,
what are the odds that you'll hear about that?
Very likely.
Now, you could say, well, so you're blaming the media?
Not exactly.
Why does the media report the 10 deaths in Japan
but not the 1,000 statistical murders?
People don't care about the 1,000 statistical murders,
they're like, what?
Like, where were they killed?
All over random locations.
By random people for random reasons.
It's like, that's not a story.
I don't care.
1,000 people murdered for a bunch of different reasons
is of no interest to me.
But if 10 people were murdered in Japan,
then it's like, which group did it
so I may now form my beliefs about the fundamental nature
of the world based upon this incident?
Yes, was there another?
Yeah?
I feel like just even four people were murdered in Japan
in the space of a month.
It was already a matter of what.
Yeah, well, if it were like Yakuza,
then I don't think Americans would care anymore.
Maybe the Japanese would care.
Do Americans even know how bad is organized crime in Japan?
It's like, if you told Americans, do you know,
just make it up, do you know that more people are killed
by the Yakuza in Japan than by the mafia in Italy?
And if you just say it with a very serious tone,
everybody will be like, oh, yeah.
I guess that makes sense, right?
Because I mean, I saw some movies about Yakuza.
All right.
Now, if you want to think about the most egregious case of this
in the modern world, I am obviously alluding to terrorism,
where 20 people can be killed by a terrorist attack in France.
And this is the news of the world for a month,
during which time 30,000 people were statistically murdered.
Right?
But how many people would then go and say,
well, 20 compared to 30,000, I guess the lesson is that
terrorism is a problem that is microscopic in the big scheme of things,
and only statistical literates would be all that worried about it.
But not going to be a common inference, right?
Right?
I mean, of course, you could, of course, say,
well, the real problem is murder.
Murder is terrible, and there needs to be a war on murder.
Murder the murderers.
Murder, yes.
Well, it's not murder if it's justified, right?
Because unjustified homicide is the definition of murder,
and it's in your statistics.
If you were to imagine someone saying,
we need to have a war on murder,
and how people respond to this, like,
what do you mean a war on murder?
It's one thing to get caught up in crime in a city or something,
but the whole planet needs to have a conference about how we're going to
solve the world's murder problem.
It doesn't seem very likely, right?
And it would just seem odd.
All right.
Okay, right now there is a tree that halfway fell over in my backyard,
and I was looking at it, and it's weighing on me.
I don't want my kids to play around there sometimes.
I'm going to be able to crush one of my kids.
And I actually was going out there with a saw,
and it seemed kind of rotten.
Like, no, this is not coming down easily.
And then the gardener wanted $100 to kind of chainsaw it down.
Like, no.
All right, but then finally I decided I should just live with it,
and I said, all right, so it's only going to kill someone if someone happens
to be right under it when it falls.
Like, how much time could it spend falling?
So basically you have to be right under it during maybe like a six to ten
second period.
And otherwise you're perfectly fine, right?
And so, all right, so suppose that it's going to be under, you know,
there's like ten, like I said, I know people are sure it would fall the next
year sometimes, but like there's a random ten second danger period.
But I said, well, I said, like how many seconds are in a year again?
And it's a lot of seconds.
And I said, my God, all right, so this is like way smaller than the odds of
being killed in a car crash today.
So, all right, fine, even though it looks really scary,
there's nothing to worry about.
Now notice, by the way, it's totally different if the tree were within
striking distance of my house.
Because in that case, suppose I knew for sure that the tree would fall over
within the next year and it was going to hit my house.
But when it fell over and hit the house, then this is not just a six to ten
second danger zone per year.
This is a certainty of the danger happening within a year.
So, very different.
But anyway, this was, you know, there I will say that I actually took out the
saw before I took out my calculator to see how many seconds per year there are.
But eventually I did that and then I said, okay, all right,
so I'm done trying to chop this tree down.
When I chop this tree down, I say, wait a second,
is it likely that I will die from trying to chop this tree down?
I was like, hmm, I'm a sawing.
I'm actually, hmm, this seems pretty funny.
Maybe I should stop sawing.
Oh, it's almost gone.
I've almost got it cut down now.
Did you cut the tree down?
No.
So it's half falling over and now it's snapping.
Yes.
Well, I wasn't able to do it.
I wasn't able to make that much progress, actually.
So it snapped.
So basically it went from being like 48% over to 49% over.
That was 100%.
Yeah, so.
So I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
So basically, it goes from being like 47% over to 49% over.
That was 100%.
Yeah, so.
Okay.
But anyway, any time that there are vivid, memorable events that people are likely to
overestimate, these are ones that, you know, that people are likely to over react to.
And on the other end, of course, there are events that are just very boring and dry.
So a tribute to Stalin.
I don't think I've ever confirmed, but a tribute to Stalin is a million deaths.
One death is a tragedy,
a million deaths is a sadistic.
So, anytime that there are things that are statistically very dangerous,
but you can't imagine writing an interesting story about them,
those are the risks that this says you will tend to underestimate.
All right. Okay. Then there's
another common way of estimating probabilities,
and this is from comparing particular cases to stereotypes,
and then using the better match.
And this is known as the representative heuristic.
So, this is a different one.
So, a standard example of this is,
suppose someone asks you which is more likely?
Is a Chinese professor who teaches Chinese literature,
or a Chinese professor who teaches psychology?
All right. Well, what is
your stereotypical nationality for a professor of Chinese literature?
Chinese.
What is your stereotypical nationality for a psychology professor?
American. American. Maybe Austrian or something.
Zinken-Freud. All right.
Anyway. So, this one,
certainly Chinese is not the nationality that you
picture when you think of a psychology professor.
So, you're probably going to think, say,
all right, so, high likelihood that
a Chinese professor is a professor of Chinese literature,
low likelihood that he's a professor of psychology.
Now, what's wrong with this?
Well, sometimes there's nothing wrong with it.
But the problem is that in the real world,
people tend to ignore what are called base rates.
So, here's the thing. How many professors of Chinese literature are there in America?
Very, very few.
I don't know if we have any in Mason.
This is a big university.
So, there might only be a few hundred professors of
Chinese literature in the entire country.
Yet, how many psychologists have we got in LA?
How many psychology professors are there?
So, thousands and thousands.
Right. So, given this,
even if only one percent of psychology professors were Chinese,
and 100 percent of Chinese literature professors were Chinese,
it could still easily be the case that the probability that
a Chinese professor is a professor of psychology,
be way greater. And this is the problem.
Again, ignoring the fact that some things are just much more
frequent than other things when you assess probabilities.
So, representative heuristic is just using
the match with stereotypes to estimate probabilities,
which can be totally reasonable.
But the bias is when you do it without adjusting for these base rates.
And just remembering, some things are just more common to begin with.
So, the fact that something is relatively likely,
given something doesn't mean that it is absolutely likely.
All right. So, there's a classic experiment along these lines,
which asks you to begin with imagining something very odd.
This is an engineering and psychology conference.
So, it's a conference where the people there are,
engineers and psychologists getting together to talk
about whatever they would like to talk about.
Okay. All right.
And then here is the key part of the experiment.
Some people are told that 70 percent of the attendees are engineers,
others are told 30 percent of the attendees are engineers.
All right. And then, you go and say,
all right, so suppose you meet a person who has
warm room glasses and a pocket protector,
which is stereotypical wardrobe for what,
an engineer or psychologist?
Engineer.
Yes. So, my dad was an engineer in the 80s,
and he did have warm room glasses,
and he did wear a pocket protector.
All right. Now, the other like stereotypical clothes for
a psychology professor would be like a tweed jacket and a pipe.
Okay.
Frazier Crane.
Yes. And?
Frazier Crane.
Yeah. Frazier Crane.
Yeah.
Did he have a pipe?
In some episodes, I think.
Oh, he did. All right.
Now, the striking thing is that in an experiment,
you seem to get very similar answers
regardless of whether you tell people the base rate is 70 and 30.
Now, this would be okay if people were just
saying 100 percent probability of an engineer,
but people usually are sophisticated enough to realize
that some engineers might dress better than the average engineer.
So, they don't give the really extreme answers.
Rather, they just give an answer that seems to be insensitive to
the actual base rates. And again, that's odd.
And again, like a classic example of using
the representative heuristic or
inappropriately or false positives in medicine,
where because the stereotypical person who is sick will test positive,
people then think people test positive as being sick.
And in fact, if it's very rare to actually be sick,
then this is highly unlikely.
So, think about that horrible airport slogan,
if you see something, say something.
All right. So, out of all the times the people who see something,
say something, how often do they actually uncover a terrorist?
Almost never, right?
Now, out of terrorists, what are the odds that terrorists are acting strangely?
That seems pretty likely, right?
That, you know, I mean, how about they want to go to flight school,
but they don't want to learn how to land?
Seems pretty weird. That's odd.
All right. But anyway, the problem is not adjusting for these base rates.
So, one of my favorite trivia questions is,
how many knives does TSA confiscate per year?
And way higher.
Half.
Half of all knives.
Yeah, not that many. I think it's like 800,000 knives confiscated per year.
Now, I think this probably includes a lot of really crummy knives,
but anyway, I mean, and then you really,
because like at first you're thinking like,
who's going to be dumb enough to try to smuggle a knife onto a plane for a terrorist attack?
And you say, oh, there's a lot of other reasons you might have a knife.
In fact, motives that are much more common than the desire for suicidal terrorism.
Like what are some other reasons you might have a knife on a plane?
I just really want to butter my roll.
Yeah, that's a very common motive.
Right? Or how about people who forget they have a knife?
How could you forget you're carrying a knife?
What is a very easy way to forget you're carrying a knife?
Yes, you just always carry a knife and then you're,
and then you're like, yes, you have like Swiss Army knife keychain.
And then you don't even think of yourself as a knife armed individual.
Just think of yourself as you,
with your usual possessions.
Like, oh yeah, it's a knife. And now I have to lose my knife.
How many times have you gone through security and then lost your water again?
Because, like, like, yeah.
Yes, so as a comedian Jeremy Clown says, well, that water could be a bomb.
So throw it right in the trash can over there with all the people around.
Full of lots of other possible bomb water.
All right.
So, yes, so these are other cases of this problem.
And I was mentioning gaydar.
So this is another great example of the representative misbias where,
so, like, you may think of pink as a gay color.
And yet how many, but you know, like, but you start with the base rate.
So according to standard estimates, what percentage of American males are straight?
Higher? Like 98? 98.
All right. And so if, you know,
if even if 100% of all gay men only wear pink all the time
and only one straight man out of 25 were wearing pink on a given day still,
this is going to give you, most of the men in pink will actually be straight.
All right. So, you know, in general, anything that is rare is likely to get overestimated
based upon some very superficial indicators which might be, which even could be correlated.
And yet if the thing is rare to begin with, it doesn't really mean very much.
All right. So questions about that?
Yeah. So, you know, so just consulting base rates is a good way of getting an idea about what's going on.
Now, again, like, people often get resentful of this because base rates often
will lead people to not believe in themselves anymore.
And that's terrible, right?
It would be terrible if people believed, the average person believed they were average.
Wouldn't that be a disaster?
Or maybe it would be, so, because nothing ever comes wrong from believing in yourself too much, right?
Like, if you believe that you'll never die in an accident, that couldn't leave anything bad, could it?
Or could it? Yeah.
Of course, it would be terrible, right? You could die, you could kill people, right?
So you believe that, or you're believing that you're sure to go and finish graduate school.
You might want to look at the base rates. Well, what fraction of the people?
And then, you know, so, now, of course, if you can get additional information,
you might want to go and look at more sophisticated base rates.
So you might say, well, how about the graduation rate of the people at the school where I met?
Or the base rate of people at my GRE school at that?
So, you know, like, there's no reason not to go get additional information.
But still, it's always good to start with what normally happens and then adjust up or down
based on your personal characteristics, rather than just ignore base rates.
Which, again, of course, a lot of people do on the theory that they're an individual, not a statistic.
But, let's see, where do we even get statistics from, again?
Collecting data from individuals.
So, you know, the fact that you're an individual does not mean the statistics don't apply to you.
All right. So, questions about availability or representativeness biases?
In the experiment with the engineer psychologist convention,
you said people give the same answer regardless of the base rates.
Will they give answers larger than 30 in the case where it's 30% engineers?
Let's see. I'm trying to remember if there are any. I don't think so.
So, yeah, I mean, I think that, you know, again, like, this is not one of these experiments where the results are really weird.
But, yeah. Okay.
I mean, actually, it wouldn't be that weird to say that, you know, like, that, you know, like,
if 30% are engineers, then it's more than 30% likely that someone wearing arm-rimmed glasses and a pocket protector is an engineer, right?
That would actually be, if you said 30, then that would mean, that would basically be saying there's no correlation.
So, yeah. You definitely expect them to give something higher than that.
But, again, it's more like saying the odds are 80% regardless of whether 30% of the people are engineers or 70% are engineers.
That's the odd part. All right.
All right. And, yeah. And there's so, let's see.
Let's see. All right.
Yeah, yeah. So, yeah. And, by the way, so on the violation of that one, there the classic experiment involves giving people two scenarios.
One of them is you say, you know, Sally has a lifelong interest in the environment.
She loves hiking and animals and donates to environmental causes.
So, people in both experimental treatments get that same prompt.
And then group A is asked, what is the probability that she will be a banker?
And then, of course, people give a really low number.
And then group two is said, what is the probability that she's a banker active in the active environmental causes?
And they actually give a higher number to a banker active environmental causes than to being a banker.
Which makes very little sense in terms of math.
Because, look, either she'll be a banker active environmental causes or she'll be a banker non-environmental,
not of active environmental causes. And the second thing is going to be a little bit above zero anyway.
So, there's no way that the second probability should be higher than the first probability.
And yet, it seems like people are doing some kind of representativeness heuristic where they're saying,
well, none of that, none of the story fits a banker.
But the story does fit a banker active environmental causes.
And then sort of matching, yeah, I can sort of see how that person could evolve into a banker active environmental causes.
Because there's not that much money in environmentalism. It's hard to get a paying job.
So, there's a lot of people who are bankers. So, you might want to be a banker.
But you'll still stay true to your ideals, of course.
And then you've got a whole little biography of this woman.
Whereas the other story, you don't have a biography. And it's also like, hmm.
All right. So, questions, questions. All right. Let us then move on.
All right. So, risk misperceptions.
All right. The basic rational expectations assumption is that actors' risk estimates are on average correct.
There is a large empirical literature that checks to see whether risk estimates are on average correct.
And finds that this is not true.
All right. In particular, low probability events seem poorly estimated by people.
Poorly estimated. Although in a strange way.
Right. Because when you give people events that are objectively low probability,
they tend to do one of two things.
Either set the probability equal to zero, or make it too big by a lot. Too big by a lot. Okay.
So, like for example, what is the probability that a randomly selected American is Jewish?
Well, of course, you know. So, if you just go and ask regular Americans, it's like 20%.
Right. And what's the probability that a randomly selected American is black,
according to the average American? Probably something like 30%.
And then you go, how about Italian? Well, like another 15%. And Greek? Seven. All right.
And pretty soon you've given away the entire 100% probability.
And we haven't even gotten to the Irish, or English, or any of the groups that historically
are actually the largest ethnic groups in the US.
All right. So, that's the case of assigning probabilities that are too big to low probability events.
Yes.
It's going to be Italian and Irish at the same time, so you can overlap.
Yes. So, yes. There is that. So, again, like, you know, so, let's see.
In the case of Jewish, normally, let's see. Would you actually bother phrasing it as Jewish and not another thing?
You probably wouldn't bother. Again, like, so, in practice, when you go and ask people,
the reason why they're giving the numbers is not that they think there's a lot of overlap.
The reason, rather, is that they just, or they don't get, like, overlap is something that, oh,
I mean, you could actually probably make the result even more extreme if you said,
oh, probably somebody's Irish. How about Irish and black?
And then they'll give you another view probability for that.
And so you probably actually get up to 100% even sooner.
Because when they were thinking of the Irish, they were not thinking of mixed groups or blends.
They were thinking of guys with restylepricon outfits.
And that was what they had in their minds.
All right. So, anyway, so a lot of times people assign probabilities that are too big.
And let's see, probability you'll die in a terrorist attack.
Yeah, that's probably a too big one. All right.
Now, on the other hand, there are things where it does seem like a lot of people round down to zero.
They round down to zero. And, again, these are for things where, in fact, the odds are probably pretty good.
Like, how about the odds that you die because your doctor didn't wash his hands?
How do you worry about that risk at all?
Yes. Yeah, you start worrying. Yes.
There was an awkward thing. Last time my kids were at the doctor, the doctor did try to shake my hand.
And he tried again. I'm like, sorry. And he's like, all right.
And then I actually, so, you know, like, he does wash his hands actually twice in front of us, which was good.
But not using soap. What did he use?
Purell.
Yes. He used Purell.
The bacteria, the bio-defense pressure that I know says that if you use that stuff a lot,
it actually loses all its effectiveness, mostly because the bacteria in your hand then become resistant bacteria.
And I'm like, hey, isn't the same with soap?
He said, no, soap physically removes germs, and it's very hard for the bacteria to get resistance to being physically wiped off your hands.
But if it's just a chemical treatment, then you just wind up getting really strong bacteria on your hands.
So I don't care. I'll shake your hand.
Yeah.
In medical settings, you're supposed to use hand sanitizer or some like-wise substance every three times and wash your hands a fourth time.
And do that in a cycle.
Right. I don't feel like the guy's doing it. I'm suspicious.
That's what you're supposed to do.
Yeah, that's what I'm supposed to do.
And I get quality control. There are a lot of people who do that.
Yes. I've also heard stories of people who tried enforcing quality control who were fired.
Yeah. Because like, oh, he's hassling the doctors for no reason at all.
All right. So again, this is the kind of thing where it seems like people are rounding it down to zero.
Or when my dad was, like his doctor said, he might have a problem with his prostate.
I said, do not go and let him do any surgery on you without talking to me.
There's a lot of evidence on this that most of the surgery is unnecessary and will ruin the rest of your life.
And even my dad, who is normally a very untrustworthy person, says, I just have to trust my doctor.
No, you don't have to trust your doctor. Bad things can happen.
And it's not something where you just have to do it.
There's always getting a second opinion, third opinion.
All right. So anyway, so there's empirical evidence on both these things.
As for what the logic is, when you set it to zero and when you make it too big,
it does seem like it has something to do with the vivid emotions of some things,
where the things that people tend to overestimate are things where it's very vivid or memorable.
So now there may also be an issue when you're doing demographics that people just don't seem to really understand that there's only 100 percent to hand out.
So this was another weird result that Tetlock found, was that if you go and ask people to go and rate,
to assign probabilities to all logically possible events, they generally assign way more possibility.
And especially the more you subdivide the events into more detailed events, the more likely each scenario becomes.
And again, of course, logically, if you say, what are the odds that there's a terror attack carried out on a Monday by a guy named Fred
wearing a jumpsuit with tie-dye on it, right, you'd have to, like logically, that would have to be an astronomically low probability, right?
But again, a lot of people want to say, eh, I don't know, like one in a thousand,
never realizing that when you split it up into that many scenarios, you could have hundreds of thousands of scenarios.
And then if you have 100,000 scenarios, a one in a thousand chance each,
pretty soon you've got a massive abundance of live scenarios.
By the way, this was the one way in which Tetlock found out that really dogmatic, single-theory,
explain-everything people are more accurate than open-minded people,
because open-minded people hand out probability like it's candy.
Oh yeah, that can happen, that can happen.
Yeah, I mean really everything's possible.
I mean, we already know they handed out 300% probability
for mutually exclusive jointly exhaustive events.
Whereas the dogmatic people only hand out like 150% probability,
so they're more reasonable.
Even there, right there.
There is this ability to trick people
by giving too many detailed scenarios.
All right.
Like any time that you've ever watched a TV show
and then said like, what are the odds that something just like that will ever happen?
Just like that?
Like one in a hundred trillion?
That it would go just the way that went down?
That's just so unlikely that it would all fit together like that.
Okay.
All right.
Now, this evidence is often, you know,
so like a myriad of evidence on risk misperceptions
is often used to justify safety regulation.
Right?
Now, which of these two, right,
plausibly has anything to do with actual safety regulation?
Yes.
So people rounding risk down to zero.
Then you might say, well, I mean,
people are not going to go and make their doctors wash their hands
if they think doctors are always doing good jobs.
We need to have regulation to protect people,
given these idiotic views they have.
Right?
So this at least fits in with the usual kind of regulation
because almost all risk and safety regulation
tries to do what to the amount of risk that people face?
Raise it or reduce it?
Reduce.
Reduce it.
Tries to prevent people from doing risky things.
Right?
And to require additional safety.
Okay.
So, yeah, so things like that,
then risk regulation seems like it's got some connection.
But on the other hand, right,
if people, for all the cases where people overstate risks,
for all those,
then what is the connection between risk regulation and that stuff?
Yeah, it makes it all worse.
It takes the problem people are already ridiculously paranoid about
and then makes them take even more precautions than they want to.
So see the TSA.
So if government did nothing,
would people still be worried about terrorism?
Probably.
These are shocking and horrifying stories.
So the natural market response would already be
to be overly worried about it.
But then when you have a pile of regulation
saying that you have to do all these extra things,
it probably means that you get even more paranoia.
So one guy once failed to do something with his shoes,
so now everyone has to take off their shoes for the rest of all time.
Or it's possible that a liquid is gasoline,
and so no liquids can ever be on a plane again.
And so on.
And then you may have noticed all kinds of odd rules
where there's some rationale,
but is it based on any kind of actual risk assessment,
or is it just the people that are in charge
just take for granted that whatever would happen isn't enough
and there needs to always be more and more and more.
And in fact, if you really scratch your head and say,
what are any examples of government trying to pressure people to take extra risk
or to prevent them from getting safety?
I know of a few examples.
So Ralph Nader wants to ban any sunblock with SPF over 15
on the theory that nobody needs any more than that
and that's just companies ripping you off.
Now this is one of someone whose native skin tone is that.
I'd say this is just wrong.
Like, I have been burned with SPF 15.
So, and also it's the case where maybe if you didn't sweat at all
or you never got wet, then SPF 15 would be sufficient.
But if any of these things are going to happen to you,
maybe the SPF 70 is worth it
because after it's lost 80% of its effectiveness, it's still as good as 15.
But anyway, so there is one consumer advocate
who's generally known for trying to make people be more safe,
trying to take away some needless safety from them.
There's also some regulation forbidding airlines from advertising their safety record.
The underlying theory is people are already paranoid about airline safety
and are driving when it would be safer to fly
and if they could advertise it, the result would just be
that people are getting even more worried about microscopic risk.
So there's that.
Of course, then there's things like inscription,
which just make people do something super risky that they don't want to do.
So yeah, a really dangerous job.
But OSHA regulates the military, right?
Before you tell guys to charge a machine,
you got OSHA to study to see if you make sure that's safe for them?
No.
Or before you go and spray charge on guys,
there has to be animal testing, right?
No.
So not the case.
So anyway, if you really were designing paternalistic safety regulation
in light of the evidence, it would look very different from what we have.
And basically the boring risks,
there might very well be a bunch of regulation
that is trying to make people take them more seriously
or at least force the providers to give you more safety than what they demand
because the demanders are in a fog about the risks.
But on the other hand, there would be a bunch of other risks
that government would be trying to soothe people's minds about.
Let's see.
So a few weeks after 9-11, President Bush very loudly
had a big meal at Morton's Restaurant
to encourage the nation to start eating out again
because a lot of people felt they shouldn't eat out during the morning period.
That's not really about safety, though.
It wasn't like people were staying home because they were worried
that their favorite restaurant could be attacked,
but rather that it just wasn't appropriate.
So not really quite on point there.
All right.
So questions, questions?
All right.
Okay.
By the way, so to me what's very striking is that
there's almost no statistical education in schools, right?
Almost no effort to go and tell kids what are high and low probability events
that are bad and things that are likely to happen
and things to not worry about.
I mean, just to go and give them a list of
these are things to worry more about, these are things to worry less about.
Something is that I've never heard of for sex education.
Has anyone ever had a sex education class
where they actually just give you a table of main contraceptive methods
and their failure rate?
It's right on Wikipedia, right?
There's some very popular methods that do not work very well.
It's like you might want to check it out.
All right.
Yes.
Oh, yeah, or one other thing that to me is quite striking.
In all the discussion about the opioid epidemic,
I cannot once think of anything where people have just been told
what the risk is to them.
So there's always like, what can we do to reduce the opioid epidemic?
How about tell people what the risk is?
Maybe you could do that, and not with a lot of hyperbole
and saying this is going to kill, this is death or whatever,
but just say, well, raise your probability of dying in your 20s,
a regular heroin user, from 2% to 7%.
That doesn't sound like it's being done very often,
but again, this would seem like a pretty obvious approach
if your concern was just that people were taking poor decisions
because the risk probabilities were off.
And again, if this were your approach, of course,
you might want to very zealously protect your reputation for accuracy.
So you might want to have a government where there's a strict rule
against hyperbole or exaggeration of any kind
because you don't want to be the boy that cries wolf
so that when there is a severe risk, people take it seriously.
Of course, it would be a lot of work to get there, right?
Yes, there was a question back there somewhere.
I was going to say, you never have the guy in the dog costume
come to your school and tell you why drugs are bad?
I remember a guy kind of like that, but what did he say?
He tells you the drugs are bad. He's in a dog costume.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yes, yes.
He sings a dare song.
Yeah, yeah, well, that's kind of on top.
That is standard for governments to do,
but for the dog to go and sing about what the probability is
or what the risks are, that kind of thing.
And more generally, there is an odd bias
where there are many risky activities
that are highly socially praised and encouraged,
such as playing football, mountain climbing,
and some smart person actually said,
well, here's the rule.
If the hangover preceded the intoxication,
drunkenness would be considered a virtue.
So if you first have to spend a day in horrible pain
and then you enjoy yourself for a few hours,
then people will be telling you you should get drunk
and drunkenness is great and shows character and so on,
but since the pleasure comes first,
the bad things after, then it's a vice.
Yes, so you take mountain climbing,
which if I haven't gone and denounced this idiocy previously,
climbing Mount Everest is highly fatal, right?
And yet when someone decides to climb Mount Everest,
people don't regard them as someone who says,
hey, I've decided to become a heroin addict.
What do you think about my choice?
Aren't you going to congratulate me?
Where I say, look, this serves no purpose whatsoever
other than you're showing off
and putting your life at risk
and putting your family under great stress
and what's so great about it anyway?
And a friend of mine who has a book on high-risk behavior
gives a very fun fact on mountain climbing,
which is that all the mountains that are above 8,000 meters
are climbed frequently, and the very tallest mountains
that are just below 8,000, almost no one ever climbs them.
So mountains that are 7,000, 950 meters,
virtually no one ever climbs them,
because 8,000 is the prestige cutoff
for mountains where you're awesome and cool if you climb them.
And it really looks like people are climbing mountains
just to look better than other people.
And then he says, and this fits in with things like
we go and celebrate someone who's the first person
to climb a mountain without oxygen or without crampons
or without other safety equipment.
It's like, wow, he did this in an even higher-risk way than normal.
Isn't that great?
Now, my friend does have the theory that if a lot of people
want to climb mountains, then it would be bad.
The only reason why it's legal is hardly anyone wants to do it.
So then it's easy to go and act like it's a great thing,
even though no one knows what's great about it.
Okay. All right. Questions, questions?
All right. So, yes.
None of my kids would mount climbers.
Not allowed.
All right. So, the last topic here.
So systematically biased beliefs about economics.
We talked about this before, but now we will come back to it
in more detail.
All right. So go back to your intro economics class.
Since you're here, I'm guessing you had a pretty good one.
Maybe not, but I'm assuming you probably had a pretty good intro econ class.
And if yours was anything like mine, what was exciting about it
is that you had a professor who was saying that
most of the world is wrong.
And not just randomly wrong, but wrong in a systematic way.
And who are most of the people?
Well, your parents, your teachers,
the textbook authors that you read in elementary school
through high school. All wrong.
All important stuff they didn't understand.
All right.
So, you know, if they know everything like why free trade is good.
So, economists teach us comparative advantage.
And they expect students to say,
Oh, so, comparative, like, so, like, like.
So free trade is just as good as I thought it was.
No better, no worse.
Now, when you teach comparative advantage,
you are normally thinking that students will change their minds
in what direction?
A pro-trade.
Right, because you'll say, you probably think that trade is only beneficial
if one country is an absolute advantage in one thing
and another is an absolute advantage in another.
I'm going to prove that there's mutually beneficial trade
even if one country is an absolute advantage in everything.
Right, and meanwhile your students are like,
No, no, no, I just think trade is bad, always.
I think trade is terrible.
And it's the way other countries rip us off.
But anyway, comparative advantage is a lot more optimistic than that.
Right.
Or again, when economists go and teach students about price controls,
are they thinking the students are going to be like,
Oh, okay, so half the students will say,
Oh, so price controls are better than I thought
and half will think it's worse than they thought.
No, they are thinking the students will then,
will previously have been in favor of price controls
but afterwards will be against.
Right.
So I mean, I remember when I first heard the basic economics of the minimum wage.
And my honest reaction was,
in my entire life I have never once heard a single person
say anything bad about the minimum wage ever.
It's not that I previously heard someone say,
Well, of course we all know that there is a potential for a disemployment effect,
but a peer of less would say that it's small.
I never heard anyone say this.
And I did not grow up in a left wing enclave like Berkeley.
I grew up in a totally normal Los Angeles suburb.
And I knew plenty of Republicans,
but I didn't know a single Republican was against the minimum wage.
Right.
And then I said, Wow, there's economists saying,
You know the thing that everyone thinks is good?
Maybe it's terrible.
And the only way to know is to go and do some complex measurements.
This would be like saying,
Maybe apple pie is actually really bad.
And we need to do some measurements to find out if it is or not.
Right.
And everyone's been telling you apple pie is wonderful your whole life.
Right.
And so anyway,
this is the way inter-recon is often taught.
And a lot of famous historical economists operate from the same perspective.
So Adam Smith.
So much of the book is written assuming that
the reader will start off as a protectionist
and a proponent of a government.
And after reading it,
they will realize how naive they were.
And how arrogant they were in thinking that they or anyone would know enough
to plan the world for the better.
We can see this in Frederick Bastiat.
Or you know, you can see it in Frank Knight.
Or Milton Friedman.
Or me.
Right.
So you can see, so this is, you know,
so economists throughout history,
there's a general sense,
or like Paul Krugman.
You can see this in Paul Krugman.
Does Paul Krugman assume that people basically have the right view about free trade
and that he's just there to go and approve the accuracy of the details?
No.
I mean like actually, you know,
so Krugman has some early work on strategic trade theory.
Giving high tech cases where free trade might not be a good idea.
But then he actually has a piece saying,
what should we teach to undergraduates?
And he said, don't teach them that stuff.
They don't need to hear that stuff.
Why not?
Because they don't even know the basics yet.
They need to know what Hume and Ricardo said.
And if they can learn that,
and after they really understand that,
and if they will come and say,
can you tell me more,
then maybe we'll teach them my stuff.
Maybe.
But what people really need are just the very basics,
the very basic stuff,
which Krugman thought very few people actually have.
And if you don't have,
and then if you don't have,
if you don't know the basic stuff of Hume and Ricardo,
what are you?
You're like a strategic trade theorist.
You're someone saying,
how can we figure out a way to import nothing
and export a ton of stuff?
Or maybe you're even worse guys.
How can we figure out a way to get rid of the trade deficit
and have lots of foreign investment here?
And yes, if you know the accounting,
that is just logically impossible
because foreign investment automatically increases
the current account deficit.
Again, what does it mean to have a current account deficit?
It means that you are paying for goods with assets.
And that is investment in our country,
is when we are going and selling people
in other countries' assets.
When they invest here,
how does a company go and invest in a factory here?
They come here and they go and they buy some of our assets.
They buy a factory.
All right.
So this is lurking in the background
of a whole tradition in economics
of thinking of the economic beliefs of the public
as being systematically biased.
And yet, when economists actually model
what people's economic beliefs are,
they almost always assume rational expectations.
So when economists write down a model
of determination of tariff rates,
normally they'll come up with some model
where you've got,
there's a conflict between interest groups and consumers,
but each group is assumed to know accurately,
on average, what is the best tariff rate for that group.
So in these models,
they almost never have consumers
falsely believe that tariffs are good,
and then we get tariffs which are inefficient.
Which again, sounds kind of trivial for a model, right?
But the fact that it's a trivial model
doesn't mean that it's a wrong model.
It just means that there's no jobs
for economists to be had in publishing on it.
Okay.
All right.
Now, so I've got a series of empirical papers
where I try to see
who's actually right about the public's economic beliefs.
Is it the textbooks
and the greatness of economists throughout history?
Or is it the current theoretical models?
So I've got papers still here to test,
and the results overwhelmingly come out in favor
of textbooks and the historical economists,
and overwhelmingly against people going
and writing rational expectations models of voter reliefs.
Okay.
All right, so the data is,
this was constructed by someone other than me,
which as I said is great for two reasons.
First of all,
then the reputation of the data is not tainted
by the fact that I'm the researcher doing it.
And I will admit this.
Am I the kind of person who believed in the textbook view
more than the research view from the outset?
Yes, I am.
Which means that it's better to outsource the data collection
to someone who doesn't have a dog in the fight.
And of course, also,
they paid for all the data collection,
which today might be half a million dollars
to collect this data set,
and it cost me nothing.
They just gave it to me for free.
And I think last week I was mentioning
how there's a lot of data that exists
and that is on the internet and has never been used.
There's also a lot of data that is not on the internet,
but has barely been used,
and if you just go and email the people
who did the study, they'll give it to you.
So I probably got lucky.
If you email four different people with data sets
and they're done with them,
and they say, you know, can I have it?
I think you'll probably get one yes.
So in general, if you just keep your eyes open
for data sets that seem to be rarely used.
Now again, if you wait too long,
then they'll just give you the dog ate my data story.
Like, well, sorry, I haven't had that data in years.
Yeah, too bad it cost half a million dollars
and I only got one paper out of it.
Would have been nice if someone else could have used it
and learned more, but there's no way of saving data.
Unfortunately.
Too bad.
Anyway, so basically you want to give them enough time
where they've sucked it dry,
but not so much time that they've thrown it away.
And if they've sucked it dry, what can you do with it?
Often a lot, because a lot of people
don't have your creativity.
Do they?
No.
The answer is no.
Other people do not have your creativity,
and so you will see uses for their data
that they're not aware of.
Okay, so the method that I used in here
was estimating beliefs as a function of
DECOM, DEMI, and control variables.
So you guys remember DEMI?
So DEMI variable for economists,
one if you're an economist, zero otherwise.
All right?
And again, if you've got rationalizations,
then we go and estimate the belief as a function of A.
plus B times the dummy variable, plus, say,
gamma times the vector of controls.
And rational estimation says that B will be equal to 0.
There will be no difference in the average opinion
of experts in the public, right?
Because in the rational estimation's world,
what is the effect of knowledge?
Is it to shift means?
No, it's to compress variance.
So if that's the truth, capital T star,
then ignorant people have that distribution,
and informed people have that distribution.
That's what rational estimations is all about.
Or again, so why the controls?
The controls are there just because there's
a lot of people who think that economics
is a fake discipline, or at least a biased discipline.
And so the controls are there to deal with the objections.
And there are two main reasons people
look for for mistrusting economists.
So one is that economists have some kind
of self-serving bias.
So maybe it just means that if they're rich
they got on job security, so they're
out of touch with the American people,
out of touch with the problems of the American people.
So of course they think that international trade
or downsizing are good when they personally
are immune to the bad part, as well, the bad stuff.
So that is a story, but it's a testable story.
Because you can get measures of whatever
it is that supposedly is biasing economists' judgment,
and then we put that control variable in.
And when you do that, that is like going and pairing
an economist with high income and job security
to a non-economist with high income and job security.
Or alternately, it's like comparing a normal person
with someone with economic training,
but all the problems of a normal person.
That's the whole idea of putting in the control variables.
And again, if this theory is right,
it is driven by personal circumstances,
then that should make the gap go away.
But in practice, it almost never does.
And then another story that's been told of ideological bias,
this one just says that economics
is a coven of extreme right-wing ideology.
And people believe it because if you don't believe it,
you don't go into the discipline.
So of course, of course economists
believe this horrible stuff.
And again, this is something where you go and get measures
of people's ideology or party, and then
try to see whether that explains the difference.
So if you are a very liberal democratic economist,
do you then believe the same stuff
that very liberal democratic non-economists believe?
And again, the answer is totally not.
Paul Krugman's beliefs are very different from that
of the people that he claims to speak for.
And one of his main goals, especially in earlier years,
was to try to fix other people on his side
and introduce them to economics.
So that is an ideal.
People often have the idea, well, look,
all this free market stuff, that's
just the right-wing people.
It's like, well, no, actually, a lot of this
is stuff that almost all economists believe.
Right now, a safer this is just to say, well,
economists are right-wing regardless of what they say.
So Paul Krugman's right-wing, absolutely.
If you read a book like, what is it?
It's Naomi Klein, Shock, Soccer, and Not Nanny Wolfe.
So I'm just reading a section where
so her take on South Africa.
Her take on South Africa is another case
where neoliberal Chicago boys won the country
and got everything they wanted.
So what are you talking about?
But if you're someone who thinks that the slightest concession
to not having a communist revolution
shows that Milton Friedman runs your country,
then, of course, you're going to see Milton
Friedman ruling the world.
Look, Milton Friedman rules every country
except North Korea and Cuba and Venezuela.
Because they're the only countries that
are doing exactly the opposite of what he recommends.
And everybody else is listening to him.
Wouldn't it be great if you could just
tell your parents this when they say you don't listen to them
and you say, no.
I mean, I've listened to you like three times,
so you rule my life.
So not very compelling, but still.
Now, the big clusters of error.
So by the way, if you don't want to read the book,
you can just go and Google the four cartoons that
have been made about the book.
So there are four cartoons, one on each of these biases.
So you can just watch the cartoon.
And they're a very well-done cartoon.
It's very happy.
I'm very flatteringly drawn.
Thinner, younger, better dressed than I've
ever seen in real life.
But so here are the big clusters that I talk about in the book.
The first one I call anti-market bias.
So there's a general tendency for non-economists
to underestimate the social benefits of the market
mechanism.
This does not mean that all economists
think markets are always great or anything like that.
That's totally wrong.
But still, there's a general tendency
for economists to be more optimistic about markets
to the public, because the public generally
looks to see whether someone is trying to make money.
And if that is so, lead to a negative inference.
On the other hand, economists have almost the opposite
heuristic.
For economists, the main concern is to say,
well, is there a way for someone to make money
solving this problem?
The answer is yes, but economists tend not
to worry about the problem.
Economists worry about problems where
they cannot think of a way for someone
to profit from a solution.
So economists can't say, well, I can't think of any way
to make money by cleaning up the air.
So that's a problem.
But if you can say, well, I can think
of a way for someone to make money by increasing
the number of available kidneys, well,
then why don't we just have a free market of kidneys?
This is one, unless you'd ever tell you
about my dinner with a Marxist economist
where we talked about kidney donation.
Yes, if you don't remember, so this
was at the New School for Social Research.
This is literally an economics department
with a six-foot-tall poster of Karl Marx in the public area.
It's not just one professor has Marx in his office.
It's like, by the water cooler, there's
six-foot-tall Karl Marx.
Just the face is six feet tall.
And yet, when I had him at dinner,
this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.
So what do you guys think about having
a free market of kidneys?
And the graduate students were like, well, I can definitely
see the argument, but I'm a little worried
that Bohr might not be able to get kidneys.
And the Marxist professor said, no, you have to do this.
It'll save 10,000 lives a year.
Wow.
So here's a table of avowed Marxists
who are more in favor of a free market of human kidneys
than almost any conservative Republican in the country.
And what's the difference?
Economics training is the difference,
because they don't just think of prices as redistributive.
They think of them as affecting the quantity supplied.
So anti-market bias.
Then anti-foreign bias.
So it's one thing to convince Americans
that when one American buys something
from another American, they're both better off.
All right, fine, maybe.
But what if an American is buying something
from a Chinese?
Then, well, we all know what the purpose of this is.
It's for the Chinese to trick us, to rip us off,
to take advantage of us.
That is the whole point.
Sure, we get cheap toys, but they get something much better.
Green piece of paper.
So that's much more orgies.
So that is, again, the underlying idea.
So in the book, I go and point out
that there is a thought experiment
that economists have been using for quite a while just
to illustrate the economist view of trade.
And this is very nicely done in the cartoon.
But the thought experiment is the Iowa car crop.
Actually got a slightly annoyed farmer who says,
Iowa does not grow corn, dummy.
All right, fine.
It's too late to change.
Whatever Iowa grows, I don't know.
Let's just define corn in the 19th century sense.
What you say does grow corn?
I'm from Iowa, so I was surrounded by corn.
So I don't know.
Yeah, so he's right all along.
He pointed me to some statistics on how little corn
is grown in Iowa.
Anyway, the thought experiment says this.
So a scientist shows up and has a press conference
and says, I have figured out a way to turn corn into cars.
And everyone laughs at him.
That's ridiculous.
The chemical components of corn would never
allow it to be turned into cars.
But then the guy goes and he buys an old factory
down by the docks.
And lo and behold, corn goes in, cars come out.
So everyone says, wow, he has some new chemical process
that no one else is smart enough to consider.
Or happy.
Until an investigative journalist
sneaks into the factory and discovers it's only a dock.
All that happens is ships with cars for Japan
come in and leave full of corn.
That's all that's occurring.
And then the guy snaps some pictures,
and there's a big scandal.
And he says, corn into cars is a fraud.
And then the scientist is arrested
for violating every trade law in the books.
The end.
Now, the point of this thought experiment, of course,
is that he did have a technology for turning corn into cars.
And what is that technology called?
It's called trade.
And in fact, trade is a technology
for turning anything into anything.
It is like the transmuter from Star Trek.
It is that amazing.
The only way that it is different
is that if it's a transmuter, then what happens
is that Americans are better off and no one else is.
But on the other hand, if there's trade,
this means that the Japanese are better off as well.
So from the American point of view,
it doesn't matter how the factory works.
But from the human point of view,
it does matter because then there's
another country where they are better off also,
because they are receiving the other side of the deal.
And I've got here a little question.
Is anti-corn bearers an aestheticism
of anti-free market economics?
Well, let's see.
I think of it as adding.
So you have the general hostility to markets,
and then there's additional hostility
when there's foreigners involved,
is at least the way that seems to me.
Yes?
So is the idea of corn for cars that nobody
would object to corn for cars if they thought it was actually?
Well, not literally nobody, but few.
So there are actual Luddites who want
to destroy new technologies, but that is a pretty small segment.
There's not a lot of political attention
being made in saying, let's smash the new machines.
Whereas, let's go and cut off trade
with a country that's destroying us.
Much more popular.
Because I feel like you could still
set up a battle between the corn lobby
and then better auto workers, because there would still be.
Right.
Like, what do people without a dog in the fight think?
What does just a random American looking on the sidelines think?
If someone says, there's a new machine that works great,
it should be destroyed to save jobs,
there's a little bit of appeal of that.
But there's something like, I don't know,
wouldn't we have to go and do other things too
to be consistent if we believe that?
Wouldn't we have to destroy our entire civilization?
I don't think there's too much to spoil
in saying the final episode of Battle Sword Galactica,
they make a decision to destroy all their technology
and then become cavemen.
And then they become our ancestors.
And just to make sure there's no evidence,
they throw it all into the sun.
So there's no sign of it ever happening.
It sounds like a spoiler to me.
Well, the show has been out and has been done for 10 years.
I mean, the only spoiler is, do you really
want to watch a show that has what the conclusion is back,
idiot?
I'm just kidding.
I'm just kidding.
I'm just kidding.
I'm just kidding.
So let's become cavemen.
Let's try that.
And let's make sure it's irreversible too,
just to make sure that no one ever tries going back
to not being a caveman.
And as you may have heard that I have a big interest
in open immigration.
And when people say, well, why is it
that everyone's so wrong and you're right?
I'm like, yeah, anti-foreign bias.
Anti-foreign bias.
When people economically interact with foreigners,
they are prone to paranoid pessimism
and to seeing the slightest negative thing
as being some kind of proof that it shouldn't happen.
I mean, just think about the sheer innumeracy
of popular action.
So suppose someone were to say, look,
if we go and open up our borders,
there's going to be a terror attack every year.
Now, how much economic gain will you
have to posit before people say, eh, it's worth it?
A trillion dollars a year.
Is that enough to make it worthwhile to have
one terrorist attack a year?
How about $10 trillion?
How about $100 trillion?
This is one where I think it's likely for a lot of people,
there is no known finite number that would get
people to say it's worth it.
Even though, of course, people bet their lives all the time
for far lesser gain.
What's the difference?
Foreigners are involved.
So similarly, suppose someone were to say, look,
we can get rid of all terrorism if we just
go and execute the following 10,000 Americans.
We come up with a computer, these
are the 10,000 most likely to do it.
And actually, we got a pure prediction.
And suppose the critics look at it and say, yeah, it's right.
So execute 10,000 Americans and end the solve the terror
problem.
Sound like a good deal?
Wait, are these American citizens
we're talking about killing?
No, no, then we can't do it.
Suppose there were even 10 American citizens,
but they're inside the borders of the US.
And there's no proof of anything at all.
They haven't done anything.
It's just pre-crime.
It's just the computer predicts that they're high risk.
So quite possibly, nothing would be done.
But suppose you have to leave a million refugees in a war zone.
They will be exterminated.
Well, but maybe there would have been terrorism.
Prove there wouldn't be.
That's kind of hard.
So that's my anti-foreign bias story.
Then I also have make-word bias.
A tendency to rate economic performance based upon jobs
rather than production, which again,
is a very emotionally easy, especially during recession.
And yet, you all probably heard, imagine
that we were to go and judge every new technology based
upon its effect upon employment.
How many great technologies would not be allowed?
Basically, actually, relative to what
the economy would look like a century ago,
then there's probably almost no jobs that have not
been destroyed by technology.
Because almost all of us would be working in agriculture.
Because as the expansion, as technology
improved agriculture, it's created a lot of other jobs.
And then, of course, many of those jobs have been destroyed.
And so on.
So this usually does not actually
lead to laws banning technological improvements.
Although it probably does lead to hyperregulation
of new technologies.
So a standard point in risk regulation
is that driverless cars are held to a way higher standard
than drivered cars.
So a driverless car kills one person,
then people are like, oh, we may need to rethink this.
How many people were killed in regular cars that day?
Statistically, about 100 people were
killed in regular cars in America on that day.
I think actually it's not as bad anymore.
It's like 50.
Now I'm not like 50.
But still, 50 times as many people were killed.
On that single day.
So how come those stories aren't headlines?
Well, the risk that we have, that's just part of the world.
Whereas the risks that of new technology,
that could be stopped.
And so it's very important not to allow it
until we're absolutely sure.
What if one of those cars kills you?
And again, proper opportunity cost reasoning response
to that.
We shouldn't allow driverless cars
because one of them might kill you.
What if one of those cars would kill someone you love?
What is the numerate response to that?
What if a regular car kills someone you love?
It's like, well, you can't worry about that kind of thing.
You'll never leave the house if you think that way.
So silly stuff.
So I think you probably see neighborhood bias most strongly
in laws that try to prevent firing,
try to prevent layoffs, try to prevent plant closures.
So things like that where there's
a set of laws designed to go and freeze existing employment
in place on the theory that if those jobs are lost,
that they'll never be replaced.
And again, also the idea of the point of a job
is to give someone an income.
It's not to produce stuff.
But again, of course, everyone had
a job that gave them an income and didn't produce anything.
What would those incomes buy?
There'd be nothing to buy.
And the whole idea of giving people an income
is parasitic upon production, which
brings me to my fundamental truth of economics,
that if people learn nothing else, they should learn that.
Since you're getting a PhD, you should
learn more than one truth.
But the truth is, if there's one lesson that I wanted people
to know above all others, the secret of mass consumption
is mass production.
Always focus on what causes production.
And all the complexities, just forget about them
because they are going to mislead you.
Just ask, will this increase the production of the world?
Then thumbs up.
This is pushing the world in the direction of prosperity.
And then a final big error that I
talked about, pessimistic bias, is a general tendency
to see a world getting worse, bad now,
and going to be even worse in the future.
This is, again, a big gap between economists
and the public, where economists at least
tend to see things as being not as bad as the public.
So even during a recession, a tendency
for the public to just think this is a permanent disaster,
or they will never improve.
And again, classic economist answer is,
this recession will end.
Every single previous one has people.
And what is a normal person's retort
to an economist pointing out a universal regularity
in the American economy?
This time it's different.
Oh, you don't understand.
This time there's new technology.
It's destroying jobs permanently.
All right.
And to me, the worst thing is when
economists turn against science itself
and make a generalization based upon the opposite of what
everything has occurred.
Yes, so I did tell you about my bet with Tyler Cowen
about unemployment.
Always worth repeating the story.
Yes, so during the last recession,
he had a book called The Great Stagnation,
and then followed up with Average is Over.
Both of them on the theme of, due to fundamental changes
in the real economy, the unemployment rate
is going to stay high for the indefinite future.
It's not just a short run recession,
despite the fact that it's always been that way before.
And he gave me 10 to 1 odds that the US unemployment rate would
not fall below 5% for the next 20 years,
and he lost in less than three years.
And what did I do?
I just bet upon history.
And in fact, I bet upon a very general pattern.
If you just go and look at all US unemployment data ever,
a very general pattern is that once the US unemployment rate
peaks, it goes back to, it falls by about 1 percentage point
per year, with a standard deviation of 0.2 percentage
points.
So really, if you just go and take a ruler
and look at the slopes of the declines,
you can move the ruler almost in parallel across the data
data without even, barely even needing to change the slope of the ruler.
So, the difference is sort of like when it bottoms out again. That has
varied a lot, but still, it goes up and then falls back down by
two to five percentage points. It's a very reliable rule.
And so, to me, actually
what's frightening about this is, it seems like this pattern
actually is hard for almost any economist to explain because
here's the thing. So, if you believe that the quality
of government policy varies over time, then, you know,
significantly, then we should see quite different slopes.
Right? So, you should see steep slopes when there's good policy, and
slow slopes when there's bad policy. But actually, the slopes are so constant
that it really makes you wonder, well, hmm.
So, do you want to say that we always have good policy during recessions?
Who wants to say that? You want to say we always have bad policy?
So, or do you want to say maybe policy isn't even all that important
and there's just a normal tendency for things to get back to normal
and the policy just isn't that big of a deal? You know, assuming maybe
the policy explains why there's that state of deviation that's not a perfect
forty-five degree line, like one percentage point per year, which is very close to the average.
So, maybe you can say, like, good policy gives you one point two
percentage point declines per year, and bad policy gives you point eight.
But, you know, at least to me, that is one of the most striking regularities
in macro, is just how constant that slope
of decline of unemployment is. Alright.
Yes. Alright.
Alright. So, questions about that? Yes.
Yes. Well, after he lost, then he said
that he really won the bet, because really the bet should have been about labor force
participation, which was responding more sluggishly.
Alright. Now, this sort of goes back to that Ted Lockian point
of you should specify the terms of victory in advance
so that you don't have infinite elasticity in redefining what counts as victory or not.
Right. So, that to me is crucial.
Right. And yet, so, you know, like it is my, like the bet was
supposed to be some sort of indication of his theory or not. And I said, look, the bet is
a vindication of whether your exact prediction was true or not.
Which then also goes to a more general point of the overall accuracy of predictions.
Although, for winning one bet, you can just say you got lucky. But if you have a big track
record of having your predictions wrong, then it's reasonable for
everyone, including you, to just accept my predictions aren't good.
So, if I happen to encounter a person calling later,
how differently would you recall the story?
Good question. Well, I think his version of the story will be,
Brian harangued me to bet him and made a big deal out of it and I never
saw this bet as being very significant as evidenced by the fact I only bet him $10 against his one.
Yes, I did. This was one where I wanted
to raise the stakes to the level high enough, like just
below the friendship destroying level.
So, I'm like, I'm only my hundred here with a thousand. Alright, no, too high.
I'm like, buy 50 to your 500. You're not going to stop being my friend over 500 bucks.
So, we'd only bet my one against his 10.
Yeah, assuming you like, a lot of, assuming you like, the other thing you like
to say is, this doesn't show anything that Brian knows any better than me because if either of us knew anything
we would have gone into financial markets and made a bet
on this. And I say, look, where's the financial market where I can bet on the
20 year unemployment rate? I don't even know any of that. And then
he'll say, well, but there's other things you could correlate with that. I don't really know.
My answer is, look, I have a strong view about this exact fact.
As for what his correlations are with a bunch of other things,
that's something where I don't know very much and I could easily be wrong. But, this one
thing I know, unemployment is not going to stay above, higher than 5%
for the next 20 years. That's crazy.
Let's see.
Alright, and let's see. So, other things on pessimism. So, to me
what is shocking is when people are pessimistic who have lived for more than 40 years.
Anyone who's nostalgic for the 80's, I completely
am aghast at what they thought was so great about it.
In the 1980's you had told me what would occur.
I really am pretty sure that I would have said, that's ridiculous science fiction, no way,
that's, you're lying. So, there will be a machine
which allows anyone to find out anything, to read any book,
hear any music, ever, and it will be free.
Right? You told me that in 1985, I just want to laugh.
That's absurd. It would have seemed as absurd as saying, we'll all have jetpacks.
Back then the jetpacks would have seemed more plausible to me
in 1985. So, I mean, I have lived long enough to see
miracles occur, and yet people still
find reason to complain. And again, this is something where
when I was a teenager I was not making a list of
predictions to go and anticipate this day so I could go and show you the accurate, like,
whether or not things were better or worse than what I was predicting. But,
it does seem completely amazing to me what has occurred.
And, again, what you could do is actually just see whether anyone was predicting
what occurred in advance. So, that is doable. Right? You can actually go
back to all the works of the time and just try to see, was there anyone who said
anything remotely like what occurred? So, I know this has barely been done,
but this is a potential topic for Peric's, is just to see how
accurate were people's past predictions? And if past predictions have a
systematic error, then it seems likely that our current predictions have the same error
as well. So, we'll continue with this next class.
