of the midterm as a bureaucratic entity.
But we will talk, we should have some time at the end to talk
about the actual substance of the midterm.
So what you're going to need to know,
you can ask me questions.
Oh, yeah, final, final, final.
There's already been a midterm, right?
All right, yes, there has already been a midterm.
Yeah, well, the longer you teach,
the more difficult these questions become.
All right, and let's see, yes,
so we're going to finish the material.
Then I will take any questions that you have
on any material whatsoever that we have done.
And that will be the end of the course,
other than the final exam.
Right now, as I think I mentioned,
this class is not just an integral part
of microeconomics, it's also a trailer for a class
that I'll be teaching in spring of 2018.
See, I don't remember who's doing it in the fall,
but anyway, so if you like this subject,
if you think this is interesting,
you can specialize in this,
and you can become a full-fledged public choice
economist, as many other graduates
of our PhD program have become.
On the other hand, if you don't like it,
then it's just one week, and you're done.
So you never have to worry about it again.
All right.
All right, so he's doing the following,
yeah, that makes sense.
All right, so just starting with the basics.
So how many of you have ever heard
of the median voter theorem at some point?
All right, good, we'll just do a very quick version of it.
All right, so first of all,
let us assume that voters' preferences are what we call
single-peaked, single-peaked preferences.
This means everybody has an ideal point or a bliss point,
and utility declines monotonically
as policy moves away from it.
This would mean, for example,
if you're going to have a bliss temperature of 74 degrees,
and then your utility goes down automatically,
the further away you get, the lower your utility becomes.
All right, well, wouldn't everything be like that?
No, not necessarily.
So, for example, suppose that you like skiing,
but you also like swimming.
In that case, you might have double-peaked preferences,
where you might have one peak at, say, 33 degrees, 32 degrees,
say, so that is the warmest temperature
at which you can have snow.
And then as it gets colder, that's where snow is.
So, that's the worst for you, because then you're snowing
under less pleasant conditions.
But as it gets warmer, that's also less pleasant,
because then your probability of having snow
or the duration of snow goes down.
And then that could go down for a while,
and then it could go up again,
and then you might have 74 degrees, the speed drops more,
and then it goes down again.
So, that would be a case where we have two peaks, right?
Okay? Or to take a political example, Lenin,
your Lenin had a slogan, the worse the better,
the worse the better.
By which he meant that he actually wanted worse things
to happen, so that there could be,
that people would be extremely unhappy,
and then there could be a revolution,
and he could establish a communist dictatorship,
rather than having an intermediate option.
So, he preferred the rule of the czar, who was much further away
from him, than the slightly more modern Marxists,
who he considered the very worst,
because they were the ones that were going to put forward
reformist measures, which would prevent the possibility
of the really good thing, a dictatorship run by Lenin.
Or one other example, during the Vietnam War,
one view commonly expressed was, we shouldn't be there at all,
but if we're there, we should be there to win.
Right? So, either do nothing, or go in with your nuclear weapons,
but don't do the intermediate thing.
That again, so it would be something
like two peaks in the preferences.
All right.
Now, suppose we've got a two-party
or a two-candidate election,
and then imagine the voters care about,
and are perfectly informed about, just one issue,
which is liberal versus conservative,
or of course, that could be left versus right.
All right.
And then, assume the winner,
the electoral rule is winner takes all,
so whoever gets more votes automatically wins.
We will assume that all ties resolve by flipping a coin.
In the real world, of course, elections are almost never ties,
and so we don't have to worry about what the tie rule is.
There is, in fact, a very detailed tie rule
for U.S. presidential elections.
A student once emailed it to me.
It's seven steps.
All right.
But what if all seven things are satisfied?
Maybe there's some final thing, but anyway.
But in theoretical models, ties happen all the time.
And so, it is important when you're doing electoral models,
to come up with your rule for what happens under ties.
All right.
Then, we need to make an assumption
about candidate motivation, which is they want to win.
Right? They want to win.
Right? And particularly, they care more
about everything else put together.
I'm just having a conversation with Steve Pearlstein,
where he claimed this was a ridiculous assumption.
I was puzzled by why anyone would consider it ridiculous.
Just saying, well, just look at history
and the horrible things people have done to gain power.
Doesn't that indicate they really want power
and will do these things in order to get it?
But he assured me if I actually mess
with politicians, I should change my mind.
I suppose it's possible.
It doesn't seem likely.
All right.
I also said that you can't really believe what people
like that say, because they're trying to tell you what you want
to hear.
And people don't want a politician
to say, I seek power.
All right.
Doesn't mean they don't.
Right? It's just not a good thing to say,
especially if you're seeking power.
You don't say, you want power.
You don't say, I seek absolute power.
You say, I just want to save the people here.
The last thing I want is power for myself.
Anyway. So, we assume that they care about winning more
than everything else put together.
And then, last assumption is they can compete
in exactly one way by taking a stand on the issue.
It's not even an issue.
It's just only one issue in a simple model.
All right.
Now, if we go and graph this distribution
of the bliss points, this shows there is that density of people
who consider that their favorite thing.
And there's that density of people who consider
that their favorite thing.
All right.
Now, notice, since this is only a distribution of belief points
or other bliss points,
these people might have very different utility functions.
So, this, one of the, some people
like this might have very symmetric utility functions.
But a person, another, a person could have exactly the same bliss
point but could have a very slow fade on this side.
And a very, or excuse me, very fast fade on this side
and a very slow fade on that side.
So, you both have the same maximum, the same first choice.
And yet, one person could be indifferent between moves
in a liberal or conservative direction.
But another person could say, look, this is the right amount
of liberalism, which is a lot, but anyone more liberal
than me is crazy.
Whereas, you can be a lot less liberal
than me and still be an okay person.
So, that could be your view as well.
Okay. All right.
Now, what, oh, yes, yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Now once we realize, so this is our distribution here.
Now we can imagine going and putting down
just randomly our initial positions.
So suppose this is the,
what's called the D party, Democratic Party.
And this is our Republican Party platform initially.
Now given the assumptions that I just told you,
we can divide this diagram into three regions.
Region one, these are the people
who definitely vote for the Democrats
because they are more liberal than the Democrats.
And if people have single peak preferences,
you always choose which evil?
The lesser evil or greater evil.
Yes, if you have single peak preferences,
you always choose the lesser evil.
That's the nature of single peak preferences,
is saying which is the lesser evil and I will do that.
All right, similarly over here we have region three.
These are the people whose bliss point is more conservative
than the conservative opposition,
so they will all vote for the conservative candidates.
And then we have people in region two.
Now it's very tempting to say,
oh well all that happens is you split it.
But we don't have enough assumptions to say that.
Because remember it's possible that this guy,
that someone here could have a very fast fall
in their utility function on the right
and a very slow fall on the left,
so a person who's very close to the Republican
might still prefer the Democrats.
That is possible.
All right, now you may say,
oh well this is, not only did you make a bunch of assumptions
but you didn't even make enough of them.
We need even more to get an answer.
But it turns out that this model still can be solved
with no more assumptions than I already gave you.
How can that be done?
Well, think about being a paid political advisor
to either side.
And you understand the nature of the model,
so the Democrat comes and says,
what do I need to do in order to get more votes?
And in the context of this model,
what is the right answer going to be?
Move to the middle.
Yes, what's that?
Move to the middle.
Yes, move to the middle, moderate.
Moderate, Democrats.
Move over here, because when you do that,
you expand area one, so now you scoop up
all those extra votes for sure,
because now those people are more liberal than you.
And you don't lose a single vote in there
because preferences are single-peat.
So at minimum you gain these
and you don't lose a single person in there
and so you have increased your vote share.
Now, since the liberal got more conservative
in order to win, does the conservative
also get more conservative to win?
No.
No, the conservative does what in order to win?
Moderates.
Moderates.
Once again, he moderates.
So the advisor to the conservative says,
all right, I'm gonna go in there.
And then again, you scoop up those votes for sure
and you don't lose a single one in there.
Right, now of course, this is just like
the kind of thing where you're in a market
and there's a shortage, so you raise the price a bit
and there's still a shortage,
and so you raise the price again.
You raise the price again until something happens.
So it makes sense to tell the Democrat to moderate again
and the Republican to moderate again.
And if they always wanna keep moderating,
moving closer to the other side,
then the only equilibrium situation is gonna be one
where the platform of the Democrat
doubles the platform of the Republican.
All right, and so in equilibrium,
the platforms cannot be different
because you can always improve your position
by moving closer to the other candidates.
That's our first equilibrium condition
in the median voter model.
Okay, yes, so literally that means that one party
can just copy the platform of the other
and then switch out the worst Democrat or Republican
and that would be the end of it, okay,
if you take it very literally.
Okay, so, and there's a special name for this.
This is called the platform convergence
where the platforms converge, they become the same.
Like there's a famous line from I believe George Wallace
who said, there's not a dime's worth of difference
between the two parties, right?
Which people usually say to make it sound like
there's not competition and democracy.
But actually in this model, that is beside the competition.
Just like we see that all the wheat farmers
charge the same price, ah, collusion, right?
No, the more normal assumption is competition, right?
Because with competition, anyone who charges a higher price
than anybody else loses all their business.
So you don't wanna do that.
All right, but saying the platforms converge
does not answer the question to what do they converge?
So what do they converge to?
And now I'm going to lead the witness to get to the answer.
I didn't invent this myself, of course.
Have you ever had a math problem where the teacher said,
let's just try a solution of the form
Y equals tangent of U, see what happens, right?
And it almost always works.
And of course your teacher didn't come up with it.
You got it from his teacher who also didn't come up with it.
Got it from his teacher, sell it and then gouse.
They didn't.
All right, so similarly here, I didn't come up with this.
My teacher didn't come up with this.
But somewhere, someone came up with it.
I think it was Anthony Downs, it's Duncan Black,
if I remember, right?
Maybe, all right.
Anyway, so first leading question.
Is it possible that they could both converge
to a position that is above the median distribution?
So say, could they both converge to the 80th percentile?
And the answer of course is no,
because if you're both at the 80th,
one party could move to the 79th percentile
and then get a minimum of 79% of the votes
and win for sure.
Okay, so and of course if you are at the 52nd percentile,
one guy just moves to the 51st percentile
and gets a minimum of 51% of the votes for sure
and therefore wins.
So we've got the next equilibrium condition saying
that the platforms to which they converge
must be greater than or equal to the bliss point
of the median person in the distribution.
All right, now we can go and do another thought experiment.
Say, could they both converge to the 48th percentile?
So they both converge to something below the median.
All right, and the answer of course is no,
because if you're both at the 48th,
one person goes to the 49th percentile
and then gets at least 51% of the votes.
So we can therefore say that,
well, they must converge to something greater
than or equal to the median.
All right, and what is the number
that is both greater than or equal to something
and less than or equal to something?
Yes, the thing, it is the thing.
The number greater than or equal to seven
and less than or equal to seven is seven.
All right, so parties converge
to the bliss point of the median voter, right?
And this is the famous median voter theorem,
which if the parties are named Democrats and Republicans,
says the Democratic platform equals the Republican platform
equals the bliss point of the median voter.
Now, there are many implications of this.
The most obvious one is if you are trying to understand
why policy changes over time,
what is the natural candidate for what has changed?
Median voter.
So why come in 1900 there wasn't any gay marriage?
Median voter didn't want it.
And how come now we got it?
Median voter does want it.
That's the simple story.
Now you say, well, that's wrong
because the Supreme Court and everything else.
All right, and that's probably true, but still.
If you were to say, all right, fine.
Now, maybe the Supreme Court gave it to the country
10 years before it was going to,
but if the Supreme Court in 1900 tried declaring gay marriage
something was gonna happen, right?
Something crazy might happen.
Like they might go and first of all, they'd say, what?
Of course marriage should be gay
because marriages should be happy.
And that's what gay means.
And then you might say, no, no, no, that's not what I mean.
I mean something else.
Like, wait, have you ever explained it
to someone who's in their eighties?
There's just a great deal of confusion
about what in the world you're saying.
Right?
Men don't marry men.
It's like, well, now they do.
No, they don't.
All right.
Just, well, the median position has changed
and so now they do.
It's like, all right.
So that's the idea.
Or if you're saying like,
why do they have socialized medicine in Britain
but not in the United States?
The voter in Britain wants socialized medicine.
The median voter in the United States does not want it.
Why is it that immigration restrictions exist
in the United States?
Yes, the median voter, who believe that is the person
who votes in the United States wants it.
You have to be very careful in specifying,
well, there's lots of voters in India who don't like it.
But the voters in India don't vote in American elections.
And so their view does not count
and is not what politicians here are competing for.
Now, we don't have a lot of time to go over the empirics
but it is fair to say that this is an extremely
informative model in the same way the supply
and demand model is extremely informative about markets.
You know, does supply and demand explain everything?
No.
But on the other hand, if you know supply and demand model,
you can explain a lot more about the world
than other people can.
And furthermore, supply and demand model works way better
than it really should when you think about it
because it seems to actually explain lots of things
even in industries that aren't atomistic
and there's other issues.
So it doesn't exactly fit the model
but it's still very predictably accurate.
And I will just foreshadow and say,
when you go into the data,
the median voter model does way better
than you would ever expect.
It's one of these uncannily predictive models.
Which again, the main problem people have is,
well, surely America don't want farm subsidies
and so the model's wrong.
It's like, hmm, what makes you so sure?
Well, it's not in people's interests.
What makes you so sure people vote for their interests?
I guess, I just kind of figured they would.
Well, why don't we go and look at the data
and see what Americans think about farm subsidies
and then you will go, wow, they're super popular.
The model actually works.
I guess.
Yes, what is this an application of the hotel and game?
Of the, which game?
Hotel and game.
Hotel and game.
Hotel and game?
Yeah.
Yes, so it's similar to the hotel and game
except in the hotel and game,
normally firms are actually not maximizing profits
and so they don't wanna do full convergence
in the hotel and game.
Because in the hotel and game,
if you have full convergence,
then you actually earn no profits.
Whereas this is one where you don't worry,
what you want is to win, right?
So in the hotel and game,
it's you aren't looking to have the larger share of profits,
you're looking to just get to maximize profits
and you don't care if you get more profits
but it's a smaller share, it's not a problem.
So the hotel and game has diversions to some degree.
But yes, it's a very similar structure.
Yes.
If I'm understanding the median voter theorem correctly,
wouldn't it suggest that most elections
would be 50, 50, 51, 49%?
So that is correct, yes.
And then of course, when applying the models
to the real world, you could have the really high threshold
and say, if the election isn't 50, 50 exactly,
the model's wrong.
Which is what a stickler could say, certainly.
On the other hand, you could go
and just look at the distribution
of what the vote shares are
and they are pretty tightly clustered around 50%,
at least for two-party elections normally.
So if you're looking around for when does this not work?
So once in a while, you'll get a party
that gets taken over by an extremist faction
that seems to care more about
having a philosophically correct platform than winning,
such as the Labour Party in England now,
or the Labour Party in England
in the 1970s through the 1980s.
And then you can have a period
where one party is crushing them all the time.
So if one party seems like they just stopped trying
to appeal to the median voter,
then you can get this kind of divergence.
The other main case is when you look
at very local government,
then you'll often get, again,
so especially like urban government,
very common to get these very lopsided percentages.
So like 70% or 80% for the Democratic candidate
in a city like New York or San Francisco,
or sometimes the flip side for suburban mayors
in very conservative places.
So that's a more interesting counter example.
So that's one where it really looks like
people actually have an aversion to the party.
It's not just the platforms,
but the party themselves is disgusting to them.
Although this does correctly predict, for example,
that what is the Republican Party of Massachusetts like?
It's a very liberal party.
What is the Democratic Party of Texas like?
They're very conservative.
It's the pro-guns, pro-life Democrats down in Texas.
Whereas if you want to go
and become the Republican governor of Massachusetts,
you're gonna be pro-choice, like William Allen was.
Right, and actually Romney.
Yeah, William Allen, but Romney too.
Romney, and actually, if you were to have an example
of how power hungry politicians are.
It would seem to me that it would be a very strong sign of power hunger if you could repeatedly
change your view on abortion without any actual intellectual argument whatsoever.
Because it's like, look, either you're murdering babies or you are depriving women of their
freedom and you're going to change your mind on that issue just to get power?
Twice?
Now, again, I'm sure Steve Pearlstein would say if you just met Romney, he isn't that
strongly, but if you just met him and you realized he's a good guy, maybe I'm just a
less forgiving person than you are.
To me, a person that could change their mind on that just to win power would be a totally
corrupt, despicable person.
But maybe that's just me in puritanical ways.
Yes?
Fred, I didn't understand why the assumption showed that a movement towards the median
would gain you more than you lose.
Ah, okay, great question.
So people have single-peat preferences.
So the people that are more extreme than you always vote for you.
So if you move from here to here, you automatically get 100% of those people.
And then, since preferences are single-peat, you move closer to every person in the middle.
And if preferences are single-peat, someone moving closer to you never makes you dislike
the war.
So think about this.
So suppose that, let's see, so we're over here, so if the other party's here and you're
here and then you move to there, all of these people here at least dislike you less.
All those people dislike you less.
That's the thing, it's the other side you should have.
You have like a socialist.
Why do these people automatically like you more?
Yeah, you have the socialist and you're moving more towards the Republican.
Ah, well again, because they definitely like you less when you move, but you're still the
lesser evil.
And with single-peat preferences, people always, invariably, without exception, choose the
lesser evil.
So yeah, these people say you're getting worse, but you're still closer to them than the other,
closer to them.
So the slope of the curve doesn't matter.
Yes, exactly.
That is the key set up.
Now, in a real class, we'll talk about how in the real world, extremists often will actually
boycott the election if you sell out too much.
And that very small tail has wagged the dog the number of recent elections.
It's just worrying, well, when are these extremists going to dump us?
Yeah, Ash?
Why is it called the Median Voter Theorem instead of the Law of One Political Party?
Ah, well, Median Voter Theorem is more specific.
It doesn't just say that there's only going to be one position.
It says that it will converge to the bliss point of the median voter.
And the very best evidence for the median voter is if you just look at data, for any
question that can be phrased is should we have less of something, the same, or more?
If you look at questions phrased that way, let's see, the median voter, the status quo
is almost always here.
Almost always where you are, with a very short list of exceptions.
All right, I think we should move on.
Now we just assumed that voters had perfect information about politics, which seems ridiculous.
So they're very far from having perfect information.
And remember, surge theory says that people are going to look at, or we should look at
the marginal cost and expected marginal gain of getting political knowledge.
But then there is this great fact about politics, which infuses all good public choice anyway.
And that is the probability that one vote changes the outcome of any important election
is approximately what?
Zero.
Zero.
Yes, a very important result.
People do argue, well, maybe it's as high as one in a million.
And then others say, no, it's more like one in 10 to the 100.
So in a way, that's a wide range of opinion.
But on the other hand, they're all approximately zero.
So that's important to keep in mind.
So once you remember this basic fact, the probability that one vote changes the outcome
of an election is approximately zero, this means that if you find out some new information,
what are the odds this will actually improve the policy you live under?
So step one, acquire the information.
Step two, if the information suggests vote differently.
Step three, what's step three?
Question mark, question mark.
Yes.
Step three is the same thing happens that would have happened anyway, with overwhelming
likelihood.
So the expected benefit of voting formation, at least on the surface, seems to be zero,
approximately zero.
And in general, if something has a positive marginal cost and has zero marginal benefit,
how much should we expect people to have?
Zero.
None, right?
So the marginal cost of, say, having, what would it be?
Marginal cost of having live barracuda in your home, positive.
Marginal benefit, zero.
So how many live barracuda do you have in your home?
None.
Right?
That is the normal result.
Okay.
So if you've got positive marginal cost, your marginal benefit, privately optimal quantity
of political information is zero, and this is the origin of the famous concept of rational
ignorance.
Famous concept of rational ignorance, right?
When knowledge has no practical benefits and time is money, then ignorance, which is really
a decision not to know stuff.
Like, how can you decide not to know something?
Same way you decide not to go to New York today.
Just don't put any effort into it and it doesn't happen.
Right?
You don't put any effort, you put very little effort into learning about politics, and then
you have as much information as you can figure out just by walking around, which is not much.
Having better knowledge, like, you know, like having no marginal benefit to you is because
actually you won't, like you're a single, like you're a single person.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
Yes, yes.
That, yes.
That's why the political advantage, at least, is essentially zero for any normal person.
Of course, if you were an active politician, then it could be very different.
Then this information could be what allows you to blackmail your opponents into doing
what you want, right?
Or tells you that the assassin is coming and then you leave the room, so you're not there
when the assassin arrives.
So that's very important information, but for most of us, doesn't really change anything.
Yes?
Is some amount of search required to, like, find out that you have no facts?
That, yeah, that is a good question.
So we don't really have time to go into it in much depth.
I do have a favorite simple argument for why, in fact, almost everyone has figured out that
this is really true, whatever they say, and this is just propose that you have to pay
$100 to vote and see how people react.
I think there should be just a $100 fee to vote, just to take people serious about it.
You see people's heads explode, and why do they explode?
Because they think, hardly anyone would vote then.
Hmm.
That sounds likely to me, but why?
I mean, if it really were so important to vote, if voting were such an effective way,
or people just didn't understand this, then it should be easy to get people to pay $100
to vote.
They'll pay $100 for a cell phone for a month.
So why not $100 to vote?
Why would there be this incredible elasticity?
And the obvious answer is because people know this in their bones.
They know that you are paying something for something that's almost certain not to actually
do anything for you.
Or, one other less conclusive, but perhaps more amusing proof is, think about the reaction
someone has when they forget their keys.
Oh, I forgot my keys, and now I have to drive home, this is a pain.
Versus, you forgot to vote yesterday.
Oh, that's a shame.
Oh man, I feel really bad about that.
Okay, now let's get on with life.
Because that's something where you did not in fact screw up in terms of your own life,
and you know it very well.
Okay.
All right.
Now, of course, empirically, it is not exactly true that people know zero about politics.
Most people in this room know something about politics.
In fact, you would probably be amazed at how much you know compared to most people in America.
So it is likely that the average person in here is at the 95th percentile.
And if you think, oh, I barely know anything.
Then you're probably at like the 88th percentile.
You think you barely know anything because you're comparing yourself to other people
in your social circle who are statistically very likely to be well informed.
And if you go and give a test, most people do, can name the president.
So most Americans can name the president.
And also, most people know the term is four years.
Once you get past those two facts, though, then knowledge really takes a quick slide.
Even things like every state has two senators, it's 50%.
How many times were you taught this and tested on this, K through 12?
At least five times, maybe ten times.
And is two a hard number to remember?
It doesn't seem like a hard number to remember.
It's the concept of per state.
Yes.
It's a division problem.
Yes, yes.
All right.
So, anyway, empirically, it's not exactly true that people know zero about politics.
But it's actually not that far from the truth when you really look at it.
And things that you might have trouble believing most people couldn't know, they don't know.
At the height of the Cold War, over half of Americans didn't know the Soviet Union was
not in NATO.
The whole point of NATO is a military alliance to resist the Soviet Union.
Right?
And I think also, like, half thought the Soviet Union was on the other side of World War II,
which is a little more forgivable if they were just mixed up between the first two years
and the last four years.
But that's not why they didn't understand.
It's not a case of a little knowledge is a dangerous thing.
It's a case of no knowledge is a dangerous thing.
All right.
Now, the median voter model doesn't have any place for special interests.
But of course, people who actually know a lot about politics generally do believe that
special interests are important.
And again, the idea of special interests is a small group of activists behind the scenes
that are preventing the majority from getting what it wants.
The deep state, for example, is stopping government from doing what it wants or what the people
wants.
Or it could be teachers unions.
Or it could be veterans or policemen.
Or it could be the steel industry.
Lots of possibilities.
And the simple idea behind all this is that special interests don't have the same problem.
Because special interests, their probability of making a difference is actually pretty
large.
So if you're the sugar industry and you are active in sugar policy, what are the odds
that the leading sugar growers could actually change policy?
Pretty high.
Like, who else cares about sugar policy?
So who else is bothering to testify and make calls and threaten to vote differently over
sugar policy other than the sugar industry?
So then they would have a high probability of decisiveness.
And if they have a high probability of decisiveness, they do have a reason to know what's going
on.
And knowledge is power.
We stay calm and story.
So special interests are well informed because it really matters for them.
And they can really make a difference.
And regular voters do not know what's going on because so little.
So little of it actually depends upon them.
And there's a famous mantra in public choice, concentrated benefits, diffuse costs.
So when you're meditating, concentrated benefits, diffuse costs.
Concentrated benefits, diffuse costs.
So we've been saying it for a long time.
Okay.
All right.
Questions?
Questions?
Yes?
Is there anything like the median voter theorem that applies to legislatures?
Yes, well, it's a very natural extension.
It's actually just look at whatever the body of voters is.
Think about, you know, like what the median person in that body wants.
So common story about how the direct election of senators changed the composition of the
Senate.
Back in the old days, a senator had to be really popular with the state legislature.
And so you got very stodgy distinguished statesmen.
All right.
And now they're directly elected.
So you get less dodgy, less distinguished statesmen.
Common story.
You could also think about how you talk to voters.
So the median voter in the Supreme Court, we might actually even know his name.
Right?
Who is that person?
The swing voters.
Kennedy, maybe?
Kennedy's a plausible choice.
All right.
So Kennedy's the swing voter.
All right.
So if you were arguing for the Supreme Court, really you are trying to just appeal to Kennedy.
Like Justice Kennedy.
Yeah?
All right.
Like what about me?
Well, we know how you're going to vote.
You're trying to just appeal to Kennedy.
But you're arguing for the Supreme Court.
You don't give you speak in a dignified scholarly tone because that's what Kennedy wants you
to talk to.
Whereas if we're Justice Trump or the swing voter, then it would be a different kind of
rhetoric.
Right?
You might not even need to know the law.
You might just go and start talking about how somebody is sad or whatever.
And that could swing that one.
Right?
OK.
All right.
Now.
So rational ignorance.
But how much does rational ignorance matter?
Well there are really two groups, two schools of thought on rational ignorance in social
science.
There's a school of thought of people who have no interest in data.
And there's a school of thought of people who do have some interest in data.
All right.
The people who don't have any interest in data often will just deny rational ignorance
and say, well, I don't see any reason to think they'd be ignorant.
Prove to me that they are.
All right.
But, and they say, well, here's some evidence.
Oh, all right.
But anyway, out of the people who ever looked at the data, there is a very strong consensus
that rational ignorance is rampant.
Certainly that ignorance is rampant.
Anyway, whether or not it's rational.
So among people who know the data, to actually deny that voters are ignorant is very rare.
Because it just goes against everything they've seen.
Right?
And especially political scientists are generally so shocked by the empirics.
Because if you think you know a lot about politics, they really know a lot.
They stay up all night watching electoral returns and stuff like that.
And then to find out that most people have never even heard of the candidates.
Most people don't know which party controls the House.
They don't, they think that the House, that House members serve terms of four years.
They think really wrong stuff.
So and that's pretty bad.
Right?
Because it's basically even odds of just guessing which party controls the House.
So the actual level of knowledge of it is so, is just incredibly low.
All right.
But anyway, once people go and admit that the public is rationally ignorant, as all
reasonable interpretation of the data says, then you can either go and say, my God, this
is terrible.
Or you can say, ah, maybe it works anyway.
Maybe democracy with people who don't know, where almost nobody knows much of anything
could actually work really well.
In particular, as common say, look, there's a big difference between the ignorance of
the individual voter and the ignorance of the system.
The system could be very knowledgeable, even though the individuals are not knowledgeable.
Just like in the stock market, almost everyone, almost no one knows what's going on.
But still, the prices reflect change in the world very quickly and accurately, it seems.
All right.
So here's the argument about how it's possible that the democratic system could work well
despite colossal ignorance, ubiquitous and severe ignorance of the people that are participating.
And the heart of the argument is this.
So individual voters are poorly informed, and as we know from rational expectations,
what do poorly informed people do?
Flip a coin.
That's what rational expectations tell us they do, and let's just quickly say that and
move on.
All right.
And then, of course, elections are based on aggregate opinions of millions of people,
and then there's a basic law of statistics, the law of large numbers.
You know, the law of large numbers.
You can't just say, oh, I'm going to vote for this guy.
I'm going to vote for that guy.
You can't just say, oh, I'm going to vote for that guy.
You can't just say, oh, I'm going to vote for that guy.
You can't just say, oh, I'm going to vote for that guy, and then there's a basic law
of statistics, the law of large numbers.
You've all heard it, right?
The law of large numbers says that random errors tend to cancel out in percentage terms.
So if you have three voters, the odds that, you know, the odds that you have three voters,
that ends, so what is it?
Well, there's two voters besides yourself, and each of them go votes, you know, yes,
50% of the time, no, 50% of the time.
And if you know what you're doing, then there's only a one in four chance that the bad thing
still prevails, right?
And as the number of voters goes up, the odds of that, if the ratio of informed people to
uninformed remains at one informed versus two uninformed, the odds that the informed
voters will prevail gets very high because you're going to get, as the number goes up,
the percentage breakdown of the uninformed is going to get closer and closer to 50% exactly,
right?
So it's like when you play a million rounds of roulette, right?
The odds of every number coming up are going to get very close to 138.
Right now there's 36 plus the zero, there's the zero, zero on the roulette wheel.
Okay.
So random errors tend to cancel out in percentage terms.
So even if there's a lot of randomness at the individual level, as long as there's millions
of voters, all that randomness would pretty much cancel out, which means that the informed
voters are going to decide the outcome.
Example, suppose we've got 90% of voters literally know zero.
So they don't know anything.
They don't even know what country they're in.
And then 10% of people know everything.
So they're blocking Wikipedia, blocking any Wikipedias.
And imagine we have an election between Hitler and a normal guy.
Hitler and a normal guy.
Now you go to the uninformed people and say, so everyone's waiting in line to vote.
You go to the uninformed people and say, so who are you going to vote for, Hitler or a
normal guy?
And the uninformed people say, I don't know.
Flip my coin when I get there.
All right.
This seems very scary.
But if there were a lot of these voters, then the division is going to come out very close
to 45 percentage points for Hitler, 45 percentage points for a normal guy.
You may then be sweating, saying, my God, Hitler's at 45% of the votes.
Doesn't take much more to put him over to the top.
Let us assume that informed people would never vote for Hitler.
It's a little awkward fact that Hitler did well with pressers and stuff like that.
But let's not worry about that.
All right.
So figure that people knew what was going on would never vote for Hitler.
So we'll get zero percentage points of them.
The normal guy gets all 10 of them.
And so normal guy wins with 55% of the votes.
This is this process at work, saying that if the uninformed people vote randomly and
the informed people vote for the better candidates, then the better candidate will win with near
certainty as long as there's a reasonably large number of voters.
All right.
Now this result has a very special name.
It's called the miracle of aggregation.
The miracle of aggregation.
Because it implies that a highly uninformed electorate, notice, this is 90% completely
uninformed, yields exactly the same electoral outcomes as a 100% informed electorate.
So you would either have just a few informed people or everyone be informed and the vote
tallies will differ.
But the winning politician will be the same regardless.
Okay.
Now of course if we're literally 100% then it would be 50% chance for Hitler.
But as long as we've got a few percent of reliable informed people and as long as the
uninformed flip coins and the fair coins, then we are safe from Hitler.
Oh, you know I was in the back actually and then you.
So if people inherently know their probability of changing the outcome is zero and they're
uninformed, why do they even vote?
That is a great question.
You know let me play you a song.
I actually got my
One possibility, of course, is that they're doing it
to impress their friends, right?
This is the Robin Hanson theory about almost all that's going
on is, let me just do it so people don't hassle you.
That does sort of just push it back.
Well, why are people out on you for failing to do something
that where there's no actual benefit to you or them, in fact?
The other main theory is the civic duty theory
that many people feel like some kind
of content idea I should do it regardless of the consequences.
Although this combines with a weird agnosticism
about who you should vote for.
So, you know, the most common, so there's a book
by Jason Foss where Jason Bender called The Ethics of Voting
where he talks about what he calls the common sense theory
of voting which says it's incredibly morally important
that you vote for somebody or other,
but it makes almost no moral difference at all
who you vote for.
And that, he points out in the book,
is a very strange theory, right?
Akin to a bunch of people being in a surgical room
and saying, look, it doesn't really matter where you chop
into this person, but it's very important
that you participate in the surgery.
Just pick up a scalpel and do something.
That's what's important.
Isn't that completely reversed?
Isn't the only important thing that you do it right?
And if you don't know what you're doing,
the important thing that you not participate and get
out of the way of people who can actually save lives?
But, and he runs with this in the book,
but Jason Bender's view remains a minority position,
strangely, despite overpowering logic.
All right.
And he's doing well in Germany, so somehow.
He's going to be the mayor of Potsdam,
invited him to give a talk.
A keynote address, in fact.
So, it's a weird world.
It just keeps getting stranger.
All right.
Anyway, why do they call it the miracle?
Well, if you've ever heard of medieval alchemy
where you say, okay, we take 90% lead, 10% gold,
hocus pocus, and then boom, pure gold.
That would be a miracle, right?
And it also doesn't work.
But this is something that if the assumptions are true,
it does work.
You really could, in theory, actually get a democracy
where almost no one is informed,
and yet it does exactly what a perfectly informed electorate
would do.
Okay. All right.
So, I guess.
Yes. There do have to be some informed people.
That is correct.
So, well, so it's not consistent
with 100% rational ignorance, but it is consistent
with, say, 90% rational ignorance.
Right? And the real, you know, if we're being empirical,
you should never expect things to be 100% perfect.
Right? Actually, we should move on a bit because we have
so much to get through.
But if you're really fascinated, of course,
there's always taking the full class.
There's 14 weeks for questions.
All right.
Now, you can analyze this politician-voter relationship
just like a principal agent problem.
Remember, we talked about principal agent problems.
And I think we even talked about the probability of punishment
and the severity of punishment at some point.
So, simple model just says the politicians will do what voters
want, and the benefit of doing what voters want is greater
than the benefit of shirking.
Remember, shirking is just the politician doing whatever he
wants for whatever reason he wants.
It could be they're lazy.
Could be they're corrupt.
Could be that they just disagree with their supporters.
All possibilities.
But anyway, whatever that is, we call shirking,
minus the probability of punishment times the severity
of punishment if you do something bad.
Now, if you go and put in a really low probability,
then it pretty much looks like politicians, like that rounds
down to zero, and then politicians always do whatever
they feel like and ignore voters.
All right?
So, it seems like voter rational ignorance implies
that so-called democratically elected politicians can do
almost anything they want.
But Gary Becker observed that there's an algebra
that can save the world.
All right?
And the algebra that can save the world is to go and put D
over on a resistance to solve for D and get the result
that we just need to make D, which is the damages
or the punishment that we inflict upon corrupt politicians
or shirking politicians when we catch them.
And that just needs to be equal to benefit of shirking minus
benefit of doing what voters want.
Divide all that by P, and we then impose that.
Right? So, if you were caught on camera taking a $1 bribe,
voters could either say, well, what are we going to do?
Or, because now, if we catch them, when we,
the few times we catch them, we need to rain hellfire
down upon them, and then they would then,
this will keep a lot of them honest.
It's like any time your parents ever caught you doing something
bad, and then they harshly punish you,
anyone ever been harshly punished for a small offense
by their parents, and then you whine and say, it's not fair.
And then, if your parents are Beckerian,
they will say, I'm also punishing you
for all the time that I didn't catch you.
Right? So, I need to give a really harsh punishment
when I do catch you, because it's so hard to catch you.
You're so sneaky.
And, therefore, you will be afraid to go
and break the rules, because a small chance
of getting caught with a horrible punishment,
if you lose your car for a year, won't be worth it.
Okay. Now, what's interesting about this is it does seem
to me that, theoretically, voters do have a way
of controlling politicians,
even when they are highly ignorant,
which is just to very harshly punish whatever bad information
is revealed.
Right? Now, again, of course, if P is literally zero,
then this is not a solution.
Then you need an infinite punishment.
You can't inflict an infinite punishment.
But it means that as long as there is some chance
of accidental discovery,
and in the real world there's always a chance to get caught.
Right? Yeah.
So, any Wikipedia article you read about a smart criminal,
well, why are they in Wikipedia?
Because they got caught, and they messed something up.
Right? So, and similarly with the politicians.
Like, no one will ever discover that I'm cheating
with an intern.
How could they?
Right? Or, of course, there's the Richard Dixon.
How would anyone ever find out that I'm covering up Watergate?
Oh, right.
I forgot that I tape record all my conversations.
No. Hmm.
Wasn't someone turning off the tapes?
No. Right?
And then, you know, so that's the actual story.
Then you try releasing it heavily redacted,
but then you can't just black out the entire transcript
and say I complied.
All right.
Now, let us then move on to my great nemesis.
I have several nemeses, but Donald Whitman is my first one,
my first love.
All right.
All right.
Just as a matter of strategy, it's always good
to have an intellectual nemesis.
And the same reason that you don't want
to be the only lawyer in a town.
There should be at least two lawyers in every town.
That way you can have clients and take cases
against each other and always eat
in the best restaurant every day.
Right? In your small town.
So you want there to be a conflict
because conflict is entertaining for outsiders.
So you want to find, you know, but of course you want
to pick your nemesis well.
You don't want to get a jerk.
You want to get an entertaining and brilliant adversary
so that you both make each other look good.
All right.
And make it seem like you're both more important
than you would appear to be singly.
Right? Just talking to yourself.
You're just a person talking to yourself.
But a debate.
My God, there's two smart people who disagree about something
and they both have arguments.
And now I've got to participate in this.
And hear what's going on.
Whereas otherwise it's like, well,
I was the person proving things.
That's much more boring.
So anyway.
So Donald Whitman, a professor at UC Santa Cruz.
Most people who don't like public choice
and the economic approach to politics in general dislike,
first of all, the economistic assumptions,
thinking about politics in an economistic way.
And they also just don't like the anti-democratic conclusions.
You might just say like the not so positive
about democracy conclusions.
It's not me, is it?
It's not the buzzing?
Can someone stop the buzzing?
All right.
Okay. So anyway.
This is a broad and fertile tradition of just complaining
about economists shouldn't be mucking up other fields
with their already dubious approach.
In the wall?
All right.
Okay. All right.
So anyway.
So that is a rich tradition.
And though I may not seem to take it seriously,
I've learned plenty of things
from the anti-economistic tradition.
But that's not what Donald Whitman is.
Donald Whitman is an economist economist
who says something much more hurtful to economists
than you, you're being a bunch of economists.
Being economist-y.
Instead, he says the ultimate insult to economists.
You are bad economists.
You guys are giving economics a bad name
with your illogical application of our principles.
And that's very hurtful.
All right.
So he doesn't complain about the economist approach.
Says that there's a lot of public choices,
very bad economics.
And in particular, he says
that the standard public choice arguments,
many of which you probably heard said probably kind
of informally.
So what Whitman says is that if you look
closely, if you look closely,
what public choice economists are usually doing is not
actually normal economics.
Instead, they're doing much normal stuff.
And then they sneak in an assumption
that most economists would not like
and that the public choice economists themselves would
object to.
You see it explicitly.
They smuggle in a dubious assumption.
And that's how they actually reach the interesting
conclusions.
Right. And if they didn't have these dubious assumptions,
then they would be stuck just saying the world works
and it's fine.
So what are the assumptions
that Whitman accuses public choice economists
of smuggling in?
So the first one he just calls extreme voter stupidity.
Right. And he uses that word stupidity very deliberately,
saying no, no, not ignorance.
Ignorance isn't enough to get you where you're going.
You actually need to think of voters as dummies, as morons.
Right. People who just aren't applying common sense.
And then you can get results.
But of course, normally an economist doesn't like
to begin a model with, all right, here's my first assumption.
People don't have common sense.
Right. People are utterly lacking common sense.
That's where I begin.
Right. Normally economists don't like that assumption.
And Whitman says that's what you're really doing,
assuming you lack the common sense among voters.
Right. So that's one assumption.
Second one he calls serious lack of competition.
Normally you can just put that in as monopoly.
It's the idea that while politics on the surface looks
like a battle royale between a whole bunch
of people struggling for power, actually it's just a big,
collusive organization.
So if you ever heard of the Demo-Republican Party,
it's like a one-party state where they all work hand
and glove in order to deny the people what they want.
So that's another story Whitman says is getting smuggled in,
is somehow competition has been suppressed
and things are just rammed down the voter's brain.
Things are just rammed down the voter's throat whether
like it or not.
And nobody is around to say, hey,
I've never treated you that way.
And then the last assumption
that he accuses public choice economists of smuggling in,
it's what he calls excessively high negotiations
as transfer costs.
It's called high transactions costs.
It's easy.
All right.
And Whitman says as long as we avoid all these,
as long as we wipe out any hint of these assumptions
from public choice, we're not going to get any
of the results about how democracy is efficient
or anything else.
We're going to get a very functionalist account
of the world is fine.
The world is counter-exfficient.
And it's a very strong kind of efficiency where
in Whitman's view we leave to democracy the things
that are best left to democracy and we leave to the markets the
things that are best left to market
so we have an optimal allocation of all tasks in society.
Of course, I think Whitman would still be happy to say, look,
it's perfectly fine for there
to be an occasional temporary brief disequilibrium,
but then the system will catch up.
So don't worry about it.
Everything's going to be fine.
All right.
So and then the implication
of this is all the public choice complaining you've heard
about democracy at George Mason,
or probably before you came here given that you're here,
all that complaining is just a bunch of losers whining
that their preferences are actually very unpopular.
So it's akin to someone saying, you know,
there's a giant market failure in music that nobody,
that I'm not Britney Spears.
It's like, yeah, that's the market failure
that a person who can't sing
and can't dance is not popular.
I mean, what do you know?
Right? How about another theory that you're not any good
and you're losing for that reason
and then you're concocting an elaborate conspiracy theory
to explain your failure?
That is essentially what Whitman is pointing
at people in public choice and saying, well, look,
you guys are weird.
You're generally libertarians, free market type people.
You're mad that you're losers.
And I'd be mad too if I were one of you.
Yes, it's not fun to lose all the time
when your views are hopelessly outnumbered.
But there's nothing inefficient about it.
It's just that you're weird.
And weird people don't get their way.
Watch your thing.
All right.
So that's the heart of it.
All right.
Now let's just quickly go through Whitman's arguments
for each of these or where he's coming from.
All right.
Now just very quick.
You may doubt whether Whitman's nemesis can actually fairly
present his views, but I am certified by Whitman himself.
So in an exchange with him, he began by saying, usually
when I argue with my opponents,
I begin by saying they didn't understand me.
But I can't say that here.
And then he said, I can't let us explain my view better
than I've explained it myself.
But I love you too, Donald.
All right.
So take that.
Anyone who ever claimed I didn't understand them,
I understand people very well.
Like a listener.
So, any case.
So Whitman says I can explain his view fairly
and too better to say so than him.
All right.
So first thing.
He says a lot of public choice arguments assume extreme sort
of stupidity.
Normally we don't say stupidity.
We say ignorance.
Right? Or lack of information.
But Whitman says it's really about stupidity,
a lack of common sense, or really just lack of the,
a violation of rational expectations.
So why? Well, Whitman says, look, here's the real,
the principle, the law of the country principle,
voter ignorance is not a serious problem.
Notice now he's saying ignorance.
Because he's saying, look, if the problem were only ignorance,
here's why you wouldn't have to worry about it.
So first reason.
Now, by the way, Whitman argues he's very lawyerly.
So if you are defending your client who is accused
of breaking a vase, the first thing
to say is there never was a vase.
Second of all, if there was a vase, my client was never
within 100 miles of it.
Third of all, if he was within 100 miles of it,
it was broken before he arrived.
Fourth of all, it wasn't broken before he arrived.
Somebody else broke it.
Fifth, if my client broke it, he was asked to.
And then sixth, if he wasn't asked to, it was self-defense,
and you just go through every one of these arguments.
And of course, to win your case,
you've got to disprove all of them.
So you have to get over every one of these arguments
in order to actually convict.
And that's how Whitman works.
So even if some of these arguments don't seem
that don't seem as good as others,
for Whitman it's really just a matter of thinning
down the assault until finally there's nobody left at the end
who can actually get over the walls.
All right.
So first principle, he says, amount of information held
by voters has been underestimated.
So why would he say this?
Well, he says, look, yeah, you can go
and give people a bunch of tasks and show
that they don't know very much.
But, he says, look, party labels are brand names
that drastically economize information costs.
You don't need to know all the details
about what Hillary voted on or anything.
Look, you know Hillary's a liberal.
You know Trump's not.
You know which one you'd rather have.
So it's actually pretty easy.
Right? And then furthermore,
the cost of information is not a big deal either
because politicians are very happy to pay
for the information and just give it to you.
So the fact that it takes time, you don't have
to actually put the time in.
It's just handed to you.
In fact, if you don't want information during election
season, it's very hard not to receive this information.
You have to really hide.
All right.
So second, his informed judgments can be made
with very little information.
So he says, voters have a lot of cognitive shortcuts,
things like just doing whatever the interest group
that you trust says.
So you don't like gun control,
you just do whatever the NRA says and that solves your problem.
All right.
Third, he says the bad effects
of biased information are overstated.
So one of them is just
because you're ignorant doesn't mean we have systematic bias.
And he says as long as you vote randomly,
then this miracle aggregation saves us.
So as long as ignorance is random voting.
And that is of course the way
that economists almost always model ignorance.
So Whitman here is plugging
into a very well-established approach to ignorance.
Just saying if people don't know what they're doing,
they flip a coin.
All right.
And here is the line.
So to be uninformed about a policy does not imply
that voters have biased estimates of effects.
For example, to be uninformed about the nature
of pork barrel projects in other congressional districts does not
mean that voters tend to underestimate the effects
of pork barrel.
It is quite possible that the uninformed exaggerate both the
extent and the negative consequences
of pork barrel politics.
As long as the people who are overly pessimistic
and the people who are overly optimistic cancel each other
out, then in fact the electoral outcome is the same
as it would be if everybody knew everything.
Furthermore, if you just say, yeah, but there's media bias.
Well, Whitman's answer here is, well,
do people know there's media bias?
Do they know the direction?
Well, in that case, there's a very simple thing to do.
Two simple things.
One is stop watching the biased news.
So you don't trust liberal media?
Stop watching liberal media.
Right? Or you could just watch it
for entertainment value only.
So you could just go and say, can you believe these people?
Fox News. You could hate watch it.
It's like, oh, come on.
Every, every, everything you watch.
Oh, my God.
Another ridiculous lie.
Another lie.
Lies, lies, lies.
Right? And then say, well, but since I know it,
I know it's all lies, it doesn't actually affect me.
Which again is the common sense thing that if you are,
if you are listening to someone that you believe
to be a horrible liar, they're not going to trick you
because you ignore, either you don't listen to them
or you just sit there saying, yes, yes, of course.
You cured cancer.
Yes, that's all very interesting.
You're an Olympic athlete.
You cured cancer.
Yes, once we did have a graduate student
who appeared to just be a complete pathological liar.
And finally people caught on to it.
So not mentioning any names, but like any news story,
this student had personal friends involved
in the news story no matter what it was.
Oh, yeah, my brother-in-law was actually very closely involved
in that.
I'm like, whatever you say.
Oh, yeah.
It's like, eventually.
Right. It's just a little bit hard to believe.
All right.
Okay. So anyway, if the media is a liberal bias,
then voters can easily adjust.
So that's the answer.
And furthermore, if there is any additional asymmetric information
Women says the problem is this problem makes government too big,
not too, or rather too small, not too big.
So, again, remember what happens in the Akerlov-Lemons model.
If car buyers have no way of telling good cars from bad,
what does this do to demand for used cars?
It reduces it.
Why does it reduce it?
Yes, because voters can't tell if they're getting their money's
worth, and so that reduces demand.
And then, of course, there's a reason
to pull off the good products off the market,
which reduces demand further.
So similarly, if voters can't tell the difference
between good government programs and bad, this reduces demand.
And then if the bad ones are basically ones
where there's a whole lot of corruption, and the good ones
or the clean ones where there's not, the ones that people will,
the politicians have a reason
to quit promoting are the clean ones, leaving the dirty ones,
which reduces demand further,
which then makes the quality even lower, and so on.
So if anything, the problem,
Whitman says, is government's too small.
Because any time a politician comes up with an idea,
voters are like, yeah, right, it's a good idea.
Sure sounds wonderful, but why should we believe you?
And like, well, if you go and read my 1,000-page book on it,
I don't have time to read your 1,000-page book.
Make it clear that it's worth my money in 30 seconds.
Well, I can't.
Well, then you don't get my money.
So I call this the when in doubt, say no heuristic.
It's a really good one, and notice,
we use this very frequently in real life.
Like, virtually all unsolicited internet ads, you apply this.
Like, well, how do you know it's not good?
Have you sent them the money to find out?
No, instead you just apply the, if I apply the, if it went
in doubt, say no heuristic,
and therefore most people don't buy anything
from unsolicited internet ads.
Yes?
Obviously, the reverse if you speak to anybody.
Yes, now that, so I completely agree,
but if people had common sense, what would they do?
I say this is exactly what common sense recommends.
Now, if you want to say, yeah, but people don't do that,
then Whitman is there to say, so, you're an economist claiming
that voters are lacking in common sense,
and you have it, and they don't.
That's your story, huh?
Right, and now he's actually appealing to two things.
First of all, professional norms in economics,
where we don't like saying stuff like that about people,
and he's also appealing to the general egalitarian ethos
of the United States and most of the world now,
where it's just not very polite to say
that the commoners don't know what's going on, and I do.
Now, I'm going to, well, maybe the commoners don't know,
and we do, and that's just the truth, and they,
and like there's nothing we can do about it other than,
well, why don't you go and take it to them?
Because they lack common sense.
People with common sense are notoriously hard to educate.
Don't blame me, blame them.
Right, and at this point, Whitman would say, all right,
that's consistent, all right, if you want to go down that route,
I'm just saying that you're part of the special people
who know more than other people, and other people are lacking
common sense, and you have it.
You know, Hitler thought the same thing.
Well, I mean, so any dissenting person
with new ideas thinks that, but some of us are right.
Okay, all right, so anyway, so just like it's naive to think
that asymmetric information helps used car dealers
sell cars, it doesn't.
It's hard to be a used car dealer, right,
because everybody distrusts you.
Everyone, whatever you say, like, yeah, right,
yeah, the sun's shining today, sure.
It's like, it's there.
Why should I look up?
It's because you pointed there.
It's a lot of work.
All right, so that's the idea is that with asymmetric information,
the common sense response is extreme distrust,
and the extreme distrust means that it's very hard
to sell people on anything, good or bad.
Okay, all right, so anyway, Whitman's bottom line then is
if you want to reach the usual kind of public choice conclusions
about voters, like, like,
like just voting for terrible stuff, you need to go beyond
the ignorance and actual to say something like stupidity
or lacking common sense, or again,
technically just not rational explanations.
They don't have rational explanations.
There are systematic biases.
There are patterns.
You know, so maybe they are flipping a bias coin,
or maybe they're applying the vote
for the better mustache heuristic, and then
by that standard, Hitler might get all 90% of the votes.
One guy can have a terrible mustache,
and then he's got Hitler with his mustache,
which is certainly distinctive.
I've heard it's coming back.
I don't see that in real life.
Yeah, so, all right, I read a book about Israel
where a guy said he saw a guy in Israel.
I don't know.
All right.
So, anyway, it's just, it's just, so, you know,
if people did apply the, you know,
if people didn't know what they were doing, just voted
for better mustaches, then maybe Hitler would have a
crashing victory, right?
So, there's all kinds of ways that people might vote
if they don't know what they're doing.
They might vote for whoever just panders to their emotions more.
They might vote for whoever they'd rather have a beer with.
Right? There are a lot of stories along these lines.
They might vote for the better-looking candidates.
Many possibilities here, and once you are willing to say not
that, then you might want to,
then you might suddenly become empirical,
and then there's actually a giant empirical literature
on all the ways that people violate this.
So, it varies, of course, from time to time,
from country to country, but a lot of evidence
of massive violations, but it does require you to go
and say something economists don't like saying,
which again comes down to voters don't have common sense.
Yes?
So, this might be something you might get to later on,
but is there an idea that talks about as if those 90% of people
who don't actually know anything think that they are the 10%,
and think that they know?
So, there's plenty of evidence that people overrate themselves,
so I wasn't going to talk about it, but yes, a lot of evidence
that people overrate themselves on any measure of competence.
So, people seem to underestimate how rich they are
in the distribution, things like that.
So, like if you ask them to put themselves in the distribution,
they don't think, they think that they are,
they generally think that they are poorer than they really are.
So, yes, they think they're poorer than they really are,
especially if they are rich, generally.
People in the 99% top think they're like 85 maybe.
You can't believe, no, no, no, I'm not rich.
I'm just a regular old investment banker here.
The rich guys are the people I work for.
All right.
So, moving on then.
So, that's where Whitman's coming in here.
Now, on the monopoly question, Whitman says, you know,
like any time that you're assuming something
like a monopoly, you're wrong.
Politics like the market's competitive.
How so? He says, well, you know, first of all, reputation matters.
So, if politics break promises, voters get mad at them.
If they do a good job, they reward them, right?
And you get, remember this here.
You do one thing wrong, voters can destroy your reputation.
Look, you work a whole life to win the voters' trust,
and then they catch you cheating on your wife once,
and then that's it for you.
Come on. Life's not fair.
You say, well, that's the way that we keep our politicians
clean is by harshly punishing them when we catch them.
Okay. Secondly, he says, political races are
at least as competitive as markets.
So, if you look at politics, it's full
of political entrepreneurs who want to stage
a successful takeover.
They want to gain power.
And what is the standard way you do this?
You locate unpopular policies, and then you go to the voters
and say, look at what the people in power have been doing to you.
I would never treat you that way.
I would respect you.
I would cherish you.
All right?
That is the pitch of the political entrepreneur,
saying you have been treated badly, but fortunately,
I am here to treat you well.
And just dump that zero.
Find yourself a hero, me, and we're in business.
Right? Now, of course, the incumbents know this is going
to be the sales pitch, so they want to eliminate opportunities
for complaining before they arise so that
when the entrepreneur comes along and says,
how is it you're being mistreated?
Can't help but figure out anyway.
Then the people say, well, actually, I'm totally content.
Oh, how unfortunate.
Wish you were miserable.
That would be much better for me.
All right.
Now, Whitman goes on to say, first of all,
high rates of re-election prove absolutely nothing.
So, you know, quote, the main reason for high rates
of incumbent success is they are the best.
That is why they won in the first place
and why they are likely to win again.
And Whitman could really even approve this argument and say,
imagine that there were a zero percent re-election rate.
That would be the smoking gun for dysfunctional democracy.
If every time voters elect someone,
after they see their job, they say, I hate this guy.
Let's get rid of him.
That would be the system not working.
Whereas if people generally want to re-elect whoever they voted
for last time shows that they are being satisfied.
Just like if there's a product that almost no one ever returns
to the store, even though they can, that's a good product.
A product where almost everybody returns it, that's junk.
Okay. And he says similarity platforms proves nothing.
So similar prices are a sign of competition in markets.
There were similar platforms in politics.
And again, Whitman could go even stronger here and say,
the signs of democracy not working are
when there are permanent
or there's lasting imbalances in platforms.
Like when the Labor Party stays Marxist and gets 30% of the vote
for a bunch of elections.
That's the kind of thing where it's a sign
that the competition has somehow failed.
Whereas if the platforms are similar
and the vote shares are close,
that's actually democracy working.
And then he says that whatever barriers to entry
that people talk about are usually minimal.
The real reason third parties don't win is
because voters just don't like them.
And if you go and read platforms of third parties,
this will resonate with you.
Platforms of third parties are often written by philosophers
who may actually have discovered the truth about policy,
but they're not salesmen at all.
Right? They're just going and saying, look,
principles of logic dictate this.
Tough if you don't like it, tough.
Logic says otherwise.
Right? And then he also goes and appeals
to the empirical evidence.
There's a lot more since he wrote, which I will say is
pretty supportive of Whitman, although there is evidence
for a status quo bias in policy where policies
that exist tend to last even if they're unpopular and policies
that, you know, and on the other hand, and policies
that are popular that don't exist are not
so likely to be adopted.
So there's sort of a discontinuity caused by,
or I guess, you know, you could just say
that there's sort of two lines.
If you go and plot the probability
that a policy exists, you know, as a function of its popularity,
there's a high line for policies that exist.
So popular policies that exist almost always last,
but popular policies that don't exist often happen,
but it can take decades.
On the other hand, unpopular policies
that exist often last, but it's really unusual
for an unpopular policy that doesn't exist to become a law.
That's very unusual.
Okay. So anyway, so Whitman's bottom line is economists are
usually skeptical about stories of collusion in markets.
So shouldn't we be equally skeptical about stories
of collusion in politics?
So let's see here.
So why don't we go and take our 10-minute break now.
And then also you can come and pick up, let's see,
so week 14 if you don't have it.
And then the week 10 homework.
And then here is the, not exactly the answer key
because these are essays, but suggested,
or actually let me just put it this way, good answers
for all the questions of week 9 are here too.
So you can get those and see what they look like.
And you can hand in your answers as well while you're at it.
Let's see, why don't I move this over there
and then we'll have a bit more space.
All right.
So Whitman has said that people in public choice are facing
arguments from extreme voter stupidity
and you shouldn't do that.
If you're basing it on monopoly, you shouldn't do that.
And then lastly, he says that there's a hidden assumption
of high transactions costs on a built-in 2.
You shouldn't do that either.
So how often have you heard someone saying, well,
there's a special interest that's blocking reform.
Special interests are blocking reform.
The teachers unions are blocking merit pay.
Right now, on the surface this is a pretty strange thing
to say because are the teachers, do they have guns?
Do they have tanks?
What do the teachers have that could block anything?
Yes. Well, they do.
In the United States?
So once or twice I've seen a picket line I was scared
to cross, but when the high school teachers
in my district struck, no one was scared
to cross the picket line.
It wasn't like that.
Okay. So what does it mean then that they're blocking reform?
Well, something like teachers normally just means the teacher
say it's bad to do this, don't do this, we're teachers.
And this actually seems to matter.
It actually seems to matter that teachers are popular.
And if teachers don't like something,
a lot of voters don't like it either.
Now, but anyway, even if you buy this story,
somehow teachers have a stranglehold.
If there's something that you, so imagine
that there's someone who's blocking that door, right,
and they're bigger and stronger than all of us
in this class together.
What is the obvious thing for us to do rather than starve
to death in this room while the big person there,
well, I mean, we only take our phones.
No one knows where we are.
So obviously you can probably just call 911.
Anyway, so there's a big person.
They won't let us out.
Then we have to solve the problem ourselves.
We can't physically beat them.
So what is an obvious thing to do?
You're economists.
Yeah, bribe them.
Say, all right, everyone, like open up the wallets.
Let's take out the money.
What is it going to take to get you
to let us leave this room?
And like, I'm blocking you.
Yes, but what would it take to change your mind?
All right.
And, of course, you would expect, given the importance
of getting out of this room, that we would come
up with the money to, come up with the money to get them
to go and leave us alone.
Similarly, if it really were true that merit pay is great
for schools and teachers' unions are somehow able to block it,
you think that we would just go and collect a giant bag of money
and give it to them and say, now can we have,
so now can we have merit pay, please?
Is this enough?
How many, how much money is it going to take
to make this problem go away?
Right? And by the definition of inefficiency,
as long as the transactions are not important,
this should be doable.
So if we value merit pay at $10 billion
and the teachers' union values not having merit pay
at $2 billion, we just go and offer them $3 billion
and they should be willing to go away.
It really is inefficient.
Okay. All right.
So, and yet it's very common to say
that it's just too hard to buy them off.
Well, why is it too hard?
Well, of course, one would be
if actually the status quo is efficient and we just,
and if we pay the total value to us of changing policy,
it wouldn't actually compensate the insiders.
That's possible.
But again, then there's not really any economic efficiency
problem, right?
And otherwise, what would the problem be?
All right.
So this brings us to Whitman's third principle,
which is political bargaining can eliminate any remaining
significant inefficiencies.
So yeah, I mean, it's reasonable to say, well, yeah,
if it's like a $5 inefficiency, then congressmen aren't going
to be worried about bargaining over a $5 inefficiency.
But anything important, if they're really,
if the world really would be richer with one policy rather
than another, we'll just bargain to that equilibrium.
Right? And this will affect, as Coase taught us, what?
Coase theorem.
So the assignment, so if a special interest has power,
this will affect what?
Distribution.
The special interest will be laughing in the money,
doing snow angels in money.
Yes, we're rich.
Teachers union.
Ah, ha, ha, ha.
We're so full of money.
All right, but this will not affect the other thing,
which is efficiency.
So we will actually do the efficient thing,
and we will just buy them off.
Okay. So why does Whitman say this?
So first of all, democracy is just designed
to have low transactions costs.
So first of all, majority rule is cheaper than unanimity.
So when you are building a skyscraper,
50,000 people work together, in general, what percentage
of the workers there are there voluntarily?
One hundred percent.
It's possible someone's family is being held hostage
to make them do the plumbing or something like that,
but that's unusual.
So there you have 100% cooperation,
and that's the rule of markets.
Even if a market project is enormous,
you still need 100% consent.
And what is democracy all about?
Not having 100% consent.
Now, of course, there are plenty of possible problems
with doing things to people without their consent,
but it does reduce transaction costs.
That's undeniable.
So if this group could only eat a meal if we have 100%
of us agreed on what we were going to eat,
we might go hungry, right?
If there's like one vegan and one anti-vegan
who will only eat animal products, then we starve,
right, unless, of course, there's bargaining.
Okay. So, you know, so, but on the other hand,
with majority rule, we would be able to work out something.
Something would prevail, and we would not starve, right?
So there would be lower transaction costs, at least.
And again, in the case of some things,
the transaction costs might be everything.
We might not be able to do it.
All right.
So majority rule is cheaper than the unanimity rule,
and that's the most obvious argument in favor
of majority rule is just that it saves on bargaining costs.
Imagine if the only way for there to be any political change
in the U.S. was unanimous consent.
I think it's a fair bet
to say there would never be another change again.
No legal change anyway.
There could be coup d'etats and things.
There could be illegal changes, but we couldn't change the law
because there's no law that everyone would agree to.
So it should lead to be something.
Now, remember back in week one,
there's weird people in this country.
There's weird people in every country.
There's misanthropes.
There's people who worship, you know, Kim Jong-un,
and there's people like that in this country.
So if there's one person like that,
these are not going to get unanimity, right?
And then furthermore, representative democracy,
and representative democracy is contrasted
with what other kind of democracy?
Direct democracy also saves transactions costs, right?
Because instead of having 300 million Americans bargain,
we just have a few hundred representatives bargain,
and so that makes things cheaper.
Same logic holds for committees.
You don't have everyone in Congress bargain.
Instead, you just have 16 specialists go and bargain
and work something out and hammer it out in a committee,
and then they take it to the rest of Congress, right?
And again, the general idea here is that political bargaining,
which has a special name, right,
at least in the United States,
we call political bargaining log rolling.
So as often in American politics,
this is an agricultural metaphor,
because in farm times, you often need
to roll a log off your property, and a log is too big
for one farmer to roll.
So how do farmers roll logs off their property?
They go over to the other farmer and say, come on, brother,
could you help me move this log?
He says, well, sure, if you would help me move my logs,
and so this way, things that are too big for any one farmer
to move get moved.
Similarly, can one congressman pass a law by himself?
No. So how do you pass laws?
You go and you get friends to help you go
and move the giant logs of legislation,
and why do they do this?
Because you'll help them when they need help, right?
In the old days, the system in the United States used to be,
I'll vote for your bill, and then later on,
you'll vote for my bill, right?
But one of the big changes in American politics is
that now, instead of having separate bills and trading
across the bills, usually people now say, I don't like that plan.
Why don't we just make one really big bill
that has everything in it, and then we don't need
to trust each other anymore, right?
And so that's very, you know,
very dangerous in American politics now.
Most, you know, a very large piece
of legislation will have thousands of pages now.
So I think TARP was over a thousand.
I think Affordable Care Act was like 2,500 pages.
It's not all about health care.
It's not all about a relief, not a relief.
a relief plan for troubled assets.
Like the troubled asset relief plan had a page
that mandated psychiatric coverage for health insurance.
And a page that gave a tax write-off
to a bow and arrow factory in Utah.
All of these weird things in there.
And why?
Well, because, well, one possibility is people just felt
like during recession we need a lot of bows and arrows,
especially in Utah.
Another possibility, though, is there was a congressman
who was friends with the guy who owned the factory,
and he said, I'll change my vote if you go
and put that extra page in.
And it's like, well, it's already 1,000 pages,
why not one more?
Anyway, that is log rolling.
And if, so if transaction costs are reasonably low,
then we can go and take efficient but unpopular policies
and turn them into efficient and popular policies.
So for example, suppose that there's rent control.
And rent control, there's 10 landlords, 100 tenants,
and each landlord loses $1,000 from rent control,
and each tenant gains $1 from rent control.
And again, that makes sense,
because remember rent control is Calgary sufficient or not?
It's not.
Okay, so is it efficient for Calgary,
is it Calgary sufficient for rent control to exist here?
No, because yes, it destroys 9,000 worth of wealth.
But if we do a simple median voter theorem
and people vote for their self-interest,
then rent control wins, right?
But then Whitman says, yeah, but that's only,
creates the bargain, where we,
the place where we start the bargaining from,
just like the big guy blocking those doors,
like he's there, right?
So the bargaining starts there.
And then what do we do to that big guy?
We go and we offer him money.
And similarly here, the landlords will go
and offer the tenants or their representatives
some money in order to not have rent control.
So they might say, look, how about we go
and we agree to a land tax,
which will not be distortionary like the rent control,
and we agree to a land tax of say $200 for each of us,
and then we can give every tenant $2.
And then we're better off and you're better off compared.
Right, and again, as long as the transaction
is less reasonable, that'll happen, right?
Or, so think about this logic for immigration.
So if an immigrant would be a million dollars
better off in the United States
and he would consume $100,000 of US government services,
then the logical thing is not to say you can't come,
but to say you can come in,
but you're gonna have to pay 101,000 at least extra taxes
so that they'll have to cover it.
Or of course, we'll have a deal where they can come,
but they can't collect, they can be guest workers,
something like that, which is why every first world country
has a massive guest worker program, right?
No, not really.
What are the countries that really
have enormous guest worker programs?
Let me just put it this way.
What is the standard form of government
of countries where guest workers
exceed 50% of the population?
What's that?
Monarchies, yes.
Little bit puzzling for Whitman, but yes.
So there are multiple Gulf monarchies
where over half the population of people there
are not citizens.
Why would someone wanna live in a country
where they can't even be a citizen?
Isn't that degrading and demeaning
to not be somewhere and you're not even a citizen?
Well, yes, yes.
People get over it, especially when you earn
five or 10 times as much money in the Gulf monarchies
as you would back home in Pakistan
or Bangladesh or the Philippines.
So that is what's really going on in those countries.
And again, the Calderix logic is very clear, right?
It's one way of look.
So the guy running the monarchy,
like he sees a benefit here,
and actually he can even go and share the benefits
with the minority of citizens,
the people he actually is really worried about, right?
And then lets in a bunch of low-skilled workers,
mostly low-skilled, also high-skilled,
but a lot of low-skilled workers,
who then go and do almost all the hard work, right?
They do it for way less than the citizens would be paid,
but way more than people in the ascending country are paid,
and in this way.
And then how is it that you go and compensate
all of the natives that have lost?
Well, the standard thing in the Gulf monarchies
is to give them enormous amounts of money.
So you're a citizen, oh great,
well here's $50,000 a year welfare, take it, it's yours.
Right, every citizen in this country deserves that, right?
Every human being really deserves it.
You're kind of only human if you're a citizen.
All right, well their country, they deserve it too,
they deserve $50,000 a year too,
but they deserve it from Pakistan,
which cannot give them $50,000 a year,
no matter how hard they tried.
Yes, Elaine?
Professor, I've seen lots of stories,
and largely anecdotes of people in Gulf countries
hearing horror stories about guest workers.
Is this a, is this just a revealed preference story,
or we should just disregard that?
Of course.
Or is this a selection bias story
where only the people that regret it are complaining?
Both, yeah.
Yeah, so, well, it's a selection bias story,
and therefore we should ignore it.
Right, so at least in the sense
of anyone who wants to reduce it.
Now if you were to say, this is a reason
to give guest workers the right to change their job, right?
You know, things like that.
That is a very different story, but,
of course, people were complaining about it.
It's almost never a question of giving the guest workers
like the actual right to go and change their job,
or be treated like a human being.
It's just a question of,
we're not gonna have as many guest workers.
So, yeah.
Right, and again, especially now,
when you're like guest workers,
they email their families home,
and what do they email them?
Never come here, it's terrible?
No, they email them, I'm looking for a job for you.
Right, and if they say that,
but I heard things aren't perfect in Qatar.
It's like, are they perfect in Pakistan?
Oh, right, no, they're not perfect in Pakistan.
So, in fact, we're making five times as much money.
Remember your uncle who worked here for five years
and came back and now lives in a mansion?
Right, do you wanna be him?
All right, sounds pretty good.
All right, so again, that is Whitman's last story.
Anytime there's any kind of remaining inefficiency left,
we'll just go and take out the bags of money
and buy people off.
So that means farm subsidies,
or the farm subsidies we had were efficient.
If they were inefficient,
we would have just given the farmers a lump sum buyout,
and they go away and we never deal with them again.
Right, so teachers' unions, efficient.
Right, so productionism, efficient.
All this stuff, efficient.
If it weren't efficient,
then we would have just gone to the steel industry
and say, look, we want free trade, you're stopping it,
here's a bag of money, and now you can go away.
Right, anytime you've ever heard these calculations
saying that for every job saved in the auto industry,
we could have a cost of America of $400,000,
that kind of thing, well, by Whitmanian logic, fine.
Then why don't we go to those workers and say,
hey, here's say $300,000 to leave the steel industry,
leave the auto industry,
and sign a form saying I'm totally happy with the tent,
all my complaints are done,
maybe even an NDA, non-disclosure agreement,
saying like I won't even talk about this anymore,
I'll just live my life with my bag of money,
and not be an auto worker,
and that's totally cool with me.
Right, and if that doesn't happen,
then what Whitman says shows that you have
actually missed some of the complexity of the world.
Right, and then if you say,
well, no, no, transaction costs are too high,
it's like how high could they possibly be?
It's a bag of money, come on.
Right, and especially remember
that we don't need unanimous consent,
we don't need every teacher to agree to this,
we just need to get a majority of them to agree.
Maybe not even a majority,
maybe we just need to give enough
to get the bad teachers to go away.
Right, you might say, hey, the good teachers
would kind of like the bad teachers to voluntarily leave,
because bad teachers make good teachers look bad.
Right, so, you know, would you want to have
a physically abusive teacher in your school?
It's like, oh, gee, that's kind of embarrassing.
I don't, maybe you might even care
about the children being physically abused, right?
Now, again, the kind of thing
that people would throw in Whitman's face,
you've heard of the infamous rubber room of New York.
So, there's a problem in the New York public school system
some years ago, where there's a bunch of teachers
that they don't want to be anywhere near a student
ever again.
So, they are afraid to put this teacher
in the same building as a minor,
for whatever reason.
You can use your imagination,
why do you not want this adult male
in the same room as these minors?
All right, but it's too hard,
according to the uni rules,
to just fire them for the offenses
that they are very strongly believed to be guilty of
and likely to do again.
But you don't want to just go and pay them to stay home,
because if teachers were paid their full salary
to stay home, what would probably a lot of teachers
start doing?
Yes, well, yes, abusing children, yes, exactly.
Just like, well, on the one hand,
I don't want to go and slap a child in public.
On the other hand, I don't want to have
to get out of bed anymore.
Well, slap the child I like the least.
Smack!
He's like, God, I feel bad about this,
but everyone saw it on YouTube, all right,
and he can't fire me.
All right, so, and then, so what can we do
that will get rid of our legal liability,
but won't actually give teachers,
the marginal teachers an incentive
to actually do even worse things
that they wouldn't do otherwise?
And they said, well, here's what we'll do.
We'll take the teachers that we'd like to fire, but can't,
and tell them that they must show up
in a special room every day.
And they had the idea, let's just rent out one big room
and say that all of the horrible teachers
must show up there on time every day.
They can clock out for lunch,
but they must only for the normal lunchtime,
and they must come back and they must sit there
until the end of the day, every day, until they quit.
So basically, it's like, kind of like a prison,
where you, it's like a halfway house.
It's where, during normal school time,
you must sit in a room.
What do you do in the room?
Nothing, they don't want you to have anything
to do with education.
But, so you can sit there, you can go and read,
you can write a novel, which was a key plot point
in the show, The Affair, if you ever saw that.
This actually, the whole thing was,
they had the rubber room, which is, anyway.
Then eventually, there was an expose news article on this,
and people got really mad about this.
And now, what does the New York system do?
New York public school system,
now they divide them among a number of smaller rooms,
which are not as newsworthy.
It was, but they had one room where 150 Cretans go,
and that was like, this room was full of 150
of the worst teachers in New York, who get paid,
I think they get like $100,000 a year, to do nothing.
All right, and that didn't go over well.
So now, there's more rooms, same basic strategy.
Anyway, so in the Whitman world,
you would actually come up with some way
of bartering them out of it.
And then, like, how would you go
and avoid the other problems?
Well, probably what you'd do is,
you would just go to the teachers union,
with a big bag of money, and say,
here's the bag of money, so that we can start firing
people who abuse children.
And they say, well, you can't prove it.
Here's another bag of money that lets us fire them
without being able to prove it.
Because, do you wanna run a business
where you have to prove everything you do
in a court of law?
That's a terrible system.
So, if the default is, that's what you have to do,
you wanna go and buy your way out of that system.
Just like, if we had to prove before a judge
that the guy who's blocking the door
shouldn't be blocking the door,
we might all be dead before the case gets resolved.
So, we don't wanna have to prove it.
We just wanna say, yeah, whatever, shut up,
you're gone, that's it, end of story, the end.
Right, to fast forward to the resolution,
which, doesn't that open up the possibility
that you might once in a while fire an innocent teacher?
Yes, and of course, to compensate for that possibility,
what's the efficient thing to do?
Another bag of money.
So, every objection, if the objection is,
yeah, but we're worried that a very small number of people
might suffer harm.
Reasonable, bag of money, shut up.
Another bag of money, shut up.
All right, and now, our business is done.
So, very simple.
Okay, so, questions about anything in Whitman?
So, and again, if you wanna start thinking about
how Whitman would rationalize any policy,
again, normally, of course,
so he's gotta say the status quo
is actually counter-exfficient,
with, again, rare exceptions,
or there could be like a short-run disequilibrium,
but again, wants to say the status quo is efficient.
So then, for any given policy that you think of
as actually clearly inefficient,
he needs to have a story about why it actually,
when you really, fully understand what's going on,
government policy is a sensible response
to market failure or something like that.
And again, Whitman explicitly doesn't wanna say,
look, this is a terrible policy,
but because there's no way of bribing everyone
to make them all like it, there's nothing better,
because again, that would be the Pareto standard.
Whitman doesn't wanna defend anything
by the Pareto standard,
wants to defend it by the counter-extended.
So, right, defending things by the Pareto standard,
right, saying, well, look,
it exists because it's Pareto efficient.
Remember, that is a clear case of damning through praise,
because remember, what in the world is Pareto efficient?
The real world?
Everything, everything's Pareto efficient.
Syrian Civil War is Pareto efficient.
How can you say such a horrible thing?
Well, who's gonna lose if the Syrian Civil War gets ended?
Yeah, well, I don't know, maybe he wins,
but arms dealers, arms dealers are better off
from the Syrian Civil War, right?
So, and then how about just sadists, misanthropes,
people who just want Arabs to die,
and like, just get a sick thrill of watching it,
they're worse off.
Does anyone compensate them and say,
well, dear, sick, hateful person,
here's a $100 check to compensate you
for the tragic early end of this war.
No, we don't do any of those things.
And, you know, and that would be what it would take
for ending the war to be a Pareto improvement.
But for a Calrix improvement,
none of that stuff needs to be done, right?
We could just go and like, okay, the war is over.
That is it.
So, these are the winners, these are the losers,
it's all over, that's it, right?
And that could be, would in fact,
that would likely be the Calrix efficient, right?
To just be clear, and again, like, there's,
like, which ending?
Well, there's so many endings
that are big Calrix improvements over the status quo.
Right, that's clear.
All right, so, all right, so here's Whitman.
Now, remember I was saying that,
of course, we've got this miracle of creation here,
which does hinge upon the assumption
of rational expectations.
And when Whitman complains about public choice economists
assuming extreme voter stupidity,
another way of putting his complaint is he's saying,
we are assuming that voters
don't have rational expectations.
All right, and that's terrible, that's terrible.
All right, now, this brings me to a question
that weighed heavily on me after reading Whitman,
which is, so what reasons are there to believe
that the rational expectations assumption is true?
Certainly to believe that it's always true.
Okay, all right.
Now, when I first started researching this,
I will admit I didn't go into it with an open mind.
It just always seemed crazy to me
to think that voters had rational expectations.
Right, just, the reason I got into economics
was because I read so many things in economics
that seemed so different from what I had heard.
And not in, like, just like a variance reducing way,
but in the sense that almost everybody
I'd ever talked to said one thing,
and economists said almost exactly the opposite.
So, and that's why, that is my autobiography,
why I got interested in economics.
You know, I read some economists saying
the minimum wage is a bad idea
because it causes disemployment.
And then I didn't say, huh,
but what is this evidence that the disemployment effect
is larger than what normal people think?
And why didn't I say that?
Because in my entire life, I had never, ever heard anyone
claim there was any disemployment effect
in the minimum wage at all.
Right, and the normal view, rather,
is just the higher, the better.
And then I read some economists saying there's a downside,
and I felt very cheated.
Like, how could this information have been kept from me?
All right, but anyway, so, I admit,
when I went into the subject,
I suspected that the rationalization assumption
would not really, really work out.
But I did think that I'd have to go
and argue with the biggest empirical literature,
but I actually found there really wasn't
much empirical literature.
Mostly, it was just the power of theory,
saying, look, well, the rationalization assumption says this,
and that's the definition of rationality,
and economists, you're an economist,
you don't wanna call people rational, do you?
Maybe I do, I do.
All right, so anyway, one of my main research ideas
that came out of Whitman's work is to say,
just like economists are used to thinking about
people weighing the costs and benefits of information,
or in other words, weighing how ignorant they wanna be,
right, you can make a rational choice to be ignorant.
How could it ever be rational to be ignorant?
Well, you know this whenever you decide
that you're not gonna spend 100% of your time studying.
Right, spend more time studying, you would know more, right?
But everyone here at some point is gonna say,
I've studied enough, I know enough microeconomics,
I'm not gonna put in any more time,
and you are therefore choosing ignorance.
Of course, hopefully, as PhD students,
you achieve a very high level of knowledge,
and then you say, I'm not gonna work any harder
to remove the last little bit of ignorance,
but still, you are accepting ignorance.
Right, so just like it sometimes could be rational
to be ignorant, to say it's not worth the value of my time
to go and understand this material any better,
I also think sometimes it could be rational to be irrational.
It could be rational to deviate from full rationality
to not have rational expectations.
Right, or in other words, I say you can think about
irrationalities being a normal good,
something that people might want.
Now, why would people want this?
Well, there's plenty of reasons why.
Right, so here's a really obvious one,
which is that people get comfort, security,
and identity from their beliefs.
All right, so if you wanna make friends with someone,
it's generally not a good idea to say,
what's your religion, and then say, oh,
well, here's all the things wrong with that religion.
All right, so, and why not?
Because it hurts their feelings.
They won't like it, right?
And so, and you say, well,
why don't you want information here?
Well, you're trying to deprive me of something I care,
of beliefs that I care about, that give me meaning,
that make my life feel important.
Right, so I don't like that.
So that is one big reason.
And of course, in the modern world,
religion has become less important,
and politics has taken its place to a very large degree.
So again, people get a lot of,
a sense of being a good and right and decent person
out of being a liberal, or being a conservative,
or being a social justice warrior,
or being an internet troll.
Right, all these things make people feel
like their life is worth living.
Right, so when I was writing this book,
I came across a book called The God That Failed,
which is just a bunch of autobiographies
of former communists.
So every chapter is a person saying,
I used to be a communist, now I'm not, here's what happened.
Not one of these chapters had a former communist saying,
and it was such a joy to learn new things
about the eras of communism.
Every time I learned a new thing, it was really fun,
and I'm just a curious person, so I was saying,
oh my God, Stalin's not the greatest person, I didn't know.
Well, tell me more.
Right, none of the people had that reaction.
Instead, people said it hurt, it felt so bad,
it felt like a deprivation of meaning in their lives,
they just felt sick.
Right, so one of them, I think, was Arthur Kessler.
He said, you know, abandoning communism
is like emotional harakiri, which is the Japanese term
for the disrespectful Japanese term for ritual suicide.
So he compared abandoning Stalinism
to like putting a sword in your own stomach
and stirring it around, and it hurts that much.
Right, this is a very normal human reaction.
reaction. So abandoning a belief normally is painful. Okay now what does this have
to do with rationality? Well if you're irrational when do you have to abandon
beliefs that you care about? Never. If you're just crazy, if you're just
totally close to reason, you say no I'm not listening to you, no no. Or if
your response to everything is that's just what people like you would say
isn't it? Or it's like oh coctopus propagandist, I see. Right or whatever
like whatever discrediting story you can tell so you never have to listen to any
argument you disagree with, that gives you, gives the beliefs that give you
meaning complete immunity. Just like every time someone argues, Satan
told us, Satan said, Jesus said Satan would send people like you here
to say words like this. I'm glad I was forewarned, I know not to listen. Right
and then you can even do the thing where you say, the more you talk the
even dumber that your belief is. I mean I thought it was already the maximum
level of dumbness but you changed my mind about that. Right so it's easy to
change your mind about how dumb your opponents are when you change the
direction of they're even dumber than you thought. That's one of the beliefs
that people don't feel bad to change. But all right now something else you're
gonna say is even when you don't have an emotional attachment to the answer,
there's also just the fact that rational thinking is hard, painful, and
discouraging work. Ever work for like an hour on a math problem and you're like
going and like I like you like saying okay okay here's and then like no it's
wrong. You go back and like you work it again, oh it's wrong, and the third time
you get it, yeah it's totally right now. All right I'm going to bed, I've got it
right, that's perfect now. Right now very different reaction if you know that if
you know that it's not for a grade or not. Right or if no one's ever gonna
check then it's easy to say oh yeah I've got it all figured out now and let's
never raise the subject again. So that could be uncomfortable. Right so there's
just the discomfort of things being ambiguous and admitting that you're not
omniscient. Right it's fun to just think that I just thought about figured it all
out. I'm awesome. All right very popular idea. All right and then of course the
indirect reason which I was alluding to is if you are too reasonable then you're
gonna lose friends. You lose friends if you're too reasonable because people
normally bond with other people based upon agreeing with some conclusions and
if you start doubting the conclusions of your friends then they were are likely
to like you less or maybe just cut you off entirely, purge you, you're not one of
us anymore. Right yeah so I had a very good Mormon friend and I said so what
would your family do if you stop becoming, if you decided told them I'm
not a Mormon anymore. They actually thought about it and he said they
wouldn't purge me but they would really hurt them. He's a super nice guy, he
wouldn't want to hurt them. Of course there's always the option of just lying and
pretending to believe something you don't but again if people have any kind
of lie detection ability or if they might actually catch you saying the
wrong thing then better just to not ask too many questions. So if you just
don't, you say someone says yeah well the Bible says this and if you never ever
open the Bible then you don't have to worry about coming across counter
evidence which would then create conflict. You just say yeah you said it I
believe you no need to look into this any further. He's totally trustworthy.
How do you know he's totally trustworthy if you've never checked what he's saying?
Something about his face. Seems like a trustworthy guy. All right so these are
all reasons why people would actually desire to be rational. It's
armor for your identity and also armor for your ego and then also protects your
friendships and relationships from the disruption of apostasy, the disruption of
the harsh questions. In general think about how few religions have a
question-and-answer period at the end. Even Unitarians as far as I know don't
have a question-answer period where you say it all sounds really good but not a
normal thing to have. Okay again why not because even the Unitarians are not that
fond of critical questions. Now once we accept that there is a reason for
people to be irrational, in fact a very normal recognizable motivation or a set
of very normal and recognizable motivations.
Then we've got the question of how can we actually diagram this? Well we've got
a quantity of rationality here. Of course if it's a normal good you'll have some.
But then we need to put a price of rationality here and what would that
price be? Well the obvious one is just to say the price is just the material
success you give up if you hold a rational belief. So material success you
give up by relaxing normal standards, normal intellectual hygiene. How clean
do your beliefs have to be? How much do they have to be examined? Is this
belief good? Is it acceptable? Is it edible? Is this an edible belief or is it
poisonous junk? Get rid of it. It's a rot. I will throw this away. Okay yes
obviously a good question there. All right okay so then we can go and just put down a
demand curve here which has the pretty obvious result here saying look well
then when the price is high, so up here, up here, right in that case
and of course off of well-being, the price of being irrational can be really high.
So if you believe that you can fly unaided, you will not believe this for very long.
You will jump off a building and die. Right? Or if you are a surgeon who believes I am
such a great surgeon, I'm better drunk than other surgeons are sober, you
probably will destroy your career pretty quickly if that is your belief. So very
costly. Or of course it's very costly saying that there's no cars coming. I don't
need to look. All right so I have a special sense. I know when cars are coming.
Step out. Don't do that. All right so these are all very dangerous, high-cost
beliefs. Right? So on these, perhaps people are going to consume no
rationality at all. So maybe some people, on some issues, people will be fully
rational. Now my favorite example of this is a bet. So for really any statement you
make or we can ever verify it, if someone offers to bet you that basically means
the price is going to be very high. Right? Of course we'll spend some of the size of the bet.
So is this fine? Let's bet a thousand dollars on this. Now anything can become
a very expensive thing to be irrational about. Now on the other hand though, if the price is
low you expect people to consume more. Right? And if the price of rationality is
completely free, then people consume a whole lot. In fact we have a special name
for where the demand curve intersects the x-axis. That's called the satiation point.
Usually appears in the economics of the phase. It's like you pay $20 and you can
eat as much food as you want. Right? And when do you go and, so how much do you eat?
Well of course you don't eat an infinite amount even when the food is free. Instead
you keep eating and eating and eating until the last mouthful of food is of zero
value to you. So you keep going down to that point. The last piece of cake.
Alright, oh I'm so full. Just one piece of cake. Alright, so that's what people do in the phase.
Right? And similarly if the cost of a belief was zero, people would just go and
believe whatever thing made them feel best about the world, no matter how crazy it was.
Could be the world is 6,000 years old or that you are the greatest person who's ever lived.
Right? Or that, you know, so, or that, you know, if we're free, say that all of your people love you.
Under the rule of the country, everyone in this country loves me. There's all kinds of different beliefs you might hold.
Which if they were free, that would be the crazy beliefs you want.
Okay? Alright. Now, why go and make a big deal about the price of irrationality when the price is free?
I guess I already erased it, but remember we talked about what is the probability of voter decisiveness in most real important elections?
Roughly. Zero. Alright. So suppose that you believe something insane and you vote on the basis of your insanity.
How much does that actually endanger your own well-being, so to speak? Zero.
Approximately zero. Because the odds that you personally change the outcome are roughly zero.
You could vote for the opposite of everything you want and what almost certainly happens anyway?
Nothing. Yeah, well, well, well, well, well, well, well, something always happens, but the same thing that would have happened if you voted the other way.
Right? And that is what's very special about democracy.
Democracy essentially goes and fixes the price of irrational beliefs all the way down at zero.
Okay. So this means that we should not be surprised at all voters of highly irrational beliefs.
So not only is Whitman wrong just to go and say that could never happen,
but in fact there's every reason to think that it would be a huge problem.
Because you can believe any insane thing you want in politics and as long as you're just a regular person,
what happens to you? The same thing that would have happened otherwise.
So Hitler was actually elected on the slogan, National Socialism Means Peace.
Now I would say even at that time it's pretty crazy to believe that.
Of course, it was hindsight's 20-20, but Hitler had done and said many things that should make you very skeptical of that claim.
And yet a lot of people believed it. So very few Germans wanted what happened to happen.
Right? So they went, well, do we want to have maybe like an eighth of our country die?
Probably not. All right? And yet if one person were reasonable, one reasonable voter under those conditions,
what policies did the one person who said I see this man for the monster he is, I'm going to vote against him?
And what happened to Germans like that? Assuming they stayed in Germany?
All right. So one of them died. Roughly. The same thing happened to them that happened to everybody who voted for Hitler.
So because being against a policy doesn't mean that you don't have to live under it.
So a long-running argument that I've had with Pete Beckey, and Pete has often told me,
Brian, you're saying that we get the policies that we deserve. I say, no, Pete.
I'm saying that we, you and I, Pete, get the policies that they deserve.
Right? That's the problem. So it's not that everyone is getting the policies that everyone deserves.
The problem is that you and I have to live under these same policies.
Or, of course, we could be Robert Higgs and flee for the country.
That is our option. Either just accept the impositions of popular madness or leave the country.
Or just go to another country where they have their own popular madness there.
Higgs will tell you he found a part of Mexico that's really cool where people just don't bother people.
Unless you want to cut down a tree on the beach. No, you're dead.
Ten thousand dollars a tree. But he doesn't want to cut down any trees. He doesn't care.
All right. So. There you have it. Now, again, just to go back to betting.
Now, many people say, well, what's so you could, so I, anyway, call this rational irrationality.
Many people say, well, what's so great about this idea as compared to old-fashioned regular plain irrationality?
That's where I say, well, here's what my story is. If people were just totally crazy,
then I could make a ton of money by betting crazy people.
Because if people were just stubbornly and totally sincerely committed to their stupid views,
then you could just go to them and say, hey, all right, well, you think that Hillary Clinton is going to win for sure?
I'm going to give you a thousand dollars. Which, if you're sure, is still free money for you, right?
And they would say, yeah, totally. And I'd say, all right, sign right here.
And I would go around making bets like this with all of these different people with their ridiculous views,
and I could be incredibly rich. And, of course, anyone else who was reasonable could be incredibly rich.
But that's not what happens, unfortunately. Rather what happens, people who have crazy views,
when you offer to bet them, suddenly they run away from their beliefs.
Suddenly it's like, well, I mean, when I say she was certainly going to win, I didn't mean, I meant like 55 percent.
I'll bet on that. Yeah, well, that's not really that good anymore.
All right, so what you said was something different. Now, of course you like to say people are lying all the time.
But, and again, I have no way of actually knowing whether there's just massive lying.
But at least from looking at, from almost all the political arguments I've had with people,
people seem so sincere to me when they make their dogmatic and ridiculous political views.
And the bet doesn't seem to just make them say, oh, my God, I've been caught lying.
Instead, the bet seems to make, to turn on a light bulb in their head for the first time in their lives on the issue.
You suddenly think, well, wait a second. I said something that actually could be wrong.
Never thought about that before. Never thought about how I might want to compare my view
to the actual strength of the evidence before having one.
Well, what do you do if you don't do that?
Well, the way that it seems to me most people form their political views is you just say,
well, what view really pleases me? That's true. The end.
Until an obnoxious bettor comes along and starts challenging you.
And that's when, oh, my God, I can't just go and believe that the demand elasticity is whatever I want it to be
in order to make the result work out.
So that's where people change.
So as I think I mentioned, I have made a hobby out of publicly betting people who say things that I think are ridiculous.
Normally they just won't bet. Normally they just run away.
Or they change their position. And they don't change it just a little bit.
They change it to something unrecognizable.
So once there were three people who, this is 2008, so this is 2009.
So the first time in 25 years, the US unemployment rate rose above the European unemployment rate that year.
And there were three big fans of European labor market regulation put out a piece saying,
this shows that all this triumphalism about how the US has better labor regulation leading to lower employment
totally unjustified, and there's no real reason to think that the US system is better.
And then I said, well, how about we bet on the average of US unemployment over the next 10 years?
And one would write back, another said no, and the last one said,
why don't we just bet on the Human Development Index instead, which has nothing to do with unemployment at all.
Nothing. All right.
So I did finally find a couple of other people who were willing to bet me,
but they needed to get a big handicap, and they're going to lose.
So pretty bad.
So for a year or two I was getting slightly worried.
Come on, it's lasting longer than normal.
Actually when I looked, it wasn't really normal.
It just took a little bit longer to reach the peak than normal.
So to my mind, betting is what reveals that actually rationality itself responds to incentives.
And by offering to bet, someone gets it,
it actually is enough to change the intellectual effort people put into their beliefs
and scrutinize them for the first time and realize that so many of the things they say,
especially things like politics, are actually not justified.
And just giant exercises of visual thinking.
That was Ash.
Just a really quick question.
When two highly confident, experienced bettors bet against each other,
what kind of odds could you expect?
Ah, well, so you mean if they both, if it's symmetric, then even odds is reasonable,
but if one person says five to one and another says three to one,
then they should bet it somewhere in between, right?
Say four to one, because that's the one that subjectively makes both better off.
Right.
Okay.
All right.
So anyway, remember how we talked about systematically biased beliefs about economics,
and I made you read an article about that?
So anyway, so I see this as a natural implication of this story.
So we get stupid economic policies because voters have stupid beliefs about economics,
and they have these stupid beliefs because if they vote on the basis of stupid beliefs,
what happens to them as individuals?
The same thing that happens to someone with a PhD in economics.
So pretty simple.
All right.
And let's see.
So another example that I like on the effect of incentives on rationality.
So the basic economic point that labor market regulations,
or especially pro-labor labor market regulations, reduce employment,
it seems very intuitive, seems very well supported,
and yet there are many people in the world who say,
yeah, it's just right-wing ideology, that's the stuff you're making up.
But anyway, of course you believe that.
And yet my favorite reply to people like this is, well,
have you ever filled out a job market application that had a line for salary requirements?
Likely.
Did you put a million dollars per hour as your salary requirement?
No.
Why not?
If you don't just take for granted that there's labor demand elasticity,
why not just ask for as much money as possible?
Why not?
Sky's the limit.
And to me this shows that everybody actually realizes on a deep level when the stakes are significant,
when there's a cost to them.
That is when people's actual apply their self-discipline.
They might actually like to put in a million dollars an hour.
That would be fun, right?
It would be fun to fill out the application.
Hire me because I am awesome.
And what is your experience?
I'm great at everything.
And to spill the whole application out, full wishful thinking.
But you recognize that if you say these things that are mentally gratifying to you,
that they will have very high personal costs.
And so almost no one says things like this.
And instead you go and try to constrain what you're saying to be truthy or true.
And on the other hand, if you were voting for policy, this is where you can say,
where do you get this idea that employers will hire fewer people when you raise the wage?
It's just your made-up stuff.
It's like, is it made-up stuff to think that if you enforce pollution regulations
with harsher fines that there will be less pollution?
Is that just made up?
Is that something where we only believe it after there's massive evidence in its favor?
Evidence that you'll never even, that's just too busy to ever look at?
No.
It is a presumption.
Of course demand curves slope down.
And if you want to say anything more about it, yes, fine, look at the evidence.
But to start with the assumption of elasticity is just what I want,
that's pretty crazy.
All right.
Questions about this?
No one happy?
Okay.
All right.
Now, one approach you can take to rational rationality is the puritanical one,
where you just sit there saying, these despicable people defiling their minds with lies.
This makes me sick.
Sinners.
Reprobates.
All right.
I'll confess.
Many times I have that reaction.
But if we're being economists about it, then if they enjoy it,
if they're willing to pay something for it, then it counts in welfare calculations.
So, yeah, even the sickest, most twisted pleasures go into the cost benefit calculations.
You know, someone enjoys watching frogs get stepped on.
That goes into the calculation.
They make other calculations that people don't like that.
That'll go in too.
But at least we put in the calculations for the numbers for the people who enjoy these things.
All right.
So, if we're doing Calder Hicks efficiency analysis, then we should count the consumption value.
But this in no way implies an efficient outcome.
And why?
Well, just think about the logic of externalities.
So if you say, look, air pollution is efficient because it's convenient for people to pollute the air.
Not true, right?
It is true that it's convenient to pollute the air.
Where does the inefficiency come from?
Other people.
Other people.
It's not convenient for you, but you're causing problems for everybody else.
And if you are selfish, you pollute as long as it's convenient for you,
ignoring all of these other bystanders who are suffering.
All right.
So, just like polluters get the full selfish benefit of their pollution,
but they are only a very tiny fraction of the cost.
Anyone ever pollute and then the next day goes,
the air smells a little worse because I drove yesterday.
No. Right?
But of course, if millions of people all make the air a little bit worse,
the air can be terrible.
Okay. But if you were to tell people, you fool,
if you hadn't driven yesterday, none of this would have happened.
Well, as long as the fool is an individual rather than a society, it's not true.
Right? If you're the one person in a polluting society
that doesn't pollute, what happens to you?
You breathe the same black air that everybody else is breathing.
In fact, you probably breathe more of it if you're walking,
because then you're walking along, hyperventilating, coughing,
taking in all the particulate.
Okay. So, same story.
Voters get the full benefit of their own irrationality.
What is this benefit?
It's the psychological benefit of protection and protecting your identity,
not having to work too hard intellectually, not losing your friends.
But you pay only this very tiny fraction of the cost.
Right? So, just like a common story about pollution is something
like everyone who pollutes is subconsciously thinking, well, nothing,
my pollution doesn't really affect the total level,
so I'm just going to do what's out there, the selfish thing.
Similarly, the rational rationality story is everyone subconsciously thinking, well,
if I were more reasonable, it wouldn't make anything any better, so I'm just going to go
and believe whatever I feel like believing.
Okay. All right.
So, just like it's possible, not certain, but it's possible that all polluters could be better off
if all polluters pollute less, similarly, it's possible that all voters could be better off
if they were all less irrational.
In fact, it's possible that all voters could be better off
if the government ignored their request and just gave them a policy they didn't want.
That's possible.
There could be a democratic outcome, a military coup overthrows it,
and the military coup could actually be efficiency enhancing.
All right.
So, remember once I told this to a guy from Egypt, and he says,
that's just what Mubarak says about why we can't have democratic elections in Egypt,
that the Muslim Brotherhood would take over and rule Egypt.
And I said, what?
I mean, is Mubarak right?
And he said, yeah.
I said, well, it's not my argument, it's your argument.
Don't blame me.
Just, you're like, I don't say whether the model applies to Egypt or not,
but the model's out there, and if it applies, maybe it applies.
I don't know.
You tell me.
All right.
Or, you know, another application would be protectionism.
So, the usual public choice story about protectionism is to blame special interests.
The steel lobby is down in D.C. ripping off America, trying to keep regular Americans
from getting the cheap steel that they have from Brazil that they crave.
That is a story.
All right.
But the big puzzle for this is protectionism is very popular.
Virtually all public opinion research says protectionism is popular.
So, why go and say special interests are subverting democracy
when the democratic outcome would appear to be to have protectionism?
Seems like an odd conclusion.
So, what's the other story?
So, my story is people have rationally irrational beliefs about trade,
and politicians offer protectionist policies to get their votes.
I mean, why would people have these protectionist preferences?
Well, who do protectionists normally blame for their country's economic troubles?
Foreigners.
Right. And is it, does it feel, and who does it feel good
to blame your country's troubles on?
Let me just say, does it feel better to say this is all our fault?
Americans are dumb.
Americans have messed everything up.
Or is it to say Americans are great and wonderful and we're winners,
but we've been stabbed in the back by foreigners.
That story sounds a lot better to almost everyone on earth.
Of course, it changed Americans to whatever country they're in.
Right. So, Germans have been betrayed.
Japanese have been betrayed.
Mexicans have been betrayed.
Afghans have been betrayed.
All right.
So, always have a story where the people in your country are virtuous,
and the rest of the world is hurting your country.
And that has great appeal.
Right. And I will confess that a fair bit about this is just from growing up with my dad
who just blames foreigners instinctively for anything he can think of.
Right. So, again, my favorite bizarro one is, you know,
it's because of immigrants that all the hospitals in LA have closed.
All of your hospitals have closed?
That's amazing.
Everyone, there's no hospitals left here.
All right.
So, he blames foreigners for problems that don't even exist.
But like, and why would a person do this?
Because he has rage.
His rage. And there's a bunch of people he doesn't like.
Now, is it fair to say that my dad hates foreigners?
I don't think so.
The right word is antipathy.
Hatred would be like he actually wants to like strangle them.
No, it's just, but it's more just like a.
All right.
So, then that he very much has.
Even that face is pretty much a direct imitation of him.
Hard for him to even say the word foreigners without like sneer.
Foreigners.
Foreigners.
All right.
And now, this is not just my dad, of course.
My dad is one of the closest things to a normal American I know.
And yes, that seems to be exactly right.
All right.
So, anyway, empirical support.
So, in that survey, Americans and economists on the economy.
Public is much more pessimistic about foreign trade
than economists controlling for everything else.
And actually, the real puzzle is why isn't policy a lot more
productionist than it is?
So, why don't we have a lot more productionism?
Of course, one story could be that we've been
in disequilibrium and now we're going to get it.
But, say, you're starting to look more dubious
that much is going to happen.
It seems like the main things Trump has done so far is he
finds a company and says, that company,
it's better not outsource 100 things.
All right.
And the things that Trump does divided
by US GDP come out to what?
Point zero, zero, zero.
But then why does he do it if it makes a little difference?
Americans love it.
All right.
You got something done.
Do you hear that?
Five companies didn't outsource stuff.
Do you have any idea how many companies are in this country?
And you didn't even, like,
those companies are going to outsource other stuff.
It's just that he stopped them
from outsourcing the thing they were going to do that week.
But then they stopped that week and then they don't do it.
But then there's, what about the rest of the year?
And like, the spotlight's off them.
And then he just goes back to business as usual.
Of course, because people are going to get bored
if he keeps going back to the same company to pick the fight.
Right? Maybe he heard, maybe like GM,
like there's like a big story.
But it's a company you've never heard of.
And you pick a fight with it once, like, yeah.
But like the second time you come back, it's like,
I'm kind of bored with this story already.
So pick a fight with somebody else.
Move on. All right.
So questions about this?
Questions about irrationalities, political pollution?
All right.
So now we come to my particular weapon,
which is a more moderate critique theme, I think.
All right.
So my critique of Whitman largely consists in,
yeah, that's basically, oh,
your critique is pretty right there and pretty right there.
And instead, there's just an enormous X there.
That's the part where I say Whitman is wrong.
I say, look, voters are extremely stupid.
Or, again, a better phrasing would just be,
voters lack common sense.
Or you could say voters are very far
from rational expectations.
Something like that.
So, and you can then go and explain everything else going
on as a response to this severe lack of voter common sense.
So, and I agree with him.
Like, you know, so politics looks very competitive to me.
So, you know, if Hillary and Trump were colluding
to ensure Trump's victory,
that was one of the best performances in the history
of our country, right?
It sure seemed like there was a lot of genuine feeling
on display and like they were doing whatever they could
in order to win.
Clawing for the power.
You know, you just imagine there being like a sector of power
and they're fighting over it.
Like, no, give it to me.
No, I want it.
The ring will be the sector.
It must be mine.
No, it's mine.
Or you just imagine the brutality
of that metaphorical fight.
That's what I feel like I see in every major election,
is candidates desperately, viciously struggling for power.
The only limit is you don't want to seem
like a bad sport to voters.
So, if you go a little bit too far,
then maybe voters won't like you
and then actually you'll have lost because of that.
Because, you know, well, my opponent would stupid anything
to win, but not me.
Oh, no. I am a person of integrity.
If you're looking.
No, give me that.
But integrity requires me to say, there are certain questions
about whether or not you were born in this country.
I'm just asking questions here.
Questions mandated by my own integrity.
Personally, I would rather not even answer these questions.
I just like to be a nice person.
I don't even want to win.
I want you to win because it would be a burden on me.
But I'll do this, throw myself at the sword,
good of the country, good of mankind.
All right.
So, anyway, so Whitman, so I say Whitman is correct
to accuse people of public choice of covertly,
secretly smuggling in an assumption of voter stupidity.
Brilliant.
It's called lack of common sense or lack of rationalizations.
But, so what?
So, voters become extremely stupid.
Even very smart ones are extremely stupid in politics
because the price is so low.
And again, I will say my dad was a big inspiration to me here.
My dad is a very smart guy.
He has a PhD in engineering and he has an enormous list
of practical skills, but he is one
of the most horrible economic illiterates I know.
And he is totally ineditable, right?
And has zero curiosity.
And the fact that his son has a PhD in the subject is
of absolutely no interest to him at all.
None. Right?
And so, and he literally will say things like,
well I didn't agree with that.
And that is his reputation of anything.
Like, I don't agree with it.
It makes me mad.
So, it's wrong.
Maybe, well how long have you spent studying it?
Why would you think that, so that,
like your knee jerk reaction is anywhere close to the truth.
But, he feels that very strongly.
Now, and yet when he runs his business,
then sound economics are very due to him.
And he sells used car parts to people all over the world.
Never once saying this is some kind of a Swedish plot
to suck up all of our car parts.
And then destroy the American car collecting industry
or anything else.
But, money's money.
Right? No problem.
Gains to trade.
Like that's perfectly fine with him.
As long as it's actually a practical task.
But when it comes to any kind of a policy question
or analyzing society, that's where the heuristic
of who do I have antipathy for is basically infallible for him.
So, what I say is, you know,
even smart people become extremely stupid
in political matters because the costs are so low.
And you can see how many pundits,
generally very smart people, open up their mouths
and say ridiculous things.
And then when challenged to bet on it, either run for the hills,
say ah, or ignore you.
Or just go and change the subject or say, well,
I'll bet on something that is totally different
from what I originally said.
Now, yet occasionally they'll say,
well why should I give you odds?
Well, why should I?
I'd like to get good odds for my bets.
You should give me good odds for my bet
because you claim high confidence and I don't.
So, you should give me good odds intermediate between even
and yours to entice me to bet in order to sucker me in.
That's why.
It's the logic of trade in general.
Right? If I can produce something for one-fifth
of the cost that you can produce it for, I don't go and try
to charge you the same price that you can make it
for yourself, I offer you a price good enough to get you
to go and trade with me.
Right? And it's exactly the same.
If I say, you know, if I say 50-50, you say 90%,
then you should be happy to give me two to one odds in order
to induce me to bet with you.
And if you don't want to give odds like that, that is a sign
that you don't have the confidence
that we are planning to have.
So, what I say is voter rationality is, first of all,
plausible in theory because of this.
You know, democracy is exactly the kind of institutional setting
where people can be completely crazy
without any noticeable effect on themselves.
And first of all, and second of all,
it's also easy to detect empirically on a large scale.
In fact, our stereotypes that economists have
about public opinion and public beliefs about economics,
almost all are confirmed by systematic data.
And if you take public choice class,
you'll go over a bunch of other stereotypes
about how people are clueless and how right those are.
One fun one is there is a stereotype that there's a lot
of that all you need to do
to make a war popular is just declare war
and then people rally around and wave flags.
And this is very strongly borne out by the data.
It's called the rally around the flag effect.
If you just take a look at public opinion,
even if the last poll before war is declared makes the war
unpopular, just declaring it causes a big spike
in popularity and then makes it popular.
So, you know, like emotionally this makes perfect sense, right?
Because you hear your country's at war
and what is a normal human being's emotional reaction
to that?
USA, USA, right?
Well, Americans' reaction.
Like say, whatever country we're in, Guatemala.
All right, so these are normal human reactions.
You hear your country's at war and you want to support them
and part of supporting them is saying it's a great idea
and that we're going to win.
Right? You've probably heard about the beginning
of World War I.
There are parades in all the big countries.
Happy parades of imminent victory.
They're all wrong.
Right? Now, you might say, well, maybe some people thought
that they were really likely to win.
Yeah, but everyone seems to think they were likely to win.
And that doesn't make sense.
You know, if you're in France and you say, well,
why are we so happy?
The Germans are having a really big parade.
Maybe they didn't beat us last time
and they're going to beat us again.
Right? That is not, that is the kind of thing
that is going to make enemies and it's also the kind
of thing that makes you feel like a traitor, even to think.
Right? You know, just the thought of our country can lose.
Those people, to think things like this normally.
And things that hurt you to believe are things
that people tend not to believe.
Right? Now, Whitman is always demanding, if you read him,
for, he's demanding those critics say,
what is the key asymmetry between markets and politics?
How are they really different?
Isn't it all just a competitive interaction
where people are trying to please customers or voters
and why don't, why wouldn't both systems work equally well,
at least within their sphere?
And my answer is the key asymmetry is incentives
for rationality.
So, in markets, there are plenty of people
who I will say are still irrational.
But at least if you're rational, you get something out of it.
You can avoid harm to yourself.
You can get a better deal.
Right? Whereas in politics,
if you are the lone rational person, what happens to you?
Same thing that happens to everybody else.
Right? So, in markets, even when people are ignorant,
they generally try to apply common sense,
which is why internet scams generally don't work.
Right? So, you know, you may not know a lot of details
about Nigeria or why there's so many spam emails from them.
But you do have common sense.
And common sense tells you to delete those people.
Right? And what are some common sense sayings
that would advise you to go and just delete them?
How about if it sounds too good to be true, it probably is.
That's just common sense.
Doesn't require much information to apply it.
It's just like, who are you?
I don't know you.
You're offering me something that sounds really great.
I don't believe it.
Delete. Right?
People do this all the time.
But politicians do the same kind of thing, and it works.
Politician comes along and says, this is going to be fantastic.
I'm going to give you this great deal.
Like, we're going to, like, everyone will be insured.
The costs will go down.
It's going to be wonderful.
Right? And people believe them.
Or someone says, look, we're going to go and invade Iraq.
We're going to put a stall on democracy.
And we're going to bring peace to the Middle East.
And it's going to happen in our time.
And we're going to do it.
And you get to be part of it.
That whole story, that sounds like a great story.
It's going to be cheap.
Cheap, fast.
Right? Or let's see.
Last night, I was seeing a clip
from John F. Kennedy's Cuban Missile Crisis speech.
And one line, I think it's like, this is almost word for word.
He said, you know, the greatest risk
of all would be to do nothing.
That's it.
How do you know?
I mean, this never happened before.
It seems like there's a really, there's one scenario
where this causes a nuclear war,
which we could have avoided just by appeasement.
Maybe it'll be even worse if we don't fight now.
But then again, maybe not.
How do you really know?
What, like, where's the, well, like, can we have a bet on this?
And, you know, we, but, you know, none of that is there.
And Stan, he just says that.
And again, when, and of course, he says stuff like this
because he knows, you know,
as a very successful politician, this appeals to people.
They want, you know, a forceful leader who tells them,
like, we are going to act.
We are going to solve the problem.
And those naysayers who just want to leave well enough alone
are going to make the whole, can only make the problem worse.
Not just to say might or seems likely to be, you know,
the kind of thing that would be the honest thing to say.
Right? Say, well, you know, and again,
just imagine a president saying, look, I've crunched the numbers.
There's a 40% chance my action improves things.
40% chance it leaves them the same.
20% chance that it makes it worse.
It's a favorable bet.
So let's do it.
That is not a war president.
That is not someone who is rallying a country behind him
for anything.
Instead, people like a leader just says, look,
victory is ours if we believe it.
Dot. Like, okay, like, is that generally true?
Is that only our country?
Does every country get this amazing,
this amazing Tinkerbell principle that if we just believe
in fairies that it happens?
No. Wrong.
But, like, why would politicians say this ridiculous nonsense?
And not just one person.
They all do it.
Why do they all say this ridiculous nonsense?
Right? You know, like, just a bunch of literal,
one literal falsehood after another.
Right? And people believe this stuff.
People like it.
You know, maybe part of it is people are just, well,
like, just like poetry.
But, again, I've talked to enough people
who tell me the poems with very, with great seriousness
as if they've got it all figured out.
I think that they actually believe the poems.
Like, you know, it's, someone believes a poem is
literally true.
That's what it looks like to me.
Like, every time someone says, this can only result in this.
So you'll bet me on, like, a million to one odds.
Or, no, even odds.
Or no bet at all.
Wow. One plus one can only equal two.
Now, that I'll bet a lot of money on.
But they don't want to bet a lot of money
on all the things they claim can only be a certain way.
All right.
Now, last thing that we get out of my rationality story is
it explains why a successful politician doesn't try
to fix the voters.
Successful politician isn't out to educate.
Successful politician is out to pander.
To tell people what they want to hear.
want to hear.
Right? And let's see, anyone here ever read Dale Carnegie's
How to Win Friends and Influence People?
You really don't have to read the book in order to get one
of the main punchlines almost immediately.
So, if you could A, tell people what they want to hear,
or B, tell them what they don't want to hear,
which is the better approach for making them like you?
Tell them what they do want to hear.
Well, what if what they want to hear is false?
Yeah, then lie.
Right? Or, of course, the easy thing is just don't investigate
very closely, and then it's just speaking without,
you know, it's like, well, it could be true, who knows?
All right.
So, anyway, voters who, voters like candidates
who share the confusions, they don't want pedants
who are going to lecture them.
Can you imagine any major politician coming up
and giving a speech before the American public,
especially in a debate or something like that,
and saying, look, I understand
that most Americans are extremely concerned
about the effects of international trade.
They're worried about the hauling
out of American industry.
They're afraid for their future.
I understand all this, but I'm here
to tell you these fears are wrong.
Like, you know, imagine, though,
like what people would say to something like that,
and then say, and here's why.
Well, let's just go over to the Econ textbook here,
page 233, comparative advantage.
Let's go through this stuff, and we're, all right,
and you have lost everybody.
Even if you give the best version of comparative advantage
that I've ever heard, which is the Iowa car crop,
your most likely reaction is your opponent saying, look,
so you think you can turn corn into cars, huh?
Well, that sounds like an amazing magic trick,
but most of us live in reality here
where you can't turn corn into cars.
You say, look, it's, you've lost the debate,
you've lost the election, and you're out of luck, right?
So, and instead, what you really want
to say in an election is American people believe these
things, and I believe them, too, with all my heart,
and I will take decisive action.
One other example that you almost never hear a politician
saying, look, this is a horrible, terrible problem.
Unfortunately, I've studied this issue very closely,
and there's not a damn thing government can do about it,
so we just have to live with the problem.
I'll keep my ears, I'll keep my ears perked in case a new idea
comes along, but any, if my rival says he can solve this
for you, he's lying.
No one ever says that, right?
And it's got to be true sometimes, right?
It can't always be wrong.
It can't be that every problem people are talking
about has a viable solution, but people don't like hearing
that a problem doesn't have a solution, and so they vote
for the person who tells them what they want to hear,
even though the truth is going to be quite different.
All right, and let's see here.
So, yeah, last page, so those are just some diagrams,
some different versions of the main curve.
Don't worry about that.
Let's see, I guess I've got time for one question
about the material, possibly two.
Again, of course, this is not your last chance to ask.
I will be around for most of the time,
so I guess I will be mostly away on May 10th and 12th,
but other than that, I'm basically
around almost all the time until the exam.
So, anyone got a late night question that's burning?
Yes, yeah, Ash?
Didn't Ron Paul do this in 2008 where he starts off on the bed
and low back, and then the standard?
So, and did he win?
Yeah, so there's one thing to, like, if you have an idea
that appeals to a minority,
then you might become a successful cult figure, right?
Or, again, like, here's the thing, in a system
of proportional representation,
you might actually be, have a great career being the person
who represents a certain kind of strange person.
Well, the people that I know who, people I know who know a lot
about Ron Paul will say a lot of his success has nothing to do
with his strange views and a great deal to do with the fact
that he delivered 5,000 babies
in the district that he represented.
So, there's a whole lot of people whose child was born
to the world by this guy, and then he's a congressman,
and he's like, all right, so, might not even be
about the policy, it's just about that nice man
who delivered the baby, right?
So, that's another possibility.
Let's see, one other time, one other question.
Anything else?
Yes?
So, what is your response, a while back I think we were
talking about biases and also it kind of pertains
to what you sort of just mentioned
about having an appropriate fear
of an actual thing happening in the world.
So, what is your response to that?
Yes. I mean, that one's also, like,
saying that crime rates are
down because incarceration is up seems
like at least a plausible theory you want to investigate.
I think most people who have done the social science will say
that there is an effect, although, of course,
most of the change is due to other things,
but at least that is one big effect.
So, again, it just comes down, again,
like inefficiencies just comes down to looking at the value
of the crime that's been reduced versus full of all the costs.
So, you know, you see a question number, see where it comes out.
Of course, there's also the possibility, like,
is there another way you could get the same result more cheaply?
Again, like, we have one common one is just to, you know,
like say, well, we don't keep people in jail for much more
than 20 years because there's near zero percent violent crime
for people who are over 40 anyway.
So, and most people commit violent crimes,
they're just not very, they're barely deterred at all
by the additional marginal years in jail.
So, there's something to that.
Yeah, but, you know, that's one, right,
say it's actually a much more complicated issue
where you really need to go into the empirics to do it.
Is it reasonable to say that about, like, oh,
we're spending a trillion dollars overseas
and that's why we're not having terrorism over here
and if we were doing that.
So, yeah, so, you know, that is a great question.
So, there there is a literature on it
where the main thing they focus is on near misses.
So, cases where terrorism almost happened
or almost didn't happen and there, you know,
a very strong result is that there really is almost no
effective terrorism prevention on terrorism.
It is just illusory, right.
So, you know, essentially there's just so many ways
that terrorism could be committed
and there's almost no money spent preventing 99%
of possibilities.
So, to say that it's the cause of lack really just,
it's just very, very unlikely.
All right.
So, yeah, so why don't we stop there.
Oh, yes, one of the things, so I think I may have mentioned it,
but I will repeat.
So, remember there is potential credit
for class participation.
So, if you first of all believe you deserve class participation
credit and second of all fear I cannot actually match your name
to your face, then if you email me a picture of yourself
that would solve that problem.
So, again, there's no requirement here.
It's totally up to you.
And actually, if I, when I'm doing it, if I can't figure
out who you are, then I will actually Google you
and try Facebook.
But anyway, but if you send me your picture,
then you don't have to rely upon things working out.
But I do actually try to make sure that I give credit
where credit is due.
But once I've exhausted all the main ways of supplementing my
highly imperfect 46-year-old memory, then, so anyway,
but if you send me your picture,
then you won't have that problem.
All right.
So, thanks everybody and good night.
All right.
Thanks.
