Remember we did two different versions of probability.
Objective probability, which you don't know anyone who takes a really hard line and just says,
I refuse to accept that could be a thing.
And then subjective probability, where there are some people saying, no, no, no, there's something wrong here.
You can't say these things. You can't say that you have a 40, that you think there's a 40% chance of something happening.
I don't know if I just said it. There's something, some people think there's something illegitimate.
But anyway, all of modern economics is based upon saying that it's perfectly fine to use subjective probability.
So we're going to do that. And if you do have some philosophical objection, you just have to suspend disbelief and work with it anyway.
You may be amazed at how far you can get talking about unicorns, even though there are no unicorns.
Now one interesting thing about subjective probability is that it doesn't put any constraints at all on what you can believe before you see facts.
You believe you can have any probabilities you want. 99% probability that I am the emperor of Antarctica.
Which is if you have John Nash out, you don't have to be the emperor of the world.
But it does actually restrict the way that you can update these beliefs.
So built in to subjective probability are some rules about how updating or revising beliefs in response to what you see has to change.
And there's two big formulas that are worth knowing.
First one is just the conditional probability formula.
Which most of you probably either know or can just intuit.
And this just says the probability of A given B.
And probability, whenever you see that vertical line, that means given.
So the probability of A given that B has occurred or that B is seen or whatever.
Is going to be equal to the probability that you get both A and B divided by the probability of B.
So a classic example would be what's the probability that you get two coins that both flip heads?
Conditional upon or given that the first one already flipped heads.
And then, well, the probability that you get two coins flipping heads is going to be 0.25.
It's a fair coin, right?
You flip it twice, you probably get heads twice in a row.
It's going to be 1 in 4.
Probability that the B happened is 0.5.
Then you go through and then you come up with probability of 0.5.
So this means that there's a 1 in 4 probability that you would get two heads before you know what the first one was.
But then the second one, before you flipped it, you already have.
But before you flipped it, you've not had a 50% chance.
So the probability that you will get two heads given you've already got one head is going to be 0.5.
On the other hand, you say what's the probability that you will get two heads given the first one was a tails?
Of course, that's impossible, right?
Now that is just a classic boring example.
We could also use this for a more interesting probability problem.
Like suppose a child claims that he saw a monster.
A monster! I've seen a monster!
And then, if you were to apply this formula, you start with, alright,
well, there's the probability the child saw a monster and there really was a monster.
So, I'm going to turn out what counts as a monster.
You know, like a Tyrannosaurus, that would count.
You know, just a list of things that would be good contenders.
I think if it turned out there was a Tyrannosaurus Rex in the backyard,
I think you would be very pedantic to say, well, a dinosaur is not a true monster.
But, in any case, so just picture this.
Alright, so the probability he saw a monster and there was a monster,
divided by the probability he says he saw a monster.
So, if the probability he says he saw a monster and there was a monster is one in a billion,
a very low probability,
and the probability that he says he saw a monster is, say, 0.1,
10% chance a kid will go and just make up any kind of outlandish story.
But, if you're my younger son, it's more like a 90% chance it's going to be an outlandish story.
Then the conditional probability turns out to be more than 100 million.
So, even though, of course, you still think it's highly unlikely there's a monster,
the fact the kid said it does dramatically multiply the probability,
by a factor of 10.
And, of course, that's more than it's only small probability to begin with,
and it's not very impressive.
This is actually a general point about probability.
You'll notice in the media, sometimes they'll say that there's a 47% increase
in the number of puppies that Sikhs have killed in the last month.
Alright, you're like, wait a second, how long does it happen anyway?
So, well, there were two incidents last month and three this month,
so roughly a 47% increase, something like that.
So, in general, whenever you see the media going and switching to percent changes,
it is a reason to think that maybe it's an enormous change over a very small base,
and is therefore still absolutely nothing a sane person would ever worry about or talk about
or pay attention to.
But, that's your audience, so I can make it in advertising, so don't worry about it.
And then a general point, a conjunction can never be more probable than either of the components.
So, a classic example here of probability, or actually in experimental psychology,
so there's a famous experiment where you randomly assign people to two groups,
so, randomly assign the even number of people to one group, odd number of people to another group,
I split you up so you don't find out what the other one is hearing,
and I go to both groups, and I give you the same story about, I don't know what her name is,
it's like a woman named Carol or something like that.
So, both of you here, you know, Carol is a long-time environmentalist.
She has always been concerned with animals and flowers.
When she was an undergraduate, she majored in environmental science, something like that.
But then, you both hear the same prompt, but then group one is told,
what's the probability that Carol is a banker?
And group two is asked, what's the probability that Carol is a banker who is active in environmental causes?
And, bizarrely, the people who were just asked, probably she's a banker,
were like, no, no way it's Carol a banker.
But the people who were asked if she's a banker active in environmental causes,
were like, no, no, 20%.
It's like 1% says she's a banker, 20% she's a banker active in environmental causes,
which, basic probability is absolutely absurd, that can't be.
Because, the worst case scenario is that if she's a banker, she's always active in environmental causes.
I'm not even, I'm not involved in that one.
In which case, if there's a 20% probability that she's a banker active in environmental causes,
the probability that she's a banker of some sort or other, must be greater than or equal to 20%, right?
So, this is a big issue in psychology.
Alright, now there's another formula, this one is one where a lot of people can kind of figure it out,
you don't need to know the formula to go do problems like this,
maybe a hard one you might need the formula.
There's another one that virtually no one can do without the formula, and this is called Bayes' Rule.
Alright, and this links the probability of A given B to the probability of B given A.
So what this says is that the probability of A given B is equal to the probability of B given A,
times the probability of A, all over the probability of B given A,
times the probability of A, plus the probability of B given not A,
the tilde means not in probability of mutation, times the probability of not A.
Now I'm sure this is instantly obvious to all of you,
and you never, you know, if you're the age of five you've been going around reciting this formula.
But anyway, this is the formula, right, and you have one example,
so I'm not going to prove it, but you want to look at one example of this.
So, you know, we just go and plug in for A and B,
that says the probability that a child saw a monster, given that he says he saw a monster,
is equal to the probability that he says he saw a monster if he did see a monster,
times probability of saw a monster, all divided by the probability saw a monster,
times the probability that he, you know, times the probability that he says he saw a monster if he saw a monster,
plus the probability that he say saw a monster if did not see a monster,
times the probability that he did not see a monster.
So, for example, if the probability that he says he saw a monster, if he did see a monster is one,
So if he sees a monster, he definitely can tell you.
And the probability he says he saw a monster
and he did not see a monster is 0.1.
So 10% chance the crowd is making an outrageous lie
to make a tension.
And the probability he saw a monster is, say, 1 in 10
million.
And the probability he didn't see a monster
is going to be, of course, 1 minus 1 in 10 million.
Then the conditional probability that he did, in fact,
see a monster and he says it is going to work out
to the 0.9999991 times to the negative 7.
So again, this has raised the probability.
Now, what's interesting about Bayesian's rule?
Bayesian's rule actually gives rise
to an entire philosophy of science called Bayesianism.
The Bayesian view of science.
And in fact, it gives rise to an entire view of epistemology
called Bayesian's view of epistemology.
And just thinking about it for science,
there's a natural framework for scientists
to relate hypotheses to evidence.
So there is a lingering idea that you
do a crucial experiment, and then this
either proves your theory is true
or proves your theory is false.
Now, has this ever happened in reality, ever,
in the history of science?
No.
No way.
So think about this.
Have you ever done an experiment in, say, high school chemistry
and you get the wrong answer?
And then the whole scientific community comes, oh my god,
a high school in Virginia.
The experiment was done disproving
the fundamental basis of relativity.
No.
So a minimum, if there's some questions
about the competence of the experimenter,
then some doubts will be raised.
And of course, there's always doubts
about the competence of the experimenter.
Even the very best person can screw up.
So even if the experiment's been done 10 times,
well, wait a second, who conducted this experiment?
Maybe there was some bias, or maybe there
was something else going on.
All these things.
So anyway, in general, if you let A be an hypothesis,
so A is an hypothesis of any kind,
and B is some evidence, B is some evidence of any kind,
then we can calculate the probability
that the hypothesis is true given the evidence.
So for example, the probability that the minimum wage
causes unemployment, given Karn and Kruger's famous study
on the minimum wage in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
How many have heard of the famous Karn-Kruger study
in New York, Pennsylvania?
So when I was doing labor at Princeton,
I had to present the paper.
Yes, I was a Karn student, although I never saw him
talk about anything empirical.
He only did the theory for a class.
But anyway, so a famous study which
seemed to show that when New Jersey raised its minimum wage
and Pennsylvania didn't, that New Jersey's low-skilled
employment actually increased relative to Pennsylvania.
There's a bunch of complaints about the study.
Most of them seem to come from people who have not read
the study, because there's a bunch of complaints
where they do specifically address various concerns.
Is it a perfect study?
Of course not.
But a lot more careful than critics would have you believe.
So anyway, suppose that the probability
that we get these findings that the minimum wage does
cause unemployment is only going to be 0.3.
Right now, why?
So if, in fact, the usual view that minimum wage does
cause unemployment is true, why would we get these results?
Well, maybe our econometric results suck.
Maybe econometric methods suck.
Maybe the data sucks.
Maybe there's human fallibility.
In general, any time someone goes and does
an analysis of some horrible accident,
the most likely answer for what went wrong is human error.
Why the plane crashed?
Human error.
Why was the car crashed?
Human error.
Why was there a ship crash?
Human error.
So suppose that you would have a probability
that you would get the findings.
Go ahead and get the findings.
If minimum wage does cause unemployment,
suppose that's 0.3.
So still, it's less likely the chance,
but there's still a good chance that the methods just
aren't that good enough to actually give the right answer,
even when the theory's true.
And on the other hand, suppose the probability
that we'll get their findings, so the probability
that we'll get the findings if minimum wage does not
cause unemployment, does not cause unemployment,
suppose that equals 0.8.
This says that if, in fact, minimum wage doesn't
cause unemployment, there's an 80% chance we'll get.
These findings.
So that could be a probability.
And then, now we come up with a key thing,
which is if you knew nothing about the empirical literature,
and someone says, yeah, what do you
think the odds are that raising the price of asparagus
would reduce the amount of asparagus people buy?
Any product, so any random product.
What would you say?
What would your odds be?
I haven't seen any evidence.
I've never seen a single study.
But for all I know, there's never
been a single study about the demand for asparagus.
But still, it's a probability that, in this case,
minimum wage does cause unemployment
if you don't know anything else.
So I'm going to say, for me, that's like a 99% probability.
And that's just ideology.
Is it?
Is it or is it just a common sense point?
And one, by the way, that I'm happy to adhere to even
for cases where I wish it were true.
For example, what's my probability
that going and more harshly punishing illegal immigration
will reduce the amount of illegal immigration?
0.99.
And what's the probability you think that punishing drug users
more harshly will reduce drug consumption?
0.99.
So these are all things that I might not like to be true.
But nevertheless, it just seems highly implausible to me
that going and changing incentives in that way
would not have the obvious common sense effect.
So we got that.
0.99.
And then, of course, the probability
that minimum wage does not cause unemployment,
that's just going to be 0.01.
So notice, these two probabilities
don't have to sum to one.
In fact, it could be that you think
that the current career findings are highly
likely regardless of the facts.
For example, suppose you thought that they were hacks
and were falsifying the evidence.
In that case, I don't believe that.
I'm just hypothetic.
It seemed like fine work to me.
So anyway, suppose you believe that they
were going to say that they were getting their findings
regardless of the evidence.
Then you can have one and one, and that could sum to two.
Totally possible.
Or again, suppose that what do people
think would happen if I were doing the study?
Then they'd say, no way, Brian is
going to go and find the wrong results.
So it's going to sum to 0.01.
The two probabilities together.
So anyway, these don't have to sum to one.
They can sum to anything between 0 and 2.
But these ones logically do have to sum to one.
Probability something happens or doesn't happen.
Everything either happens or doesn't happen.
So that is certain.
So we go and plug these probabilities into a basis rule.
And then we get the conditional probability.
Given these, again, I'm saying conditional probability,
that the minimum wage causes unemployment
given their findings, is just going to be equal to 0.3 times
0.99 over 0.3 times 0.99 plus 0.8 times 0.01.
And that's going to be equal to 97.4%.
So in other words, we go and we do a study run by someone else,
some very careful guys, against the wrong result,
and we still say there's a 97.4% probability
that minimum wage does have the expected effect.
How is it that we're able to get this result?
Well, because we start out very confident in this,
if you're like me.
Of course, you might have a totally different probability.
And from being a CART student, my impression
is his probability for that is 0.5.
So he's just like, I'm just totally open-minded to anything.
Anything can happen.
I always have a little puzzle when people say, really?
So when you talk to people about what
will happen if you start cracking down more on late
homework, you're like, 50% chance it
leads to more late homework, 50% chance it leads to less late
homework.
Who knows?
Until we do empirical study, anything can happen.
I'm a little puzzled by people with that.
I'm like, you can't really be that open-minded, can you?
Nor should you be.
Your brain is falling out of your head
if you're that open-minded.
But anyway, now notice that after the CART group
was studied, I am less confident than I was initially.
Initially, like, 99% chance that the usual standard textbook
for you is right.
Now I'm down to 97.4.
So I have had my confidence reduced.
But given that I thought it was very likely to begin with
and that I didn't put that much trust in the methods anyway,
then it's not so surprising that I didn't update very much.
Anyway, general good rule for reading empirical work
is before you actually get to the section where
they give you the answer, just to honestly say,
well, if the result comes out the wrong way,
would I put much credence in it?
If your answer is no, you also shouldn't put much credence
in it if it comes out the right way.
So before you approach, you just say, look,
this is a really hard issue.
And I greatly doubt that anyone could
write a paper that was very good on this topic.
That means that at the end of the paper,
you should not be going and saying, oh, it was so great.
Because it had the right answer.
That's what we call circular reasoning.
And it's bad.
OK?
All right, so questions about Mace's rule?
Now, I'll say that there's very little doubt that most people
are ignorant of this formula.
The question is not, do people know the formula,
but do they act like they know the formula?
At least, are there some signs that they
are in the ballpark of this formula?
That doesn't look so bad.
So for example, people generally run away
when they appear to see a large fire.
And why?
Well, initial probability that there is a fire,
given that there seems to be a large fire, pretty good, right?
Where there's smoke, there's fire.
Of course, it could be all elaborately staged hoax.
But probably not.
Or here's another fun one.
I assume most of you in the room meet reports of alien
abduction with skepticism.
I do.
All right, so if you don't, then this isn't a good example.
But if someone just says, I was abducted by aliens last night,
if your reaction is, well, I mean, he said it.
Why would he lie?
I guess he was abducted.
Or you're like, I don't know, 50-50 that it happened.
If that's your reaction, then maybe you're
not so consistent with Bayes' rule.
On the other hand, if your reaction is, oh, come on.
Really, there's aliens?
This seems very suspicious.
Anyone ever seen, there's a great infographic
showing the amount of evidence of alien abduction
as a function of camera phone ownership in the population?
And strangely, the number of reports
don't seem to change much as camera phones
have become ubiquitous.
That's pretty odd.
Now again, of course, you always try to say the theory
is that, well, the aliens aren't going to come now.
There's camera phones.
They were making up their anti-camera phone technology.
So you can always try to say the hypothesis that way.
But still, there's something pretty odd about it.
My brother does believe in Bigfoot and mermaids.
So he was never that into this.
Here, like in another example, we believe shocking disaster
stories that we hear in the New York Times,
but not in the weekly World News.
We have another weekly World News.
It's a great newspaper.
Much more entertaining than the New York Newspaper,
so that's for sure.
I've heard about that, boy.
So anyway, I still remember on the morning of September 11,
2001, when I went and told Robin Hanson that the World Trade
Center's buildings had collapsed,
he went and checked his watch to see if it was April Fool's Day.
Right?
Literally.
He goes, it's April Fool's.
Boy, September 11, that's many months away from April Fool's.
But then when he saw that it was on the New York Times website,
and he made sure.
This is like, you know, New York,
nyl.com, not New York, nyt.com.
Once he verified that, I guess it really happened.
Or, you know, like another one, we don't generally
change our mind about the minimum wage
when a spawner's discovering a new galaxy.
It just seems relevant.
So something is equally likely, given A or not A,
then we're not going to change our mind when evidence comes in,
because the evidence is relevant.
So anyway, the fact that there's at least a bunch of ways
that people are kind of Bayesians
is fortunate for us, because almost all
of microeconomic theory, game theory, builds on this stuff.
So if it's deeply wrong, then we're just building on sand
and waste our time.
On the other hand, if it's kind of right,
but there's some problems, then we
can go and work through how it works, if it's exactly right.
And then we can go try to tweak things a bit as we go along.
And that's what we are, in fact, going to do.
I think I already mentioned Richard Thaler's anomalies
column.
So again, people sometimes think of Thaler
as being someone who's trying to destroy economics
or something like that.
I think a fairer story is he's just
trying to tweak economics in a more accurate direction.
I didn't say, look, here's a basic model.
It's not terrible.
But there's some glaring problems.
And if we can go and patch the problems,
then we can get a better story.
So anyway, so after the midterm, we're
going to talk about empirical evidence
that people do deviate from Bayes' rule
in certain specific kinds of cases.
But anyway, for now, we're just going
to work with it just to understand
what the theory implies.
And then the last question.
So what should you infer if you appear to witness
a zero probability event?
What was that?
Probably didn't happen.
Yeah, exactly.
You're mistaken.
This did not, in fact, occur.
So has anyone here ever had a lucid dream?
This is where you're in the dream,
and you then become confident that you are dreaming.
And then if you really interact together,
like now, I can do anything in this dream.
I can fly.
So I did have a dream like this a few weeks ago.
And in the dream, I was able to turn my wife's hair blue.
I don't know why that would let me like this talking to her.
I said, look, here's my proof.
This is my dream.
I'm going to turn your hair blue now.
And like, it happened.
Wow.
All right.
Thanks.
Anyway.
All right.
So questions about probability?
You can tell the probability.
Yeah.
How is the continuous version of that?
How is the?
You have like instead of g of a, you
have a probability distribution function.
So you have to replace p a by the value of the probability
of the, I mean, as a function.
I'm thinking of.
OK, these are all steppers.
These are not.
You got to say, probability a, a, b, that's just a number.
That's not a whole function.
Yeah.
But.
But that can be generalized to have.
Yeah, almost certainly.
I'm not sure I've ever seen anyone bother, but they're
likely to do it.
All right, so now moving into general equilibrium.
Just to let you know, so when I was in your shoes,
I could do six weeks on this stuff.
And I've squeezed it down to one week.
I think that it deserves one week.
It doesn't deserve any more than one week.
And especially because this is what
we call a mature research literature.
Almost nothing new is being done on general equilibrium.
So it's not very useful to you except just
to understand the background.
And insofar as it does give you some insight in the world,
that's good.
But it's not the kind of thing that it's likely
that anyone here is going to be doing more research on.
Because probably anyone's doing any more research on it.
It's just a very thoroughly fished field.
Although it's possible the next great general equilibrium
theorist is here.
It's possible.
All right, so just to back up.
All right, so usually we think about, in economics,
we think about individual agents as maximizing
something or other.
Maximize utility, maximizing profits, maximizing votes.
These are all things that we imagine
that people are maximizing.
But we actually rarely analyze an isolated individual.
So there is crucial economics where
you just analyze Robinson Crusoe on an island.
But it's not very interesting in terms of explaining the world.
We don't have a lot of one person societies.
So anyway, for most social scientists,
interesting questions involve more than one person.
Interesting questions involve more than one person.
Unfortunately, there's a case where
the interesting questions are really hard.
So we've got a whole body of theory
for analyzing what happens when there is just one individual.
But what about when there are a bunch of individuals
that are all interacting?
So in particular, so you've got one individual doing
what we call playing against nature, one person
on the island.
If that's all that's going on, then the action
is very one-sided.
So for example, Robinson Crusoe shows up on an island
and he starts hunting turtles and fish.
Does anyone think maybe there'll be a turtle fish alliance
to overthrow Crusoe?
Highly unlikely.
It's just not going to happen.
The nature that you're interacting with
is so dumb as a brick, so unstrategic,
that you may as well just figure that there's
no strategy there at all.
I remember once when I was out of high school,
I went hunting crawfish with a net.
And at first, we tried hunting them from the front.
And a crawfish has a distinctive reaction
when it's approached, which it flips its claws this way
and flees at an incredible speed.
So you can, like, a human being will never
catch a crawfish from the front of the net.
And then it took us about five minutes to say,
let's come up behind the crawfish.
And then what will happen?
What happens is they immediately kick themselves,
or like, fling themselves into your net.
And we caught them all.
That was it.
There was no learning.
They weren't saying, hold on, fellow crawfish,
we must revise our strategy.
No, they just did what they were called to do,
and they were all eaten.
OK, so anyway, when you're playing into nature,
you don't worry that your opponent's going to change
his behavior in response.
Certainly, if your opponent is the forest or a mudslide,
you don't think, what will the mudslide do
if I start building dams or something like that?
So you're like, the mudslides are
going to change their behavior.
They're just going to keep doing whatever thing they do.
But on the other hand, when there are two people involved,
then things are very different.
And the idea that a human being might
start revising a strategy in response to your behavior
seems very reasonable.
Again, if a human being is two years old, then maybe not.
Although, it doesn't take kids that long
before they start looking for weaknesses
and sensing chinks in the armor and realizing,
hey, this lady just does whatever we want.
And that guy over there, he's tough.
He's mean.
Let's go and exploit the nice lady
and be nice to the mean guy.
Typical thing for kids to do.
All right, so anyway, so given the incredible complexity
of strategic interaction between human beings,
economists have taken a lot of our brain power
and zeroed in on a very special case.
Zeroed in on a very special case.
And this case is, imagine that we don't have one agent,
but we don't have two agents either.
Instead, we just have a ton of agents,
an enormous ocean of agents.
So let's think about situations like this.
And in this case, we're able to solve the strategy problem
as well, because we said, look, there's that many agents
that no one individual needs to worry
what anyone else's region response to his behavior will
be.
Picture this.
Have you ever been to the grocery store
and you're about to buy a second can of corn?
And then you say, wait a second.
If I buy the second can of corn, they
might jack up the price in the first can of corn,
so I better not do it.
Has anyone ever had this kind of reaction?
Now, if you were, say, the US military
and you buy 20 million cans of corn a year,
then this could be a very reasonable concern for you.
But if you're just one isolated individual,
the idea that the store is going to change the price of corn
or that you might tilt the world price of corn by even a penny
sounds quite fanciful, right?
So there are actually a lot of cases
where you will be tailoring your behavior to circumstances
without the slightest concern that anyone else is going
to change their behavior.
Another example.
Is anyone worried that if you drive more aggressively,
this is going to lead to a general social breakdown
of good driving?
Even a small change in the general social level
of good driving if you drive worse.
I once did have a graduate student
who did believe this, and I believe
there's a chain reaction.
And all right, well, I can't prove you're wrong,
but that seems a very strange view about how the world works,
that lots of other people are going
to noticeably change their driving just because you're not
driving that well.
Seems kind of fanciful.
All right.
So we have lots of kinds of examples of this thinking.
Has anyone ever been thinking about buying a stock
and you're worried that you're going
to change the world price of stock?
Or what if I dump this?
All right.
So again, I know for all I know, there's
some people who own so much Bitcoin
that you could actually move the markets.
Way off.
Yeah, so when I first started hearing about Bitcoin
about five years ago, I'm not sure
if we did have any one grad student that was into it.
Probably we did, but I definitely had some people
that were similar to our graduate students who
appeared to just be random kids who didn't know anything
about anything.
And they had a shirt that says, I use coins, Bitcoins.
And I wonder if those kids are now worth a billion dollars.
I don't remember who they were exactly.
But anyway, if you really had a billion in Bitcoin,
maybe you could move the market around.
So Robin had some other competitor to Bitcoin,
and then he was concerned.
Wait, if I sell it all, maybe I will change the price.
But he was actually more worried that he'd
get robbed in the process of selling it.
So he brought in a cryptocurrency consultant
to make sure that there was not a digital purse snatching
as he showed up.
Anyway, an interesting result out of all this reasoning where
we just figure that the world is so vast that any one
individual can neglect strategy is
that once you make the problem simple in this way,
thinking that the world does not pay any attention to you,
then you can make the problem complex in every other way
that you can imagine practically.
And you can still get clean answers.
Now, I say clean answers, not true answers,
but clean answers.
If you are, in fact, a theorist, then a lot of what
you're looking for is, in fact, a clean answer rather than
a true answer, unfortunately.
I don't know why.
Well, because people can make their career off of, say,
I've got a model that has a definite answer about what
happens.
Is that what really happens?
Well, I've got another paper that
pursued the change of the assumptions.
And then there's more papers, hundreds of citations.
Yeah, yeah, but is the model true?
Well, you know, 10 years coming up,
we'll address that afterwards, something like that.
So anyway, any time you analyze complex economies
using this assumption, the world is so big
that no one individual makes a difference,
you are doing what we call general equilibrium analysis,
or GE for short.
All right, questions?
This is the idea.
So another idea.
At some point, I think we do the mating market, at least
for a little bit.
So you know the saying, there's lots of good fish in the sea?
You have to remember to sing a song, which I will not
sing to you right now, although I'm so resented.
But anyway, so again, there's infinite good fish in the sea.
Or at least there are so many fish in the sea
that your behavior is not going to change how many fish are out
there and their quality.
There's 1%.
All right, so now let's do our harder math before the break,
when we are all still completely and absolutely alert.
Everyone's energy is crackling, and you're
ready to do topology.
Well, I'm not really going to do topology.
I'm going to tell you a result that's
proved using topology without actually going into much detail.
But topology is one of those kinds of math
that's way beyond calculus by quite a bit, actually.
But an economist, Jay D. Meyer, who
is a topologist, is a topologist by quite a bit, actually.
But economists generally just go and import the theorems
without having to really worry about it.
So there's a few that do actually learn topology.
But I really recommend it.
Of course, if you do want to do it,
you'll want to discourage it a little bit.
Realizing your potential as another great topological
economist.
OK, so here's a simple example.
So suppose that we've got an economy.
We've got high consumers with identical preferences
of A. So this is a really boring economy.
Two goods.
Everybody's got identical preferences of down.
There's I of them.
And then everybody's got this utility function,
which you've probably seen before.
So given by A times natural log of X plus B times
the natural log of Y. The goods are X and Y.
And then we constrain A plus B to be equal to Y.
And now, these agents go and make exchanges in markets
where everybody knows that their personal behavior has
no effect whatsoever on prices.
So everybody is like you when you're buying a second can
of corn.
Are they going, oh my god, oh my god,
if I take that second can of corn, I might shift the price.
Be careful.
Think about this.
No, they're not doing that.
They're just going, if they want eight cans of corn,
they're just going to dump the cans of corn into the cart.
And that's it, without having to think about it anymore.
Now, what's going to happen in this very austere economy?
Remember, identical preferences and endowments.
So it's a really boring world.
What's going to happen here?
Well, intuitively, since everybody's
got the same preferences, the same endowments,
then the only stable equilibrium is
going to be one where whatever the prices are persuades
everybody that they don't want to change anything.
Because if the price of X is too low,
then everyone will want to sell X. Can everyone sell X?
No.
Everyone cannot reduce the holdings of X.
This is the world.
We have a little toy economy, a toy world, where you set it up.
And similarly, if the price of Y is high,
everyone will sell their Y. Can everyone sell their Y?
Of course not.
So instead, we need to have prices
that persuade everybody just to stick
with what they started with, which
is a very boring economy.
Proves the useful points.
So formally, we'll start doing something
that will seem totally familiar.
And it's only at the end that we actually are truly
doing general equilibrium.
So let's just start with something.
This is going to look very similar to stuff
that you probably did in your intermediate background.
So let's just start off with noting
that the Y is just going to be equal to your total income.
This is a commodity economy.
So your total income is just going
to be the price of X times the amount of X you have
plus the price of Y times the amount of Y you have.
So the amount of Y that you have has got to be your income
minus the price of X times X all over the price of Y.
And then, so this is what has to happen for consumption.
And then, since this is a commodity economy,
your income is just going to be defined by the price of X
times X bar.
So whenever I'm going to bar over a product,
that means it's an initial endowment.
It's the amount of the stuff you start with.
So it's going to be the price of X times your endowment of X
plus the price of Y times Y bar, your endowment of Y.
Now, this means we can go here.
We can plug that in for our income.
And then, we go and take that Y and plug it back in there.
And now, we have simplified things down
to maximizing a function where it's just a utility.
It's a function of X. That's where we're just
doing partial derivative of utility with respect to X.
So agents are maximizing that thing written in the notes.
Which again, just comes from here's where our income is.
Plug it for income.
That's Y. Plug it for Y. And now, we've
got a nice, easy function.
So we can probably be maximizing since we're
ready to take out plus a lot of the grade, plus A, plus F.
First year of college.
So same kind of function, but maximizing it for one time.
And when we differentiate, what do we get?
We find out that X is going to be equal to A over B times
price of Y over the price of X times the amount of Y.
And then, since agents are obviously
going to want to consume all their income,
there's what else you can do with your money.
It's a two-bit world.
It's one.
Notice, it's also a one-period model.
There's no future in this world.
The world happens once.
You live fast.
You die young.
And so you consume your X, consume your Y,
and then you're dead.
So there's no point saving it.
There's no children in this model.
There's nothing like that.
It's not an over-regenerations model.
Really stripped-down model.
Anyway, so since you consume all your income,
then what we know is that X is going
to be equal to A times your income over PX.
And Y is going to be equal to B over income times PY.
And remember that the functions like this,
you get this constant income fractions result.
The way of when the utility function looks like,
people will consume a single thing.
If A is 0.3, then they'll consume 30% of X and 70% of Y.
OK, now so far we haven't done anything
that's general equilibrium.
This is all intermediate microbe.
So where does the PhD microbe start?
Right now.
Right now.
And it's going to seem so simple that you'll
be delighted to know, wow, this is all
that it takes to transition from intermediate microbe
to PhD microbe.
So since, so the general equilibrium step,
this is to actually do what's called close the model,
to make everyone's behavior consistent with everybody
else's behavior.
So that we can all be maximizing simultaneously.
So far, all we've done is figure out
what does one individual do to maximize?
But what is it like for everybody
to maximize simultaneously?
Remember, this could be any number of people.
This could be a quadrillion people.
What is it like for all quadrillion of them
to maximize simultaneously?
And the answer is to make this world work.
To make the story internally consistent,
we just have to set x is equal to x bar, y is equal to y bar.
And then what we find is that x bar is going to be equal to a
times dx x bar plus py times y bar all over px.
x, x, and then if we simplify this down.
So notice, what we're really trying to solve for
are px and py.
That's what is going to make the world consistent.
It's what's going to make things make sense.
We want to find out what prices are required for this society
to be internally consistent.
What prices are necessary for everyone
to be maximizing their own self-interest
simultaneously in a way that is totally stable?
And if we go through this, we'll do a little bit more math.
We'll find.
that the equilibrium prices of x and y
are just going to be equal to a over b times y bar over x bar.
And this is a PhD conclusion.
That is a PhD conclusion.
Now, what does this mean?
Well, it says that in the society that we just defined,
so this one, everyone's got an ethical preference
and an endowment, everyone's got the utility function,
then in equilibrium, the ratio of the price of x,
the price of y, remember, this is p sub x,
so it's not p times x, it's p sub x,
is going to be equal to a over b.
And again, so what does that mean?
Well, what's a?
A high a means what?
What does high a mean?
Like x more.
Yeah, people like x more.
What does high b mean?
People like y more.
What does a big y bar mean?
The world has a lot of y.
Lots of y.
What does a high x bar mean?
The world has lots of x.
The world has lots of x.
So this says that if people like x more,
then the price of x goes up.
If people like y more, then the price of x relative to y
goes down.
If there's more y, then x is going to be more valuable.
If there's more x, then y will be more valuable.
And in particular, given these assumptions in this model,
this is exactly what's necessary to make the world stable.
If the price of x divided by y were higher than this,
then people would want to go and dump a ton of x
by y.
But there's the problem.
If everybody wants to dump x and buy y, can society do that?
No, of course not.
Society cannot collectively dump its x and get y
if that society is everything.
Of course, one country could go and dump its x in order
to get y.
But the universe of Asians cannot do that.
And so that's why this actually doesn't
contain some useful insight here.
OK.
All right.
And again, how is this different from this?
This is telling us what one individual does.
This is telling us what society does, given these assumptions.
You've actually been able to build a whole world out
of some very specific assumptions
about individual behavior.
Now, you may say, yeah, well, we build a world that
is nothing like the real world.
And in fact, it's such a narrow, stripped down world, who cares?
I know, it's an interesting homework problem anyway.
But also, as you might guess, one of the best ways
to start understanding more complex problems
is to start with a really simple problem
and then work your way up.
Robin Hanson was telling me that there's
a famous mathematician who published a book with just,
I think it was convenience, it was called How to Solve It.
Anyone heard of this book?
And it just contains a bunch of strategies
for solving problems.
And two of the top strategies are,
if you're stuck on a problem, A, try to solve a more general
version of the problem, or B, try
to solve a more specific version of the problem.
And both actually are useful strategies if you're stuck.
You can go either way, of course.
The more general one is a little bit more helpful
if you can pull it off.
Because if you prove the more general thing,
then you've automatically proved the more specific thing.
But on the other hand, doing the simpler problem
is probably easier.
So at least that's how I am.
So questions about this really simple economy
and how we now have a glorious PhD result?
So in that case, what if we made things more interesting
by allowing the individuals to be different from each other?
So everybody can have their own preferences.
Everybody can have their own endowments.
So at least we've got a real motive for trade.
Here, the whole point of prices is just
to convince people they don't want to trade,
which is a strange market.
But nobody in the market can convince people
that no one wants to participate in the markets.
It seems like a dumb thing to do,
but it's implicit in the model.
Anyway, so what happens if we give everybody
their own tastes and their own endowment?
In particular, just to keep things tractable,
why don't we keep the basic functional form of utility,
but then give every person his own preference parameters?
So everybody still has this log utility function.
But one person can have utilities 0.9 log x plus 0.1 log y.
Another one can have 0.03 log x plus 0.97 log y, and so on.
And then for the endowments, anybody can have anything.
So some people can have zero.
Some people can have a ton.
It's all OK.
But then, again, what happens is that instead of there
being a common x bar and y bar, now we
have an xi bar and a yi bar.
This indicates the endowment of person i,
endowment of x of person i, the endowment of y
of person i.
Happy?
I don't feel completely alert at this time of the evening.
All right.
So yeah, topology coming up.
All right, that's the easiest kind of topology.
All right.
OK, so what do we got?
All right.
So as I said, so now the agents are actually
going to be making trades at a greater prices.
So people who like x a lot are going
to tend to be buying some x.
They're going to be buying x by selling y.
And people who don't start off with much x
are going to be tending to buy x with y.
So what we need to do is find not
the prices that will persuade every individual to stick
with what they started.
That's not necessary.
Any one individual can go and sell some x and buy some y.
But still, society cannot sell x.
And society cannot sell y.
So what we need then is to find the prices that
will induce aggregate consumption
to equal aggregate endowments.
So in other words, so in equilibrium,
what we need is that the summation
of all the consumption of x has to equal the summation
of all the endowments of x.
See, so the xi's without the bars,
that's what people actually do.
And the xi bars, that's what people start with.
But again, it's perfectly fine if any one individual
doesn't consume what they started with.
And if you're not consuming what you started with,
what are you doing?
Selling.
Yeah, trading.
So if you are consuming more than you started with,
you bought some.
And if you're consuming less than you started with,
then you were selling some.
So what do we do?
Well, yeah, so we're going to add up
i equations for individual consumption of x
as a function of price of the initial endowments.
And then we're going to impose constraints like this one.
And of course, a similar constraint for y.
So what does this give us?
Well, I got it in the notes.
So in the end, this gives us a p sub
x times the summation of xi bar is
going to be equal to px times the summation of ai times
xi bar plus py times the summation of ai yi bar.
By the way, if you're wondering what happened to the v's,
whenever you're wondering about where the v's went,
I'm using that.
So I am using this assumption.
This, by the way, is not even an important assumption
because you could always normalize this equation so
that they do sum to 1.
So this is not actually a substantive assumption.
That's something you can get for free.
So again, imagine that a plus b sum to 1.7.
We can just divide both sides of this equation by 1.7,
and then we're OK.
Then a plus b goes on to 1 again.
And remember, what's the difference
in maximizing utility and maximizing utility divided
by 1.7?
No difference.
There's no difference at all.
What's the difference between maximizing profits
and half of profits?
It's the same thing.
The way you maximize half of profits
is for maximizing profits.
Same way you maximize twice, you've got two times profits.
Justice aside, this is one of the dumbest arguments
for why excess profit taxation is harmless.
But I have seen economists make a straight face.
Look, it's just calculus.
Excess profit taxation doesn't harm incentives at all
because if people are doing something, maximizing profits,
then we can take half away, and they still
do exactly the same thing.
I'll leave you to ponder why this actually
is such a dumb argument.
Back to this.
So then we can go and solve for this whole thing.
And what we will get is Px over Py.
So notice, there aren't any subscripts for individuals
for Px and Py.
Why do the prices not have individual subscripts?
Because there's no price discrimination.
Because this is a market.
This is a market where each individual is not
paying a price.
Instead, there is a common social price
that everyone can access.
And this is going to be equal to what?
So it's going to be equal to summation of ai, yi bar,
over summation of bi.
And we have bi, xi, bar.
How do I get the b come back?
Well, I'll be back.
It's easier to do the math without it,
and then in the end, it looks cleaner if you put it back in.
So it's perfectly fine to substitute something out
and substitute it back in at the end.
And once again, this makes total sense intuitively
because this is saying that if one individual's intensity
or preference for x goes up, then that makes x more
expensive.
And if the preference for y goes up,
then it makes x less expensive.
And if the social stockpile of y goes up,
then x becomes pricier.
And if the social stockpile of x goes up, then x becomes cheaper.
All right, now if you're paying close attention,
you say, wait a second.
You said if one individual changes,
that changes the price?
But isn't the whole basis of this
that no individual does change the price?
Yeah, there is actually a little contradiction here,
because essentially what this means
is that in reality, as long as these
are individuals of finite size, they actually
do have a very tiny effect.
And yet we've reasoned all the way through assuming
there is wrong about it.
So one way you can salvage this is say, yeah, well,
I'm just assuming that people just round down to zero
even incorrectly.
That would be one way of rescuing the model.
The other thing you can do, which we're not
going to suffer with, is fine, let's redo all the math,
but assume a continuum of agents.
So it's no longer one, say, a quadrillion agents.
Instead, it's going to be a continuum of human beings
with a measure of one.
And then each of them is an infinitesimal.
Every one individual is an infinitesimal amount.
And if you're an infinitesimal amount,
then you really don't have any effect on anything.
So you could go either route.
Mathematicians will generally like the second route.
We're fine with a switch to a totally continuous world
where individuals are a continuum of individuals.
Is this really a thing?
Yes, it's totally a thing.
There's theorists who spend their whole lives
working with continuum of agents.
And then what about the other thing where we just say, yeah,
well, people think that they have no effect,
but actually they do have an ever so slight effect.
You can do that too.
That would be very much in the spirit of Richard Thaler
for people to say, well, people look at the world,
and in fact, they have a 1 7 billionth influence.
But they just say, it's zero.
Nobody cares about you.
You're boring.
All right, now something else to point out
is we get exactly the same results
if instead of substituting out for y, we substitute out for x.
So we could redo all the math with the other route
that we currently find.
And then there is a nice intuition behind this,
which is if we only have two markets and one of them
is clearing, what must the other one be doing too?
Clearing, right?
Because it's a barter market.
So if the x market is in equilibrium,
then there's no way that the y market
wouldn't be in equilibrium.
The only way the x market is in equilibrium
is if at that price, there is neither excess supply
nor excess demand of x.
And what it means for y to be out of equilibrium
is the flip side of that very thing.
So happy with that idea?
That's good.
All right, now one thing that you
might notice about these utility functions
is that they imply that every individual is,
as long as a and b are both greater than zero,
every individual is absolutely desperate to have
a little bit of each good.
All right, so what would your utility be if you had zero y?
What's the log of zero?
Negative.
What's that really big number that isn't actually a number?
Negative infinity.
Negative infinity.
So no one wants utility negative infinity.
Negative infinity is a really bad utility to have.
So this means that if you were in danger of having zero y,
you would give up virtually every scrap of x
you got just to avoid the horrible fate of having zero y.
So why then, in a model where suppose some people just
started off with no y, suppose that for some people
y i bar were zero, why is it that these people don't just
get expropriated by the markets?
Why is it that they still wind up getting to go and pay
the same price as the people that start with plenty of y?
What's going on here?
People act as if their actions are under effect.
Right, right.
But more intuitively, this is a competitive market.
So if you had no y, you went to someone and said,
I'd like to buy a little y.
And they said, sure, give me everything you have except
for one epsilon of x.
And then you'd say, I think I'll go someplace else.
So it would be like trying to buy water in the desert
when there's 1,000 water stands right next to you.
You desperately need water from somebody or other,
or you'll die.
But it doesn't make you actually desperate for water
from any one individual.
It doesn't mean that you are going to pay any noticeable
price.
This is a generalization of something
that you may have seen at some point in undergraduate
economics.
Where you can suppose that a worker has a vertical labor
supply curve.
And then there's labor demand.
And then someone might say, well,
since he was with that vertical labor supply curve,
he'd be perfectly happy to go and work for peanuts down
there, right?
And then there are plenty of Marxist economists.
So the one who said it actually most clearly
was the anarcho-economist Maconin, who just said,
well, sure, since the worker will take anything,
he will get next to nothing.
And again, what is the error with this assumption?
So think about it yourself.
So suppose that you have no other source of income.
And so the only thing you can do,
the only way to get any money was to work.
And suppose that the only offer you had
was for starvation wages.
Just keep alive.
Would you take that deal?
Probably.
Does that mean you're going to get that deal?
No, why not?
What's going to happen if an employer says, hey,
tell you what.
I'll go and offer you $1 a day.
That's your offer.
So we're right down here.
So just look at this.
So this is just supply and demand.
This is not PhD micro.
So supply and demand.
So at that really low price, we've got an excess something.
What's the excess?
Excess demand, right?
Because at that really low price, people want a ton.
But there's only that amount around.
And so if you were offered that amount,
what would other employers be eager to do?
Offer you a raise.
And if you think about this a little more,
I say, well, look, this holds just as well for Tom Cruise
as it does for a dish digger.
Does it even worry the Tom Cruise?
Since the entire movie industry conspired
to offer him only $1.
I guess this is back before he had any money of his own.
If they all conspired to offer him only $1 a day for his acting,
they'd probably find all this said to act for $1 a day.
And I'll be hungry.
I'll play one of the really thin roles.
I'll play one of Christian Bale's many starvation roles.
There's a guy I don't understand.
You're that rich and you starve yourself not just once.
He starved himself several times, actually.
Three different roles.
He's gone really hungry.
He went down to 90 pounds for The Machinist.
That's not special effects.
You see this movie, it's like, that's Batman?
For Batman, he was going to get, what's that?
Right before Batman.
Then he had to gain.
Yeah, yeah.
So he more than doubled his weight between roles.
He ate an apple and a cup of coffee each day on The Machinist.
And if you see him, you're just like, oh my god.
I can't believe he survived that.
Anyway, that would be what he would be able to afford
at that wage.
But again, as long as there's competition,
no one is worried that Christian Bale actually
is going to starve.
Because since he produces something of so much value,
there's competition.
And that's what's going to happen.
And it's the same thing over here.
All right.
So questions about anything we've done so far?
I'm happy with general equilibrium.
Everyone understand how we've done something better
than we did in intermediate micro?
What we've done better is we have deduced
how a whole society behaves from assumptions
about the individuals that comprise it.
Whereas in intermediate micro, the most you're ever
likely to have done is figure out
what happens for one maximized individual, which
is a much narrower question.
So now we're going to go and think
about general equilibrium in pure exchange economies.
So now we're going to go and try to analyze
them in very general terms.
All right.
So now we're going to stick with our assumption
that we've got i consumers where i is any number.
But now we're going to go away from two commodities
all the way up to an arbitrary number of commodities.
So now we can have k commodities where k is any number,
any number you want.
And then we need to add on a few other assumptions
just to keep everything clean.
So most of these assumptions are just
mathematical housekeeping.
They're not things that would even
occur to someone to dispute.
So commodity consumption must be non-negative.
You can't consume negative p's.
For example, has anyone ever consumed
a negative amount of p's?
All right, good.
All right.
So then that's OK.
All right, next assumption.
So assume that utility of x is strictly
increasing in all commodities.
This is actually stronger than necessary.
One of the games that mathematical economists play
is what is the weakest assumption that
guarantees absolute certainty.
And if you're really curious, it turns out
the weakest assumption that guarantees absolute certainty
is called local non-satiation.
If this sounds really boring to you,
then you'll never need to know it again.
But if you're curious, then you can go and Google that.
You can read the Wikipedia article
on local non-satiation.
All right.
Then consumers start with endowment of commodities.
So endowment of consumer i is going
to be indicated by e super i.
And now e is actually a vector.
Remember what is a vector?
It's a bunch of numbers held as a package.
So your endowment vector could be three pigs, two pancakes,
one pound of cheese, and then three tic-tacs.
So that's a vector.
So that is a four-good vector.
So anything strange?
So when you put goods in your shopping basket,
you are buying a vector.
Buying a vector of stuff.
You have a comfortable look at the vectors.
All right.
That's a vector.
Okay. And then, of course, we also have a price vector.
Price vector is going to be, you know, is going to list the prices
of one of each of these objects.
All right.
And then, of course, when you're trying to find
out how much does your whole shopping cart cost,
then you are doing vector multiplication.
You're taking, well, the price of, you know, price of pigs times the number of pigs.
What's the price of pancakes?
Number of pancakes.
What's the price of gouda times the amount of gouda times the price
of gouda plus the number of tic tac times the price of tic tacs?
And that equals whatever you have to pay the cash register on.
Right? You're trying to figure out how much money am I going to have to pay?
Take the price of good one times the amount
of good one times the price of good one plus the amount of good two times the price
of good two plus the amount of the good three times the price
good three, and so on, for all K goods that you purchased.
So there's the continuous price vector, which all consumers
treat as exogenous.
Again, that means that every individual
assumes that that price vector is above them and beyond them.
They have no effect on that price vector at all.
And then we can define a general equilibrium
as follows, a situation in which your consumer
may maximize the own utility subject to this constraint
for all individuals.
So every single individual does this,
maximize utility subject to the constraint
that the price vector times the consumption vector
is less than or equal to the price vector times
his personal endowment vector.
So actually, we should put an i there, too.
So again, this just means that no individual consumes more
than he has income.
Duh, right?
So every individual must live within his means.
Now, if you're wondering, what's with the less
than or equal to thing?
This is a finicky mathematician's thing.
It just says, look, it's possible, logically,
for a person to consume less than they're equal for.
Now, you might say, yeah, this is a one-period model.
And every one of people, utility's increasing at all
goods.
So why would anyone ever fail and not spend their money?
Why would anyone ever hold back even a penny?
And that's where, for a finicky mathematical economist,
they say, whoa, whoa, whoa, slow down there.
That's going to be a corollary.
So don't try to take away one of my results from me now.
You might say, yeah, but that's totally trivial.
I need W or what?
Look, this is a major intellectual accomplishment
to start with a less than or equal to sign
and then replace it with a full epoch sign.
If you're like, so what?
Sorry, yeah, that's my reaction, too.
But anyway, in the subculture or cult of mathematical economics,
depending upon your view, it's really cool
to start off with a mathematically weaker
assumption, no matter how intuitively obvious it is
what's going to happen in the end.
And then you can crank an extra result out.
And you can even go and put it in a special font.
Let us six.
Everyone consumes all their money.
Whoa.
So part of what we're doing here is
we're just getting an example of what
this kind of work looks like.
And partly, of course, I'm just copying it out of the book.
Not just copying, but that's part of what I'm doing.
When I went to write the notes, I went back to the book
to make sure, yeah, that works.
OK.
All right.
So there's that.
So for any individual, every individual can't.
No individual can consume more than they've got.
But that's not the only constraint.
The other constraint is that society cannot consume more
than society has for anything.
So individuals can consume more than what they start with
of lots of stuff.
That's fine.
If you had one really valuable good that you didn't like,
you could sell it all.
And then you could go and buy tons of all the other stuff.
That would be fine.
But society can't do that.
Society cannot consume more than it starts with.
So what we need for society is for the summation of all the xi's
to be less than or equal to the summation of all the x super i's
is equal to the summation of all the e i's, e super i's.
Now, again, remember, this is new because these are actually
vectors.
So this is saying, and intuitively what this means
is that every single commodity that we have,
society cannot consume more of anything than exists.
So even if there's 1,001 goods and we're OK on 1,000 of them,
but then society's consuming more
than exists of one of those 1,001 goods,
that is not allowed.
Something's wrong.
We have not really solved the problem.
Something is screwing if it turns out
that people are consuming more than exists.
And that is like operating at 101% of your potential.
Can anyone operate at 101% of their potential?
No.
By definition, as the Simpsons teach us,
100% is the maximum that anyone can do.
Potential is the maximum anyone can do.
If you appear to be doing more than 100% of your potential,
it is because your potential was mismeasured, misestimated.
All right.
Now, this is all I got to say.
So I will be first to admit this is not
the most exciting part of economics.
But there is a useful intuition here.
And the useful intuition is this.
We've got a world where we assume that, first of all,
endowments are fixed.
So there's no production.
There's just a pile of stuff that exists.
Nothing anybody can do about that.
And then also, preferences are fixed.
This isn't general psychological theory.
This is general equilibrium theory.
And so these preferences, the weights
that people put on each good, those are going to be fixed,
too.
And by the way, so we no longer even need this assumption
as this functional form as long as utility is increasing
in the good for everybody.
All right.
So if we can't change the amount of stuff,
and we can't change the tastes, how can we
make the world consistent?
And the answer is, well, let me give you a hint.
This isn't economics.
Since this is, in fact, PhD economics,
what is the thing that does vary?
What's left?
Where does the flexibility of the world come from?
Prices.
Prices, yes.
Prices can vary.
Prices are what allows society to be consistent and make
sense.
Prices are what reconciles all of the inconsistent
wants of mankind.
It is what reconciles all the endowments, regardless
what the endowments might be.
The prices are what moves around so that even
if endowments change, if the amount of one thing
becomes greater or smaller, if someone actually
drops all their stuff into the ocean.
Prices are what allows the world to continue to be internally
consistent and make sense.
So the price vector P is what is left.
The price vector P is what is around and can still vary.
And that is, again, general regulatory theory.
It's saying, given all this information
about all the individuals in society,
what is the social outcome?
Which is a bigger question that is asking,
what does any one individual do?
And again, that kind of begs the question, well,
can all individuals simultaneously be
maximizing?
Is that even possible?
And the answer is, under these assumptions, it's possible.
Questions?
Everyone content?
Everyone still energized and ready to learn this stuff?
OK.
Now, we come to sufficient conditions
for the existence of general equilibrium.
But first, let's back up.
It's very important to remember the difference in logic
between necessary and sufficient conditions.
Necessary and sufficient conditions.
So if something's a necessary condition,
this means that if you don't have it,
you don't have it.
If you lack a necessary condition for x,
you definitely don't have x.
On the other hand, sufficient conditions
tell you if you've got the stuff, you've got x.
But there could be lots of other ways of doing it.
So if you lack a necessary condition,
then you don't have the thing you want.
If you lack a sufficient condition, you might still have it.
Because there could be many different sufficient
conditions.
So you think about this.
So suppose someone has been, yeah,
I kind of go for the gruesome example.
So if I've been decapitated, say, all right,
is that a sufficient condition to kill me?
Yes.
But it's not the only way to kill me.
There's lots of ways to kill me.
You could stone me to death by electrifying me.
There's tons of stuff.
Hopefully, you're not planning on doing any of this stuff.
But there's lots of ways of doing it.
All right.
Now, in general, in mathematics, and especially
in mathematical economics, very often what you're receiving
are sufficient conditions.
And yet, people often be confused
and think they're getting necessary conditions.
So it's very useful to keep in mind,
to remember which thing are you actually giving us.
All right.
So if you had a proof where you said,
look, if you don't have condition alpha,
then it doesn't happen.
Then that's a proof about necessary conditions.
On the other hand, if you said, look,
if these six assumptions are met, then it happens.
Then that's just a proof about sufficient conditions.
And the way you can think about it
is, if you got sufficient conditions,
then you could say, well, so we know.
So if that's happened, then this definitely occurred.
And you say, yeah, but could it still occur in other ways?
Yeah, but then we couldn't know for sure.
So just like in a good zombie movie,
when do you know for sure the zombie's dead?
All right.
Well, decapitation is, again, the standard.
The zombie's fine.
There's nothing that zombie's going to do.
And there's a lot of other cases where it's like, well,
probably he's not coming back.
Probably the zombie's gone.
But again, if you're a mathematician,
you're like, probably not good enough.
If I don't have absolute mathematical proof,
I'm not coming within 100 feet of that zombie.
Zombie movies, that's generally a wise approach.
But anyway, if you're a mathematician,
you are generally obsessed with having absolute certainty.
And that is why they put so much energy
into mathematical proofs that say, we've got absolute proof.
And if all these conditions are met,
then this thing definitely occurs.
So yeah, but maybe it occurred, and maybe we
didn't need that.
What if we just came up with something
that gave us preponderance of the evidence,
and that's good enough?
And we can watch the mathematicians,
the hair on the back of their neck go up,
and the fire in their eyes.
You think that's, what would it be?
Did Ptolemy just say, no, not Ptolemy.
You could just say that he had something
that probably showed about what the angles
of the triangle were.
No, he worked and worked and worked
until he had absolute proof.
And I won't settle for anything less.
That is the mathematician's mentality.
So now we're going to talk about sufficient conditions
for the existence of general equilibrium.
So key point, the equilibrium might exist anyway,
even if these conditions are not met.
And we're going to talk about that.
But if all these assumptions are met,
then we've got a guarantee, a mathematical ironclad proof.
And again, this word proof in that technical mathematician
sense, if this, like, we've proven it,
there is no way in the world this is wrong now.
Unless, of course, the mathematician
made an error somewhere, which could have happened.
But that's not true mathematics.
And you start worrying, what about the fallibility
of the mathematician?
No, no, no, you're putting probability
into a beautiful proof.
It won't let you do it.
No.
So anyways, general equilibrium might still
exist even though sufficient conditions are not met.
Right, all right.
OK.
Yes, and by the way, so like another good example
is you may have ever, how many of you
have ever heard of Arrow's impossibility theorem?
Yes.
If more properly named, it would just
be Arrow's impossible to be certain theorem, which
sounds a lot less cool, right?
Because he doesn't really prove that it's
impossible to meet all of his conditions.
Just proves it's impossible to be certain.
And when you hear that, well, yeah,
I didn't care that much anyway.
So I don't have to be certain as long as it's not that likely.
All right, anyway.
OK, so let's just go through these sufficient conditions.
All right, so first thing to notice,
the inequalities can be replaced with equalities
because we assume strictly increasing utility.
So that's just a little finicky thing that we can take care of.
All right, and then secondly, since this is an endowment
economy, we can multiply all prices through by a scalar
that we'll call lambda.
And this means so if p is an equilibrium price vector,
then lambda times p is as well, where the lambda is a scalar.
So basically, this is like you can knock a 0 off all
of your currency at every price in the economy
and it doesn't change anything.
You've heard about economies where sometimes they just
knock four 0's off the currency.
This is basically that.
It's saying that if we knock four 0's off everything,
then nothing changes.
And what this means is that we can restrict attention
to price vectors where they sum to 1.
You're saying, all right, so OK, but who cares?
Well, the answer is there's a bunch of theorems that only
work if the price vector of a vector sums to 1.
These are big theorems in topology
where that's a key assumption.
And so what this is showing is that we can cleanly
go and take the economy and do a slight trivial transformation
of it, and we can shoehorn it into a theorem that's already
been proven by some really smart people.
And by the way, this is a general strategy
any time you're proving anything in mathematical economics.
Say, is there a theorem that's almost exactly the same
as what I'm trying to prove?
Well, step one, is there a theorem
that's exactly the same as what I'm trying to prove?
In that case, just say, hey, that theorem.
I'm done.
Unfortunately, that won't get you papers.
It's too easy.
So you really want to have some intermediate difficulty
where, say, right, so there isn't any theorem that exactly
fits this, but I can go and do three little transformations,
and I can show that the problem that's economically interesting
is isomorphic to the theorems that are long been known.
But that's not obvious, and so give me tenure
for writing this paper.
OK, so that's important, at least professionally.
So you're familiar with the general way
in which dream jobs for life are handed out in academia?
Are the dream jobs for life handed out
for excellent teaching?
No.
No.
Are they handed out for being a really nice guy?
No.
Once in a little bit, but no.
That will put you over the top.
Are they handed out for publications?
Yes.
What if the publications are ultimately just not that good?
Do people often steal your dream jobs
for life for publications that aren't even that good?
How many publications that weren't that good?
That's an important question.
And of course, this has no bearing
upon our own glorious economics department here,
but I have served on the tenure oversight committee,
and I've seen the horrors of the system up front.
And yeah, so there are a lot of people getting jobs
that I call dream job for life for work that just seems quite
crummy, but they got it.
They racked up a bunch of publications in some place
or other.
Doesn't the quality of the publication matter?
Depends a lot upon the school.
If you're at Harvard, yeah, then in fact,
low-rank publications probably count for negative at Harvard.
But on the other hand, it depends on how low.
But what were you actually able to say?
If you're a assistant professor at Harvard,
then if you want a publication in a low-rank journal,
people say, what in the world is he wasting his time
with those losers for?
So there have been some people at Harvard
who've gotten tenure based upon three papers in the air
or something like that.
Let me have Harvard, go one level down.
Wow, you say.
All right.
But anyway, so where was I?
Yeah, so anyway, but if you just go down
to schools that are ranked, say, 50 to 100,
then it's very common you've got 10 publications some way
or other.
And then all you need to do is combine that
with some letter writers who say that you walk on water,
and that you're awesome, and that your 10 publications are
path-breaking and brilliant.
And how many people cannot find a single human being
willing to write such a letter for them
when their whole future is on the line?
I have yet to encounter a person who
could not get such a letter, just saying.
All right, so this seems like a very cynical view.
I suppose it is, but it doesn't mean it's wrong.
Yeah, so yes, when I was on the committee,
I tried to point out some of these ugly trues
and try to say, perhaps we should raise our standards a
bit.
And generally, I just ran into a brick wall.
Then finally, I found out the best thing
I could do on the committee was just
to stop them from hassling deserving people.
Because sometimes they'll be very deserving people,
like, well, the letter was printed
on official stationery.
I don't think we can count this.
And I was like, come on.
All right, so I felt like I could at least prevent
someone's life from being screwed up.
In the end, of course, they would still get it.
But just to stop someone from screwing someone else,
I can serve that function.
I'm no longer on this committee.
No, it's not that.
It's one of those things where I learned a lot about the world
a little bit worse than I thought.
And I'm traumatized by it.
But still, at least I did look into the belly of the beast
and just see, yeah.
You thought the system was functioned before.
See, and the other thing I'll say,
I know this is a regression advice,
but I do have to mention it, since this does
bear upon your future.
There was one professor with a British accent
who says, a dream job full of life?
What are you bloody talking about?
We work in Fairfax.
And I say, look, it's a job to receive a middle class salary
to do whatever you want without any customers who could ever
really complain about you?
That sounds like a dream job to me.
I think almost every person in the economy
would agree about this.
Of course, if you take that for granted,
it's the worst that could possibly happen.
Then you're good.
All right.
So why don't we go and take a break now?
So that clock is actually three minutes slow.
My apologies.
You will reconvene in 10 minutes.
And again, this is a good time to turn in your homework
if you want to do it physically.
Again, as I said, you can also email directly to the class
today.
Is everyone in the hall?
Or can you just close the door?
When you close the door, if there's people desperately
rushing to get back in, just let them in.
Can you close the door?
All right, great.
OK.
All right, and now, unfortunately, there's
some math we have to do after the break, which
I try to avoid, but can't always be avoided.
All right.
But when possible, I will simply give you the gist of the math
rather than actually working it through in gory detail.
All right, so I've given you all the assumptions.
So we've got the abouts, the conditions that we got.
And now, we then just need the following assumptions
to guarantee the existence of general equilibrium.
All right, so assumption one is the utility
as a function of p has to have a unique solution for all p
for all prices, which, again, may seem like a very odd point.
This is just saying that for any given set of prices,
there's only one utility you're going to get in equilibrium.
You can't have two different utilities that you have.
Yeah, why would you?
All right, assumption two, you need total demand for a good k
exceeds total endowment for a small enough price
and falls short of total endowment
for a large enough price.
So there's got to be a price so high that people actually
consume less than exists.
There's got to be a price so low that people actually
want to consume more than exists.
You can get the doubt that they will consume it,
that they want to consume more than exists.
So there's got to be a price so astronomical that people say,
fine, we're going to consume less than actually exists.
There's got to be a price low enough
that people will say we want to consume more than actually
exists.
And then last, we just need the total demand function for k.
Is it got to be continuous for all prices between 0 and 1?
And now, amazingly, we're done.
So how do we actually prove the theorem?
Well, there's the special case.
If it is a two commodity world, then there
is a theorem you may actually remember
from calculus called the intermediate value theorem.
This is basically like a Goldilocks theorem
where it says, look, if sometimes it's too hot
and sometimes it's too cold, there
must be a point at which it is just right.
And that's if there's a continuum of porridge
temperatures, then there must be a bowl of porridge
at a temperature that is exactly right.
So that is the intermediate value theorem.
So if it can be too high, too low, it's continuous,
then you can prove that there must be a point where
you cross whatever threshold that you specifically
are concerned about.
Now, what about the k commodity world,
just an arbitrary number?
Well, here there is something in topology called Brouwer's fixed
point theorem.
Brouwer's fixed point theorem.
And we're not going to go into what it is,
but you invoke this theorem.
And we have actually used all the assumptions
that we need to shoehorn the economy into this famous theorem
in topology.
Now, I tell you, I actually got to watch Gerard Dubrow, who
is, together with Arrow, proved the existence
of general equilibrium using Brouwer's fixed point theorem.
So I actually got to be in a class with him
where he went and did his own proof.
And it went on for 90 minutes.
And he was the famous Nobel Prize winner.
And then after he finished with it,
he was so proud of himself, as proud as only a Frenchman
could be of himself.
And then he finished with it.
And then he finished with it.
And my aunt shot up and said, well,
but didn't you just assume that the economy fits
the assumptions of another theorem
proved by somebody else?
What's so great about that?
Oh, I did something much better than that.
So he never convinced me he had done anything that much better
than that.
And I still stick to my view that that was a bad Nobel.
But obviously, I'm in the minority here.
And a lot of people thought this was freaking brilliant.
So I saw him walk through his own theorem.
And he said, here's Brown's fixed point theorem.
Here's what I did.
And they're like, what you're doing
is just making assumptions until it works.
It's all reverse engineering.
I said, no.
It's much deeper.
All right.
My take is I was right then.
I'm still right now.
And yes, he did something.
But it's not really that great.
It's a sad world where that's worth a Nobel Prize.
Anyway.
But just to give you intuition, so what does Brouwer's fixed
point theorem say?
Or what does any fixed point theorem say?
All right.
So mathematically, the idea is you
want to prove conditions under which there is some f of x
that is equal to x.
Some f of x that is equal to x.
Now intuitively, think about this.
Suppose you look at a globe.
And I were to say, show me where on this globe the globe is.
And you would go and take your little pen and say,
it's right there in Fairfax.
The globe is right there on the globe.
Or it could be a map.
And you could say, all right, where on this map are we,
the people holding the map?
And again, you could say, all right,
we're right there, right there.
Now first, you might say, well, isn't there always
a place on the globe where the globe is,
or a place on the map where the map is?
And the answer is no.
Suppose that we were on the moon holding
the globe of the Earth.
And you say, where on the surface of this globe are we?
We're not there.
We're in a totally different place.
There's no place on this globe of Earth
where we moonwalkers are.
And that is a case where there would not be a fixed point.
So a fixed point would be if you could show where
the map is on the map itself, or where the globe is positioned
on the globe itself.
And the nonexistence of a fixed point
would be one where you are on the surface of the moon
with a globe of Earth.
And you're asked where you are.
And usually you say, it doesn't exist here.
There is no such place here.
And of course, if you are in the United States looking
at a map of Europe, where's America on this map?
America's not on this map.
Not anywhere.
So that is the idea of a fixed point.
Another analogy that's often used
is suppose there's a mountain with a path.
It's winding, but it never actually reverses.
So it always is going down.
Or of course, from the bottom point of view,
it's always going up.
And one person starts at the top.
One person starts at the bottom.
Can we be sure that they will meet each other?
And if we've set it up right, then there
is a fixed point where they will cross for sure.
On the other hand, what if one of them
is skiing down the mountain, and another one
is taking a funicular to the top?
They might never cross.
And again, that would be the case where there
is an absence of a fixed point.
So that's the intuition behind what these fixed point
theorems are all about.
If you're curious, of course, you
can go and read an enormous amount of math
about it for general discussion.
We're not going to do that.
I'll just tell you that at the crucial moment,
Gerard de Brul invoked the Brouwer's fixed point theorem.
And then there's another one that's even more general,
called the Coccatani's fixed point theorem.
If this is all more than you ever want to know,
then well, good.
I'm never going to tell you anymore.
But if you want to learn more, on the other hand, bad news,
because you'll have to pursue this on your own.
OK, so questions about how this works?
Yes?
Unrelated, but sort of related, what do you mean by topology?
Topology is a branch of mathematics
concerned with things like fixed point theorems.
So again, you read the Wikipedia article on what topology is.
Again, honestly, the only topology that I know
is the very topology that I had to learn for this very class.
But basically, it's the mathematics
of shapes and spaces.
Again, I couldn't give you any better description of it
than that, but there is a much more precise story
about what it is.
Now, another question is, how do you get to these fixed points?
So in general equilibrium theory,
they usually focus on Mooraisian auctioneers.
This is the idea that there's just some person who
looks around the world, and any time there's excess demand
for something, he raises its price.
And any time there's excess supply, he lowers its price.
And he does this in a continuous way,
using a very nice blue function.
And in this way, the economy gets
to the equilibrium price vector.
There is a whole literature where Austrians talk
about how terrible this is, and how awful general equilibrium
theory is for dodging this great point.
Because of course, is there actually
an auctioneer in the real world generally?
No.
Sometimes in financial markets, there
will be a market maker who is actually
a lot like a Mooraisian auctioneer.
But then in a lot of other markets,
there's nobody like that.
So this is a bit of a puzzle.
We'll discuss some alternatives later on.
Of course, the really obvious one
is that usually, sellers just set their own price.
And usually, we don't have perfect competition.
So the fact that you set a different price
for a competitor does not mean that you will either
sell an infinite amount or zero.
Like, have you ever noticed that you want to sell something
on, say, eBay, and then you charge a price a little bit
higher than other people, and you still sell it?
In perfect competition, that would never happen.
Or have you ever noticed that you
say I'm willing to work for a little bit less
than other people, and then you don't
find that you receive a trillion job offers?
And again, that's not what perfect competition predicts.
Perfect competition says that if you
offer to work for a penny less than equally qualified workers,
everyone in the world will come and try to hire you.
So far, I don't know of anyone, no matter how successful,
has been offered a job by everyone in the world.
OK.
All right, so questions about this?
Happy?
All right.
So now we're going to do something
which I think will actually enhance your understanding
of what we just done.
And this was never done for me.
So I had to wait years before I actually achieved
this higher level of insight.
So when would a general equilibrium not exist?
It's all well and good to go and say
we proved the existence of general equilibrium,
and we have a bunch of assumptions.
But if you don't understand why the assumptions matter,
then I would still say that you're pretty much in the dark
and don't have any intuition for what's going on.
So rather than going into great detail
on what the fixed point theorems are,
I'm going to go and try to explain to you
why the different assumptions actually make a difference.
So here's some counter examples where general equilibrium would
not, in fact, exist.
All right, first big one.
Lexicographic preferences.
So you guys remember hearing about lexicographic preferences
at some point?
So in the dictionary, when you are alphabetizing words,
suppose that there is a word that is like AZZZZZZZZ.
That's a word.
All right, now does the fact that it has a bunch of Z's
mean that it gets moved later in the dictionary
than a word that has, that's like ABBA?
All right, where the average letter in ABBA
is way closer to A than the average letter in A
with 10 Z's on it, right?
Now, in dictionaries, we use a lexicographic order
where we first look at the first letter
and organize everything that way.
Then we look at the second letter
and organize everything that way.
Then we look at the third letter and organize everything
that way, right?
And this way, we proceed with a clear priority.
First letter is absolute priority
unless the first letter of two words is the same.
Then we look at the second letter.
If the second letter is the same,
we look at the third letter.
If the third letter is the same, we look at the fourth letter.
That's the way that we alphabetize things.
Imagine then that someone had preferences for consumption
this way where they said, look, if there's two bundles
and one has more X, I always choose the one with more X.
If they have equal X, then I choose the one
with it that has more Y.
If they have equal X and equal Y,
then I choose the one that has more C, and so on.
That is what lexicographic preferences mean.
All right, now, if someone has lexicographic preferences,
then it is easy to prove, or maybe it
can be proven anyway, that they cannot have any utility
function.
They do not have any kind of utility function.
Why?
Because if you have lexicographic preferences,
there is no amount of Y that can compensate you
for even the slightest amount of X.
And that's the problem.
OK, now, why does this mean that we could no longer be
sure of the shadow equilibrium?
Well, so suppose that all the agents of the economy
had lexicographic preferences.
Then, so we know, like, everyone lexicographically
prefer X to Y.
Well, is it then possible for X to have a price less than 1?
No, because if the price were less than 1,
what would every single person do in order to get more X?
So if the price of X were, like, 0.999,
and the price of Y were 0.001, if you
had lexicographic preferences, would you keep any Y?
It's really cheap, no, but you dump all your Y
to buy X, because you value X, the smallest amount of X,
infinitely more than you value an infinite amount of Y.
All right, so this means that you say, all right, fine.
Then the equilibrium price is going to be the price of X is 1,
the price of Y is 0.
But that's not an equilibrium either,
because we specified that if the amount of X is equal,
people would still like as much Y as possible.
So if the price of X is 1, then people
want an infinite amount of Y. If the price of X is less than 1,
people want 0 Y. And therefore, it
is possible there would be no equilibrium at all.
And that's an example of the failure of general equilibrium.
There's no price where the world makes sense.
And you say, all right, so the price of X is 1.
Well, then it doesn't make sense,
because people demand an infinite amount of Y,
and there isn't an infinite amount of Y.
So fine, let's make the price of X 0.999.
Well, that's not going to make any sense either,
because now people want 0 Y, and there's more than 0 Y.
So no equilibrium.
The economy does not make sense in this situation.
All right, another example.
Suppose there's a discontinuity of any kind.
So suppose the total demand for X
is 90% of the social endowment at the price of 7,
and 10% of the endowment at price of 7 minus epsilon,
infinitesimal amount.
So why would this be?
Well, maybe society is a superstition
centering on the number 0.7.
All right, have you ever been in a building
where there's no floor 13?
All right, so that's weird.
So I was on a cruise ship.
There's no floor 13.
It's not like it's a laundry floor.
It just doesn't exist.
You go on the stairs, and twilight's on.
You go from 14 to 12.
Where'd 13 go?
All right, same idea.
If there was a superstition about the number 0.7,
so that could lead the people in a discontinuous response.
And then again, no general equilibrium.
There's a question over there.
Yes, please.
Can you have a general equilibrium
with the on-chain preferences?
Ah, so let's see.
With the on-chain preferences, let's see.
So let's see.
So again, the on-chain preferences,
that's actually an example.
So let's see.
So that's one where, let's see.
So you would put 0 value on an additional amount of a good,
unless it came packaged with an additional amount
of the other good.
So yes, I think we actually specifically ruled that out.
Let's see.
Yes, yes.
So that would violate that assumption 4 in section 3,
the utility strictly increasing in all commodities.
Now, could a general equilibrium still exist?
The answer is almost certainly absolutely.
But we no longer have absolute proof that it will exist.
And that is, again, the issue mathematically.
So again, all of these are about sufficient conditions.
So essentially, when normally, when any assumptions fail,
you could just go and tweak all the other assumptions
sufficiently so that everything works out nicely.
Not always, but often you can.
So yes, so with the likes of graphic preferences,
here's a nice tweak that'll make the world work.
Let's just assume there's no y.
Then we've got an equilibrium.
The price of x is 1.
Price of y is 0.
Nobody has any y.
So everyone consumes their diamonds.
Everything's great.
So that'll be fine.
All right.
Let's see.
Then there's a more general concept of demand
not being well-behaved at extreme prices.
This could mean that you just have a 0 price for 0 prices
for some goods.
But there's some technical issues I won't get into.
Here's another one.
Suppose that prices themselves are discontinuous.
Suppose that prices must be in one penny units.
Then it could be that the actual market clearing price is, say,
$1.99 and 7 tenths of a cent.
And then either the price is too high or too low.
And in either case, you actually get market clearing.
And there's no general equilibrium.
So you have that problem.
Now, as I said, these standard theorems
give sufficient conditions.
You can still get general equilibrium
even if some of these assumptions are violated.
So here's a fun one.
Suppose you have a linear utility function.
Many of you remember.
Anyone remember back in intermediate micro?
And you're like, why do we have to do utility functions
like that one?
Why can't it just be utilities x plus y?
Why are you torturing us with these low utility functions?
And the answer is that if your utility is equal to x plus y,
then what does everybody want to do?
So if your utility is x plus y, then you
either want to have all x or all y,
except in one special condition.
So what prices would make a person with utility
equals x plus y want to have all x?
px is less than py.
Yeah, px is less than py.
Then dump all your y.
Buy all x.
Utility's higher.
On the other hand, reverse it.
So if x is more expensive than y, then dump all your x.
Buy y.
If the prices are the same, then you're OK.
Prices of x are the same.
Then you're indifferent between any bundle.
So if it turned out that, say, everyone
had a utility function equal to price of x
plus the price of y, then you might still
be able to get equilibrium.
So if the prices are equal, then maybe everyone
is just content to stay with their initial endowment.
Why not?
And then you're fine.
Now, notice, if you think about it more,
what about a world where almost everybody has a utility
function like that, and then some people
have these weird linear ones?
Is that going to be OK?
Almost certainly fine, because what happens?
So 99% of people have those nice ones,
and a log utility function.
Then 1% of people have the linear ones.
Well, if the price of x is greater than the price of y,
what do the people with the linear functions do?
Price of x is greater than the price of y.
What do they all do?
Dump all their x.
And who buys it?
Those people.
And then the price adjusts, and those people
go and adjust things.
But again, this means that we can no longer
have that pure mathematical Pythagorean certainty
that mathematicians are hunting for, because they say,
well, that's pretty good.
So if there's 99% that will work, but 1% that is OK,
but what if it's 47%?
What if it's radical 3?
What if it's that?
You don't have any proof of anything, do you?
It's all just loosey-goosey garbage, complete garbage.
Very like, well, not a problem that's
really that pressing anyway.
So you could go and work it as a homework problem,
and then you could say, well, we've
proven it for this homework problem.
But again, if you are a mathematical economist saying,
bah, you proved it for one homework problem,
that's not good enough to get a dream job for life.
I want a very general proof of the conditions,
defining the entire locus of points
under which general equilibrium will still exist.
If a fraction of population A has linear preferences,
and a fraction of B has lower linear preferences,
let's do that.
And then you can get a paper out of that,
and probably somebody has done it.
So anyway, so yes, so with this linear utility function,
we have a problem where we have discontinuous responses
to demand to price.
Because either you consume all x, or you're different,
or all y.
And if you're graphing that, you would see, wow,
that's a big discontinuity.
Either all of x, or all of y, or you don't care.
And we can do similar things for most of these assumptions.
We'll say, well, what can we also do?
How might it still work out?
Again, imagine a world where everybody
has one good they don't care about.
Intuitively, what's going to happen in that world?
If someone happens to start with an endowment of a good
they don't like at all, what are you going to do?
Sell it.
But since there's always somebody who likes each good,
then it'll just drive down the price of that a little bit.
And the people who do like it will take it and the problem.
OK, everyone happy?
Questions, questions?
All right, so certainly this stage of the evening,
I'm always worried lack of questions simply means lack
of energy to put your hand up.
Or it's just like, fine, I'll take your word for it.
But let's try to steel ourselves in pursuit of PhD level
understanding of the material.
Right now we come to.
The two welfare theorems.
So, I don't know if you've ever met him,
but so, like, you know,
GMU undergraduate Nathaniel Beckhofer
is now at the PG program at UC San Diego, so,
and he calls me once or twice a week
and tells me what's going on there.
So they're doing the welfare theorems,
and being taught by a guy who,
well, let's just say that he doesn't know
that much empirical stuff.
So, he's a great theorist, but not too into empirical stuff.
And he's all the class,
the first welfare theorem,
no, actually, these two welfare theorems
are why capitalism is great.
Right, and if you know anything about the history
of the theorems,
that was not the intent of the people
proving the theorems.
And if you understand the theorems,
it's a pretty weird view,
interpretation of what the theorems mean.
So, let's go and see what theorems actually say,
and then see why this is an odd way
to read the theorems.
Okay, all right.
Going back to intermediate microeconomics,
maybe if you had a good intro class,
you actually saw this in intro economics.
So, when you're going and trying to prove
the social optimality of markets,
and you get a course in practice,
this means that it has which kind of efficiency property?
Calorie X, right.
Actually, of course, it also has Pareto,
because everything's got Pareto,
but who cares?
Since everything's got Pareto,
it's not an interesting concept.
All right, but anyway,
you may remember back in, say,
intermediate micro, where you had Q, you had P,
you had supply, you got demand,
and then you saw that at the market clearing price
that all the surplus is realized, right?
And that means we got a counter-insufficient result,
all thanks to, like I said,
that's what we get with supply and demand.
But notice, this is what's called
partial equilibrium analysis.
We're only looking at one market.
How do you know that what is true for all markets,
what's true for one market is true for all markets?
Maybe that's just a giant fallacy composition,
just like if one person stands up at a concert,
that person sees better,
so if everybody stands up, everybody sees better.
Maybe there's actually a giant logical flaw,
and then we teach it,
and we teach undergraduates,
C markets are great.
Look, all we've done, actually,
perhaps, is just trickery.
So, general equilibrium theory tries to go
and generalize this result,
and see, if it generalizes it,
or perhaps you might say tries to prove conditions
under which that partial equilibrium result
is also a general equilibrium result,
so we actually can get calorie sufficiency
for the overall economy.
All right, so can we generalize that to multiple markets?
And the answer, according to general equilibrium theory,
is yes, we can take this insight
from individual supply and demand models,
and actually show it works for an economy
with an arbitrary number of clients.
Right, and this brings us to the first well we're there.
So under the previous assumptions,
general equilibrium theory,
general equilibrium allocation is Pareto efficient,
and you're gonna say, wait, Pareto efficient?
Yeah, but remember, this is a highly simplified problem,
and therefore, it's also gonna be calorie insufficient, too,
as we'll see.
All right, so how do we prove this?
All right, so I know patience for proofs
is gonna be very low at this time of evening,
so I'm just going to do it quickly.
I'm not going to try to do it that hard to convince you,
because in a way, it would not be fair
to try to convince people who are this tired.
Right, so at least some of you are tired.
Some of you probably are saying, you're insulting me.
How could I be anything less than absolutely thrilled
in anticipation of this proof
of the first welfare theorem?
All right, so the standard method is proof by contradiction,
where we just suppose that the first welfare theorem
is wrong, and we show that that actually
contradicts our assumptions.
All right, so here's how it works.
So suppose that X is an equilibrium allocation,
but X prime is Pareto superior to X.
All right, so here's how the proof works.
All right, X prime must be feasible, all right, obviously.
So that means that we sum over all the X primes
that's gotta be less than or equal to the endowment vector,
all right, the social endowment vector.
All right, E is now the social endowment vector.
All right, then since prices are non-negative,
remember how we squeezed in that assumption?
I wish we had this looking proof.
Of course, what else would they be?
Then we've got, then we also know that the market value
of the new consumption bundle must be less than or equal
to the market value of the endowments.
All right, getting pretty obvious.
And then utility is strictly increasing in consumption.
Therefore, we can get rid of that less than or equal to sign
and replace it with an equality sign.
Good, okay.
Then we can go and sum these.
So this is going to imply that the summation
of that PXI bar is gonna be less than or equal to
the summation of the PXI.
All right, but by the definition of a Pareto improvement,
all consumers must weakly prefer X prime to X,
and one must strictly prefer X prime to X.
That's the whole idea of a Pareto improvement.
So everyone remembers the difference
between weak and strong preference?
Weak preferences means you are either indifferent
or you like it better.
And strict preferences means you actually
affirmatively like it better.
Okay, so weak preference means that X prime
must not be more affordable than X.
So that means that the market value
of the new consumption vector must be greater than
or equal to the market value of the previous
consumption vector.
And strict preference means that X prime
must not be affordable for someone.
So at least one person must have PXI is greater than PX.
And then the last step is just to sum up
the weak and strong inequalities.
Right, so to understand the intuition of the last step,
suppose that X is greater than three and Y equals seven.
What can we say about X plus Y?
Can we say that X plus,
would we say is X plus Y greater than or equal to 10?
Can we say that?
Or can we say something stronger?
X is actually greater than 10.
If one thing is,
so if you add up an inequality with an equality,
it sums to an inequality with the same sign
as the original inequality.
Right, so that is the last trick.
So we sum up those weak and strong inequalities
and we get this result,
the new thing is actually going to have
a greater market value than the original thing,
which contradicts assumption four.
Okay, so now again,
if you're like struggling with the proof,
again, it's been proved in 100 different places
in five different ways.
This is just the simplest one,
the most straightforward one.
So there's no math here that's really anything
that you haven't seen years ago.
I'd say there's no calculus even, right?
All right, now, there have been people
who've looked at this theorem,
which is called the first welfare theorem,
and said, ah, capitalism is great.
Okay, it's not really all that impressive
when you think about it for many reasons.
Of course, one is that we've actually assumed away
any externalities, for example,
and we have assumed perfect competition and so on.
Right, so we've actually built in a bunch
of really extreme assumptions.
Now, this doesn't mean that we couldn't get
Calgary's division C with other assumptions,
which is another common misreading of this.
So there are other people who say,
see, like you need all these assumptions
to make capitalism work,
these assumptions are crazy, so capitalism terrible.
Capitalism terrible, no, no, no, no, no.
These are assumptions under which capitalism is great,
but there could be a bunch of other assumptions
under which it's great, too.
And we're actually, later, as we proceed in the class,
we're going to see how much you can relax these assumptions
and still get exactly the same answer, amazingly enough.
Right, but anyway, one thing about this is,
you say, look, fine, you've shown that this is
Pareto efficient and actually really counter-expedient,
but you could say, suppose there was an economy
where one person owed everything and everybody.
All right, is that gonna be Pareto efficient?
Yep, counter-expedient, sure.
And wonderful, as we all starve to death,
or as we all are the slaves of Joseph Stalin,
like, we can all say, well, isn't this a wonderful theorem
that showed how wonderful this world is?
You can see that, great.
So, again, a common critique of the first theorem,
the first Welfare Theorem, is that,
since it's compatible with any distribution,
it's really not, it doesn't really show
that markets are especially great,
just says that, given whatever the elements that are,
you get to something efficient,
and again, really, both Pareto and Calvary-Hicks,
if you are paying attention.
Okay, all right, so, with only the first Welfare Theorem,
then I'd say most economists understand,
you're like, eh, all right, I guess it's okay.
And then there are people who have never had a split
who say, ah, this is what Adam Smith was grasping at.
Or he was talking about something completely different,
maybe, right, so maybe he was talking about
the dynamic efficiency, that kind of growth,
maybe it's something totally different in mind.
Maybe you should read someone before you go
and impute a theorem back to someone
who had no idea what you're talking about.
All right, but in any case, many economists
who find very little to get excited
about the first Welfare Theorem change their minds
when they hear about the second Welfare Theorem.
All right, I'm not gonna even bother
trying to prove the second Welfare Theorem,
I'll just tell you what it says.
Second Welfare Theorem says that any
Pareto-Efficient allocation can be a general equilibrium
given some initial endowments.
So in other words, if there's,
for any general equilibrium you want,
we could go and adjust everybody's endowments
in a giant initial redistribution, and it will be stable.
All right, that is the idea.
All right, so what does this mean?
What are people talking about?
So you have to understand,
when these two Welfare Theorems are being proven,
it's the 1950s, and in the 1950s,
the big actual debate is between Social Democrats
and full-blown Socialists and Communists.
All right, so if you are,
so you have to first step into this world
where this is the range of debates.
Of course, there's some other things going on,
but this is the main stuff that people are debating.
So is full-blown Socialism good,
or would it be good to have markets
that are actually, that were lots of redistribution?
Which of these two things is the truth?
Well, let's be open-minded.
It could be either Joseph Stalin,
or it could be early John Rawls.
It's a little bit on the back,
but one of those two things, or something like that.
Something in that range.
All right, now once you are in this mindset,
you might consider a big victory for Social Democracy
to say, look, all we need to do for markets to be great
is to have massive redistribution, and that's it.
We just need to go and expropriate the rich people,
give the money to poor people,
and then allow markets, and then everything will be fine.
So there's nothing wrong with markets per se.
Really, all complaints about markets
is boiled down to inequality.
And we don't need to destroy markets
and have government seize everybody's property
to get rid of inequality.
We could just go and keep private property,
but redistribute it all, right?
And in the background are sort of thought experiments
like, tell you what, socialists,
how about we have one last equalization of resources,
and then finally you shut up,
and we never have to hear one of your complaints again
for as long as we live, ever.
All right, so that means we just expropriate
the Rockefellers, everybody else,
everybody goes and gets an equal pile of resources,
but from then on, free markets rule,
whatever happens, happens, and you don't talk.
Okay, so when I looked over
Jordan Peterson's 12 Rules for Life,
there was one that immediately resonated with me,
and I just think, oh, that would be so wonderful.
It's the one where he says,
something like, do not criticize the world
until your own life is in perfect order.
Like, wow, just think about it,
a gloriously silent world,
where every single person I know
who has any issue in their own lives
just shuts up about the world,
and I don't have to hear them anymore.
And then I smugly punch in.
My life is great, everything's just the way it ought to be,
so listen up, troubled neurotics.
I will now preach unto you.
All right, anyway, so that's what you can imagine.
All right, now, when you hear about
the Second Welfare, they're like, well,
of course, sure, you could just go
and take everything for the rich,
give it to the poor, and then to free markets,
and markets will work, right?
Right, well, here's the thing.
There is, of course, a view lurking in Marxism,
for example, that that's wrong.
And again, it says, well, that might be okay
for like three minutes, but then what's gonna start
happening to our wonderful equal distribution of income
or wealth?
Well, some people are gonna go and invest and get lucky.
Some people are gonna work harder than others.
And before you know it, we're back to the same old world
of inequality and all the evils of capitalism
reassert themselves.
Now, the second, and what's even wrong with that,
Marx's response?
Like, when you think about it, it's like, yeah,
that's exactly what would happen, of course.
So is the Second Welfare Theorem wrong?
Well, not really.
The thing is, the Second Welfare Theorem
actually is implicitly imagining that when we redistribute
stuff, we're not just redistributing existing stocks
and real estate.
We're redistributing the human capital, too.
We're redistributing everything.
All right, and we're not redistributing just current stuff.
We're redistributing future goods.
Like, so the redistribution goes way beyond anything
that even the most radical redistributionist
has ever conceived.
Like Harrison Bergeron?
Yeah, yeah, it is, yes, exactly,
the Kurt Vonnegut story, Harrison Bergeron.
Right, because again, so if all you did was go
and give Bill Gates the average amount of liquid,
of like tradable wealth in our society,
how long would it take before Bill Gates
was super rich again?
Almost immediately, probably immediately,
right out of the book.
What it was like for me to be poor for five minutes,
and then he makes 10 million bucks off of that,
and then he goes and invests it,
and before you know it, he's a billionaire again.
All right.
So, but suppose that actually the rest of mankind
owned 99.999% of Bill Gates' human capital.
In other words, that Bill Gates is in fact a slave.
Well then, Bill Gates, and this is really
what the second book has in the background,
although almost never does someone actually
go and blatantly admit that it's about,
that it requires slavery to really be true.
But yeah, but like, and then it works fine
because Bill Gates goes and tries to go
and enrich himself in this new regime,
but who actually owns almost every penny that he makes?
Other people, right?
And so yeah, you just redistribute it in the right way,
right, and again, for people who have
a lot more human capital, you could say,
well, like we're giving you, you'll have like,
basically nothing of your own human capital.
Now you get to start thinking about this
and saying, well wait a second,
like isn't this gonna destroy incentives,
and in fact, wouldn't something way more moderate
than this really destroy incentives?
And the answer is the second one over here
just glosses over all that.
Blatantly.
Right, in the background there's an idea,
what we're just talking about,
a one-time lump sum redistribution, and that's it.
Right, and again, so this would not,
so in other words, to be truly lump sum
would not mean that the world gets 99.999%
of Bill Gates' human capital,
would actually mean that Bill Gates starts off
70 billion dollars in debt to mankind,
and then he's allowed to go and work that off.
Thanks.
Until finally, like eventually,
by struggling as hard as anybody else,
he's able to get back to the level of an old person.
So it would really require something,
it's so mind-bogglingly extreme,
I don't know of anyone who's actually advocated this.
But anyway, you have to go back to the context,
the political context of the 50s
to understand why people thought
this was such a brilliant idea, all right.
So anyway, but philosophically the whole idea is that
all distributive complaints about competitive markets
can be answered with lump sum redistribution.
Again, in the real world,
of what relevance is lump sum redistribution?
What are the countries that fund any significant amount
of themselves through lump sum taxes?
I don't know of any such country.
So again, it's all basically an intellectual game
being played by mathematicians, proving theorems,
and then at the end, trying to go and desperately claim
that this is the theorem that's gonna show the communists
in this wrong or something like that.
Again, this is one where I think any communist worth of soul
if you really saw what's going on, saying no, no, no, no,
no, you're not getting away with this.
You're actually talking about something
that's more extreme than what we're talking about.
You know, even in the Soviet Union,
we'll let the novelists who write great World War II novels
keep a lot of their money and be rich.
And that was actually one of the best jobs
to have in the old Soviet Union was to be a novelist.
Because they actually let them keep a lot of their money.
And again, the biggest kind of novel for decades
in the Soviet Union was the World War II novel.
And it's also, like I said, they sold like gangbusters.
Of course, there's tons of World War II veterans around.
Of course, and you know, best in eights.
And you can actually tell a story
where like horrible things happen
because it's for an audience.
Like, you know, like they're not gonna,
you know, no one in the Soviet Union is gonna want a book
where everyone survives a World War II story.
So you can sell something that seems really ugly,
but it's so infused in the ethos of the great patriotic war
that it's okay to have horrible tragedy
because it's all the fault of not only the Nazis,
but the West and stuff.
Anyway, all right.
Now, what would be another example
where redistribution wouldn't work?
So, you know, like, you know, so like here's one.
So you could actually say this about democracy.
So imagine you've got two wolves
and a sheep voting over lunch.
Okay.
And you say, all right, look,
obviously what's gonna happen at first
is that the two wolves are gonna vote to eat the sheep
and that's not fair.
But what if we went and just first went
and redistributed well so the sheep was really rich?
And then would this solve the problem
of the sheep getting eaten?
If our decision rule is just one animal, one vote?
Not really.
No.
That's a little like,
step one is the wolves,
or you know, you go and expropriate the wolves
and give it all to the sheep and say, all right,
now sheep, now you're really rich,
so now you're safe.
And then the two wolves,
we'd like to call a vote
to just reverse that last redistribution
and also to eat the sheep.
All right, so.
What if the sheep agrees to buy other sheep
to feed the wolves?
Well, again, like we've assumed a world
with only three people.
Okay, fair enough.
With only three animals.
All right.
So, yeah.
But anyway, but like really like any story
where once you, once you,
I don't know, like you do the redistribution,
but the social mechanism can then readily reverse
whatever the redistribution is,
that's a case where the second model for theorem
is saying, at least in markets,
if we really redistributed enough,
that wouldn't be an issue.
All right, so everybody happy here?
Clear?
Calm, confident?
Okay.
All right, great.
All right, again, if you've ever had to read
like John Rawls in a philosophy class,
again, this whole mentality is sort of lurking
in the background of like, are we gonna,
like how would we go and defend the,
like a Western mixed economy against
the full blown socialist?
Have you ever thought about that?
And then they're trying to figure out a way
to outmaneuver that guy.
Even though, again, given very egalitarian premises,
maybe he may be actually the socialist, right?
Maybe you have to actually say, hmm,
it's better to have inequality without slavery
than slavery without inequality.
Maybe you need to go and say that.
All right.
All right, everyone happy?
Everyone staying awake?
All right, so we're all, gotta stay awake, yeah.
So, Bobby Rowe is the best man at my wedding.
Whenever he gives a late talk,
he begins by actually making people cheer and shout things.
I'm not quite ready to go there yet.
But, you know, I make people applaud for different things.
I used to divide people up into different factions.
All right, anyway.
We'll just continue trying to be excited.
Try to stay awake.
Okay, next, all right.
So, Errod De Broglie contingent claims market.
So, I did just make fun of Gerard De Broglie.
Now, here's an idea that he had
that I think is actually more interesting.
Now, generally, it starts out seeming pretty general,
good for any number of agents, any number of goods.
All right.
But then Errod De Broglie said, wait a second,
this is actually way more general than it seems at first.
Why?
Well, he said, first of all,
our theorem can actually be extended immediately
to intertemporal markets.
Why?
So, just think of good trading at time t
as being a different good
than good k trading at time t plus y.
And then basically, we say,
well, instead of having k physical goods,
we can have k times t intertemporal goods.
All right, and then we just go and redefine k.
I'll explain what it is, I'll take new k
is gonna be equal to old k times t, the number of periods.
And now we've got a model that actually allows
for an arbitrary amount of intertemporal trade.
So, now I could go and trade bananas in 2019
for driverless cars in 2037.
And we could go and write a contract about that.
We can exchange that,
and that could be a perfectly competitive market
where we go and exchange pieces of paper
for goods that don't even exist yet.
That would be possible.
All right, so instead of trading current goods,
instead of it being a bargain market
where I hand you bananas now for cars now,
I'm handing pieces of paper which are just promissory notes.
And we can have a giant market in these promissory notes
where every conceivable promissory note
can trade for every other conceivable promissory note.
All right, so.
And then, they said also general equilibrium theory
can handle an arbitrary amount of uncertainty.
So imagine we've got k physical goods, t time periods,
and then say m possible states of the world.
Then we can just go and say, well, let's multiply them out.
So k physical goods, t time periods, m goods,
so that'll be k times t times m goods,
which we can exchange as pieces of paper.
So this is a piece of paper that is good
for one mouse in the year 2037
if the name Brian is more popular than the name Ryan.
And that could be a note.
And we could go and define an unlimited state,
a list of states of affairs,
which might or might not happen.
And if the state of affairs doesn't happen,
then the promissory note is worthless.
And if it does happen, then it's worth its face value.
And we can do it that way.
Okay, so just think of good k,
or good k if x happens to be a different good
than good k if x doesn't happen.
So again, more realistically,
it could be like an orange if the average temperature
in Florida is over 80 degrees,
and an orange if the average temperature in Florida
is less than or equal to 80 degrees.
And then we could go and have two different contracts
for each of these different states of the world.
So again, imagine the incredible complexity
of these markets.
So it's not just every good,
it's every good at every time period
under every possible imaginable condition.
And we can all shoehorn it into an existing model.
Okay, right?
Now intuitively, you can actually imagine
that I take a piece of paper that is good for,
say, like one lecture from me in a week.
And then I could go and I could draw a bunch of lines on it,
and I could cut it up into
a thousand different pieces of paper,
good under this condition, good under that condition.
And as long as I've actually partitioned it into
all logical possibilities,
so I divided it up into a set of mutually exclusive,
jointly exhaustive conditions.
So if you have all the pieces of paper,
then you definitely get a free lecture from me.
Or if not a free lecture, you get a lecture from me
if you're the owner of it.
Then we could go and imagine a market in all these goods.
Like every piece of paper can be sold separately.
And then if you want a guarantee,
you just buy up all the pieces.
If you want a semi-guarantee,
then you buy up a segment of the pieces.
Or not.
Okay.
All right.
Now, so anyways, in all these cases,
this is taking advantage of the fact
that we can construct a new problem
which is isomorphic to another one.
Right, which when you really think about it
is actually logically the same as another problem.
All right.
Yeah, so, you know, like lots of problems.
So again, if you were doing price controls
and you started off with rent control,
and then someone says, what about labor?
And you just go, here, I'll prove it for labor too.
And you just erase the word rent and rent control
and you replace it with the word wage maximum.
And then the diagram's still good.
Right, so that would be a case in my smart problem
where we start off like a price dealing for asparagus.
Well, what if it was coal?
Erase coal, write down coal.
Now it's the diagram for coal, ta-da!
All right, isn't that amazing?
All right, same thing here with the Arrow and Dubrow Realize.
You can take their general equilibrium model
and you can just go and say,
you know when we were talking about physical goods?
They could be notional goods.
Any number of notional goods
under any conceivable situation that you can imagine.
All logical possibilities.
All through the future history of the universe.
And our model applies.
All right.
Now you may think, eh, it's still kind of like over problem,
but there have actually been some real concrete achievements
that I think have been inspired by Arrow and Dubrow.
And the most notable one in my view is betting markets.
Right now, if you are a very narrowly minded person,
as I'm sure none of you are,
I say betting and you think Atlantic City, right?
Right?
But, if you think about it a bit more,
you say, well really, aren't all financial markets
really betting markets too?
Aren't people betting on prices going up or down?
And you say, so really betting markets
are not just Atlantic City, it's all the stuff
and we're not insurance, it's not really kind of betting.
And when you start thinking about it more,
it's saying, well gee, if that's all true,
couldn't we have a betting market about any event at all?
That anyone wonders about?
Couldn't we have a betting market on whether
say Donald Trump will still be the president
at the end of his term?
We can have that market.
And now, partly thanks to these ideas we do,
there are online betting markets
for all kinds of weird things.
There's online betting markets,
not just for political things,
like which party would retain control of Congress.
There are online betting markets for unemployment rates,
for inflation rates,
online betting markets for revolutions, right?
And then there was a very controversial online market
that the great Robin Hanson,
as I mentioned a few times already,
but he always deserves all the bliss that I can give him.
So there's a very controversial betting market
that Robin was personally very closely involved in.
So gee, you guys are so young,
you used this probably before most of your times.
All right, scary.
But perhaps not as scary as the idea itself.
And the idea itself was terrorism betting markets.
Can I draw like a scholar or something?
Spooky, all right.
All right.
All right.
So about 15 years ago,
it's about 15 years ago now,
DARPA, which is the Research Wing of the Defense Department
funded a set of internal betting markets
for predicting grotesque and horrifying events.
And there was a whole team of researchers
that were involved in this.
Robin Hanson was one of them.
And then word leaked out that this was occurring.
And there was a Senator and a Congressman
and a representative immediately at a press conference
denouncing this ghoulish
and horrible terrorism betting markets.
And if you ever believe
that there is a political status quo bias
and it's hard to change anything in policy,
that's not what happened here.
Within, the program was immediately killed
and within two days,
all the main people involved had been fired
or had to resign.
All right.
Now, most of the researchers involved was read for cover.
Robin was the one guy who kept answering his phone
and saying, yes, I would love to defend
so-called terrorism betting markets.
Now, Robin to this day insists
it wasn't really terrorism betting markets.
Right now, here is his story.
You can tell me if this makes any sense to you.
And I don't think it would make sense to many people.
Says, look, it wasn't really betting on terrorism
because you couldn't bet on any specific terrorist attack.
You can only bet on the total number
of terrorism deaths per year.
Now, to a normal person,
does that mean you're not really betting
on terrorism anymore?
No.
Like this is just a case of Robin
not understanding the emotions that are normal for a person.
Which of course is what makes him so creative
is just like,
like if you even knew the emotions, that might stop it.
But since he's unaware of these emotions,
then he just does it.
He's like, what did I say?
What did I do?
But anyway, so terrorism betting markets.
Again, the idea here is why don't we go
and have a betting market where people go
and actually place bets on the total number
of terrorism deaths.
The easiest way to imagine it
is something like suppose that there is a security
which pays a dollar if the total number
of terrorism deaths is over 2,000
and another one pays a dollar
if it is less than or equal to 2,000.
And then we can go and compare the prices
of these two things and this will give us
an idea about those.
Or we could have many more,
so we could have a whole bunch of different bins
for the possibilities.
So, and in this way, we could actually get
a market estimate of how many terrorism deaths
there are in fact going to be.
And then we can go further.
How about we go and we have one set of,
one set of assets that give terrorism deaths
if we do invade Iraq in 2003
and a separate set that estimate casualties
if we don't invade Iraq.
Then we can go and see, well, does the market say
that invading Iraq will reduce terrorism
or increase terrorism?
Interesting question.
At the time, of course, a lot of people said
foregone conclusion, of course.
How many of them said there would be something
called ISIS that would come along
and it would be a massive body count and so.
I do know some people who say,
like they still stand by the Iraq War.
My question for them is, look,
if you went back in time and had to classify
what occurred in terms of percentiles of outcomes,
where would you put what did occur?
Telling me, like if what did occur was not
in the 10th percentile, lower your expectations?
Again, I would say that what occurred
was pretty much worse than what almost
anyone at the time was forecasting,
including critics.
Anyway, so the idea here is that we can go
and use the knowledge of the market,
like everything good you've ever heard
about knowledge aggregation properties of markets
to go and figure out what's really going on
and get the best estimate that we actually can.
Now, of course, there are endless complaints about this,
most of which are based upon not even reading
what the proposal was.
So there you go.
So some of the really stupid ones
that people immediately said.
There's a terrorism betting market,
there's a league of terrorists to go and bet on terrorism
and then profit by the very thing they're doing.
Yeah, they actually, so there's a few things to know.
First of all, it's not ridiculous at first
until you pay any attention to the facts.
So first fact, maximum bet's 100 bucks.
So you have to imagine that someone is actually
not gonna be a terrorist and then they go,
oh, but I can make 100 bucks on top of everything else.
That's certainly misguided.
All right, second way, second thing.
To participate in the market, you must register with the CIA.
Okay, so you go and you bet on the markets
and then you go and try to,
then you go and collect your money and you say,
hello, just by coincidence, I sold my house
and put everything on terrorism event,
which just happened the next day.
Whoa, how weird.
And then the CIA will say, that's really interesting
and we will be delighted to pay you
after we do the most thorough background check
we have ever done in our history.
Yes.
Maybe.
So if you go and read the 911 report,
now here's the thing, if you really wanna profit
from terrorism, is there a safer way of doing it
than going and registering for a special market
with a maximum bet of 100 bucks that was run by the CIA?
Can you think of any easier way to make money
on terrorism than that if you know it's gonna happen?
Say what's that?
Is that guns outside a mosque?
Let's think about something less gruesome.
Yes, shorting markets.
How about shorting insurance markets
or shorting the industries
where you know the jacks can happen?
Or how about shorting reinsurance markets,
those are the special insurance markets
that make up catastrophic losses for insurance markets.
Yes.
You can also see like terror organizations
price fixing on their own,
like fixing fights in a boxing match
with their own terror attacks.
Somebody comes with a really efficient terror attack
but the head of the cell is like,
I bet on less than 5,000 this year.
So we're gonna need to tone down to see more on it.
Yeah, sure.
Yeah, so anyway, so these are all glaring problems.
Actually, by the way, the 9-11 Commission
actually did investigate whether anyone
had in fact financially profited from the 9-11 attacks
and they were not able to find anyone on earth
that seemed to have prior knowledge and act on it.
They did find that there was one firm
that had shorted United stock
but they had also bought American stock.
So, I mean, maybe they only do half the bar or something.
I don't know, something like that.
But it seems unlikely.
But anyway, that would be a way better way
of profiting from it than going and registering with the CIA
which sounds like the height of idiocy.
Yeah, way back there.
Yeah, I was just, I'm trying to hear what you're saying.
So you guys are saying,
there's like a James Bond sequel
that like the bad guys are working on.
Yes.
So I'm trying to pull it.
Is that like what they were using?
Yeah, yeah, so you know,
again, of course that's something that you can do
without terrorism betting markets.
But yeah, this would be one
where you specifically have terrorism betting markets
that worry this won't incentivize terrorism.
Which again, like if there were a no questions asked system
where you collect no matter what
and they're an unlimited bet,
maybe this is a reasonable concern.
But the people who came up with this
were 100 miles ahead of the critics.
But the critics couldn't be bothered
to actually read it before attacking it
or maybe they did read it and then said,
man, this is ruining my demagogic potential here.
And I'm, demagoguery is really,
it was really lucrative for me.
So that's fine.
Again, some of the other dumb things is,
look, you shouldn't figure out
these complex questions by betting.
We should do it by consulting intelligence experts.
That's the right way to do it.
Right, and there is the snarky reply to this.
And then there's the really ironclad reply.
The snarky reply is military intelligence.
There's an oxymoron, ha ha.
Right, or you could go and point out
a whole bunch of grotesque failures
of military intelligence like,
you didn't see 9-11 coming,
you didn't see the Pakistan detonated nuclear weapon coming,
you didn't see tons of stuff coming,
so what good are you?
And that is the snarky reply.
The good reply is that we welcome
the members of the intelligence community
in our betting markets.
If they actually are the best informed people,
we would love to ascertain that this is in fact true.
If no one outside the community knows anything useful,
betting markets will reveal this
as the members of the intelligence community
make money hand over fist,
taking advantage of the ignorant, arrogant people
who think they know better.
Or maybe it turns out that there's actually
dispersed knowledge and there's plenty of people
who do know stuff who aren't working
for intelligence agencies,
and so we will incorporate all the knowledge
of the intelligence community
plus all the knowledge of everybody else.
And that is the bulletproof defense
of terrorist betting markets.
Yes.
How useful could that market have been
if people, like if only accepted people
who are willing to register with the CIA and pay,
and only make gains to a few hundred or more dollars?
Well, so there's a big research literature
on how well these markets work,
especially compared to other things.
And the usual result is even markets
where there are quite low caps
on the amount you're allowed to bet
still give a big improvement in predictive accuracy
over other stuff that we've got.
Again, of course, for things that are very hard to predict,
then they might still be crummy,
just better than whatever else we've got.
Right.
Now, interestingly, so how many people
have actually read a book by Philip Tetlock
called Superforecasting?
I read his expert book, the one before it.
Yeah, yeah, anyway, so expert political judgment
is sort of about how experts know less than they pretend to,
especially when they disagree with other experts.
Superforecasting actually goes
and opens up an enormous tournament to the whole world
just to see who really knows their stuff
when we go and measure knowledge in a proper way,
namely, you have to say what's gonna happen
before it happens in a way where we can precisely identify
whether you're right or wrong, like actual prediction.
It's not prediction if everybody can just say,
yeah, I was totally right after it happened.
Just go and say, well, I think there's gonna be
serious issues in North Korea.
And then you just wait for stuff to happen and say,
see, well, look at my crystal ball, I know everything.
All right, so that is not a real prediction
in, according to Tetlock, and of course,
Tetlock is correct in this matter,
as he is on virtually everything else he writes on.
So he should be the conscience on the shoulder
of every person who discusses the future.
He's so great.
But anyway, yes, so big result there
is that there are lots of people out there in the world
who actually are good at forecasting,
and there are some people who are awesome,
and the awesome people, though they do generally have
a bunch of the things that we think of as good traits,
very often they are not professional forecasters,
they're not in the intelligence community,
they're not actual economic forecasters.
They're just people with common sense and good judgment
and some freaking humility to know the difference
between actually knowing what's gonna happen and 80%.
I mean, of course, people on TV
don't like to say stuff like 80%.
Certainly, if you wanna go and promote a war,
have you ever seen someone on TV promoting a war
and saying, look, 50% chance this war improves things,
30% chance it makes no difference,
20% chance it makes things worse, I'd like those odds.
Let's do it.
Any pro-war pundit ever say something like that?
Of course not.
Does any anti-war pundit ever do the reverse?
No, of course, it's always, this will inevitably
and can only lead in the absolute destruction,
that's the kind of garbage people say on TV.
Right?
Right-handing, and of course, what terrorism betting markets is about is making things
more precise, opening things up, and then of course, making people put their money where
their mouths are.
And it turns out there's a lot of people who talk big but don't want to bet much on anything,
and there's other humble, modest people who don't seem like, who don't have any great
status in society, but are in the top of the top of forecasting.
The book gets a title because Ted Locke calls the top 2% of his forecasting community to
be super, he calls them super forecasters, right?
And then, interesting question, did the super forecasters just got lucky?
And the answer is no.
Of course, they don't, when you run the chart over a second time, they don't, the top 2%
don't all stay in the top, but a shockingly high percentage of them do stay at the top,
so they have a genuine talent.
All right.
Okay, and yeah, if you'll allow me to brag, so while I have not really participated much
in actual betting markets, I do a lot of one-on-one bets.
So this is not actually a case of perfect competition, this is pure bargaining.
Why?
Because it's much easier to get one person to bet me than to go and set up a market on
any issue where I think the people are full of it.
So the first interesting thing about it is it's really hard to get people to bet you,
especially famous people don't like betting, right?
Or they want to bet on something ridiculous, like when we got, Oran will still exist or
something like that, there'll be no war between Norway and Sweden.
Oh wow, you want to give an odds on that?
All right.
So there's that.
But anyway, so I do a lot of these bets, and so right now my betting record does stand
at 17 victories and zero failures, and then maybe 15 other outstanding bets, and I'm going
to win two more bets really soon.
It is essentially guaranteed unless inflation was 40% this month, or rather deflation, was
there was 40% deflation this month and I might have a problem.
But if something like that didn't happen, then I'm going for two more bets.
Yes?
So you've got me curious about this since last class.
What are some of the stakes?
So here's the thing.
It is so hard to get people to bet that often the bet is just a dollar.
People make fun of it, like so why not go $100, people laugh, two economists betting
over $100.
And they say, look, I would have bet for a lot more if the other person would have, but
it's like pulling teeth to get people to make any bet of any kind.
So I did have a 10 to 1 bet with Tyler about unemployment a few years ago, where he said
he gave me 10 to 1 odds that unemployment would remain above, would remain at 5% or
higher for the next 20 years.
So 10 to 1 odds in my favor.
And now I wouldn't want to actually bet him $10,000 on that because I think that if he
owed me $100,000 that could hurt our friendship and he's going to get more than that.
But I did say, okay, how about $100?
He said, no, I'll bet you $1.
All right, so I wrote my one against his 10.
So I did win, almost didn't win, just a couple of years.
I got 10 bets from him.
And of course, the better known people are, a lot of what they're betting isn't really
the money, it's the reputation, it's the prestige.
So there's that.
Yes?
When you do these bets and some people, they will not go in and they don't want to go in
and they don't want to go in and they don't want to go in and they don't want to go in
and they don't want to go in and they don't want to go in and they don't want to go in
and they don't want to go in and they don't want to go in and they don't want to go in
and they don't want to go in and they don't want to go in and they don't want to go in
and they don't want to go in and they don't want to go in.
Are they still fairly convinced of their position?
Yes, well, so Tetlock does have, you know, his earlier book, Expert Political Judgment,
is, he has a big chapter on how do experts respond when confronted with the fact that
they were wrong.
First thing is people, as experts, just misremember what they said in the direction, suspiciously, of being right.
So this is why
they have to, you know, they essentially, you know, they have a clear, there's clear documentation of what they said initially.
And then step one is, so do you remember what you said? And there's a strange bias towards
misremembering what you said, if what you said was wrong,
though not if what you said was right. If you said the right thing, then almost everyone remembers correctly.
All right, suspicious. But then when confronted, there is a whole series of defense mechanisms, which
basically, these are the defenses that you would imagine if you had the lowest possible opinion of these people.
All right, so what are some of the defenses? Saying, look, I was really right.
So, like, the thing you asked me to go and predict, it just wasn't fair.
It wasn't a fair thing to ask me. And then there's the, I was just off on timing.
I said it would happen this year, but what I really mean is it happens sometime this century.
Right, and you guys have probably heard of Paul Ehrlich, the famous biologist who bet Julian Simon about commodity prices over ten years.
He would spend his whole career predicting doom and gloom in our lifetime.
And then there turned out there was a video where he was asked, well, what happened, Paul?
And he said, look, as a biologist, I think in timeframes of millions of years.
And he said, I only bet him just to shut him up.
And you're like, so.
So did you pay him?
Yeah, so I don't want to be maximally uncharitable here, but it sure sounds like what you're saying is that you were completely lying for your entire career.
And because you knew that if you said this would lead to disaster in the next million years, no one would care.
So you said it's going to lead to hundreds of millions of people starving to death within a decade.
So you said it's going to lead to hundreds of millions of people starving to death within the next ten years, even though you didn't really have any reason at all to think that was true.
Right, but the interviewer didn't quite put it that way.
But again, so if you and my bloggers Google Paul Ehrlich, you will go and find the video, you can judge for yourselves whether he's actually saying something as ludicrous as what he appears to be saying, but the often-timing defense.
And then, of course, there's the response of, look.
It's just, prediction is stupid.
Like, you shouldn't judge people by whether or not they predicted what would happen.
And, you know, suspiciously, people almost never say this if they predict it correctly.
Only the losers say this.
Right, so this is a glory or not.
And there is a particularly disgraceful quote from Henry Kissinger.
This is a public quote, so Ted Locke was not breaking any confidences.
Well, where Kissinger, when confronted with the way the Cold War actually panned out after saying that it was possible,
God just said, you know, said, you know, said, well, when he said to his opponents, he goes,
Well, your crystal balls just seem to happen to work better than mine.
Ha ha ha.
Wait, if it's all astrology, then why are you a respected person?
Why does anyone listen to you?
Why do you have power of life over death if it's all just making stuff up anyway?
Terrible.
Yes, please.
What did you think of the effects they would give, like I erred in the right direction?
Yeah, well, again, suspiciously, people almost never said I got lucky in the right direction.
Right, and then they get the second deference.
So there's this bizarre asymmetry where if you get it right, then you just say I had it dead to rights.
I'm great.
But if you get it wrong, then, like, well, I was wrong, wrong in the right direction.
But, again, it's basically saying I was strategically right.
I was just exaggerating dangers because I thought people might not be paying attention to something enough.
And it's like, well, look, the honest thing to do in that case is not to go and say the probability is higher than it really is.
It's to go and talk about how bad it would be if it happened.
So it's one thing to say, you know how bad a Soviet invasion of the U.S. would be?
Here's what they actually do when they take countries over.
Mass executions, deportations, all this stuff.
But then to say, well, yeah, but I don't want to have to go into how bad it is when the Soviets take over a country.
So I'm just going to say the probability is five times what I really think.
That seems pretty phony.
But, all right.
Okay, so anyway, this is betting markets.
And if you are interested in betting markets, this is one of the best places in the world to work on them.
So Robin Hanson does a lot of them.
A lot of us are interested.
And still I would say that it's an under-fished topic.
So nothing more to do.
Okay, so questions?
Questions about this?
Okay.
All right, so I guess we are out of time.
I think we are going to finish up with this last topic next week.
