Something really big before it becomes really big.
It's a book on reputation for seeds,
almost all internet commerce.
And it is the book that brings together all the evidence
that we should expect that internet commerce
would actually be viable.
As I would say, that probably most economists in the 1980s,
if you just explained it to them, would have just said,
ah, there's no way this will work.
Either that or there'd have to be a giant government bureau
of internet regulation to ensure that everybody
is getting everything that they're supposedly getting.
And then you would go and file forms to complain
to the government if you aren't happy
with the product that you get,
which is the way things usually work on the internet now.
Now, moving on from reputation.
So as I said, reputation probably matters
not just for quality, but for price as well,
because stores develop a reputation
for having a certain level of pricing.
And you can even see this in franchises like 7-Eleven,
where they will, in fact, regulate the prices
that their own stores can charge,
because if one 7-Eleven charges these ordinary prices,
this hurts the reputation of all 7-Elevens.
And so it makes sense for the mother corporation
to pay attention and to be concerned
about this kind of thing.
Okay, now, normally, we think about reputational incentives
leading to Pareto superior outcomes,
or at least counter-Hicks superior outcomes.
But there are plenty of examples
where reputational incentives lead in the opposite direction
to extremely bad behavior.
So outlaws may want to have a reputation for ferocity,
or of course, dictators often want
to have a reputation for brutality.
So one of the little-known secrets
of the collapse of the Soviet Union
and the restoration of Russian power is this.
In the last years of the Soviet Union,
Gorbachev started scapegoating
different Red Army commanders
who committed atrocities against civilians.
So, why scapegoating?
Well, he probably wanted it to happen, right?
A general who goes and shoots a bunch of protesters
is helping to preserve Gorbachev's power.
And yet, what does Gorbachev do
to many of these commanders?
He punishes them.
He says, oh, I didn't want that to happen.
That's terrible, shooting civilians, terrible.
Or imagine that with a Russian accent.
I actually saw Gorbachev speak here at GMU.
I walked out after five minutes.
He was so boring.
He just seemed to think he was still talking
to a Politburo of people who could be sent
to Siberia if they walked out.
But I walked out and nothing happened.
Nothing happened.
Anyway, so Gorbachev started scapegoating
his military commanders who committed atrocities
against civilians and before long,
military commanders stopped committing atrocities.
And then, it was very hard to maintain order
and maintain dictatorial power.
And then, in the final gasp of the Soviet Union,
when you may remember there's a military coup
against Gorbachev by hardline communists.
When they went and gave orders
to start committing atrocities,
generals involved at key locations said,
we want written orders.
And no one in the Politburo would sign.
And so the Soviet Union collapsed.
All right, now, this continues under Yeltsin.
For John Ury Yeltsin.
So when there are cases where military commanders
are committing atrocities in Chechnya,
Yeltsin goes and scapegoats them.
And of course, this means that Chechen separatism
does better.
And when Putin gets power,
what is the first thing he reverses?
He stops scapegoating military commanders
for committing atrocities.
And wow, you don't even have to give orders
for atrocities as long as there's no punishment.
There's always people on the ground
to say, hey, those people are making me angry.
Let's go and teach them a lesson.
All right, let's show them
what the might of Russia looks like.
Right, and you do that a little bit
and then confidence is restored
and then rebellion is crushed
and dictatorship is reestablished.
All right, now, this also means
there's something interesting strategically
about frequent demands to punish underlings
when something goes wrong.
You know, so it's very normal in politics
that, say, an undersecretary has to go
and take responsibility for something that goes wrong.
And the undersecretary resigns
or sometimes they even go to jail.
Now, very often what the undersecretary's doing
sounds like something that the president
probably wanted to happen.
Maybe they actually gave the order,
but in any case, if you're the president,
people do things to make you happy
and you don't even need to say it.
All right, so what is the game theoretic logic
behind demanding that the president
go and punish an underling?
What is the logic behind demanding a scapegoat?
Even when you know, well, probably this person
was just doing what, he was just following orders.
Why do you want to go and, you know,
so of course, you might say, well, let's punish the president.
Well, that's not gonna work.
He's above law.
All right, so why go and ruin an undersecretary's life?
What's the point?
Well.
Reputation?
Well, yes, well, yes, but elaborate, elaborate.
What, something, something, reputation.
What, what?
We were on, so I said reputation.
Yes, yes.
How, yes, yeah, Nathan.
You want to deter people from committing these atrocities
even when the president wants them.
Right.
You'll have deterrence if it is,
there is an expected cost to doing so.
Yeah, yeah, so you are undermining
the president's power when you do this.
When you punish the underlings
for doing what the president wants,
it makes people not want to do
what the president wants anymore.
They're like, oh my God, I've got to watch out here.
Sure, make the president happy,
but I don't want to go to jail.
Right, and then if you look more closely
at some high-profile cases, like,
I don't even, I can't, I can't remember the name.
There's the Naomi Watts movie about the CIA operative
who got her cover blown for the critical articles
that her husband was writing, right?
And it was Scooter Libby.
So yeah, I believe he went to jail over this,
but what happened to him after he got out of jail?
Pardoned by book.
Yes, and yes, not only a pardon, but also?
Cushy job, cushy job waiting for him.
So this is how you take care of your people.
Is, or you're like, you go and do
a little bit of prison for me,
but it's gonna be minimum security.
And then there's gonna be a nice pardon waiting for you.
And you're not gonna get treated like a regular felon
that nobody wants to hire.
Ooh, you're a felon.
I don't want you working here.
Instead, there's gonna be someone who says,
well, I'm, well, we must question your judgment,
but your motives were very admirable.
And you know what?
I really want to reward those motives.
A lot more than I want to punish your judgment.
And so here's a great job waiting for someone
that otherwise might be totally unemployable.
Right, so same logic.
All right, and as I was mentioning,
one standard tactic of Genghis Khan was to say,
we will burn your city to the ground
and kill everyone inside, plus the animals.
The animals are actually there too.
Two, you're like, well, not me.
I don't care if I die, but don't kill my animals.
But anyway, so if you resist at all, we will kill everyone.
Right, and this seems like a,
this seems like it's overkill
until you realize it's not about trying to loot that city.
So what is it about?
Looting all the other cities.
Looting it really easily with a minimum of effort.
So look, you know what happened in the last city
that didn't immediately surrender?
Well, I'll give you a 24-hours-to-go look.
And now, all right,
so now you're gonna surrender immediately,
and then it's gonna be,
life's gonna be really easy for everybody.
It's gonna be a nice system, right?
All right, so anyway, how could the standard,
the standard intuition that reputation does lead
to socially better outcomes be rationalized?
And here, though there is not any theorem,
my best guess is that you just need
to add on free entry and exit.
Yes, the problem with a city is a city cannot just pick up
and run away from getting us gone very easily.
So you cannot easily leave,
in which case there is an incentive
to convince these trapped people
that you will deal with them harshly.
But if it was really cheap
to just pick up your city and go away,
then when you try treating people this way,
they would just run away from you.
And on the other hand, if you were treating people well,
they would go to, they would flock to you.
And so that is my story.
Now, I think I was saying in the last class,
remember we should interpret this
like Austrians, subjectively.
So freedom of entry and exit is not just a matter
of objective facts, it's also a matter of attitude.
So this explains why when you're dealing with friends,
where people feel like they could get rid of you
if you're no longer good friends,
then reputation works very well.
But within the family, where you feel bound for life,
where there's a norm saying you don't cut off family
no matter who they are, no matter what they've done,
then this creates room for truly horrible people
and families to just establish a reputation
as the person who never apologizes,
who never treats anyone well,
and then everyone says, well, it's just crazy Uncle Brian.
Or whatever.
So there's no dealing with them,
so we just have to give him everything he wants
all the time.
It's like, well, why does he get to be our uncle?
Because that's the bloodline
that establishes that for all time.
Well, couldn't we just get rid of him?
No, that would be horrible.
All right, and this explains things like why drug addicts
first prefer victims to rob are their own families.
You go robbing your friends, they may call the police,
or at least you lose your friends,
but go and rob your parents.
I don't recommend this.
But if you rob your parents,
they probably will call the police.
They'll probably just guilt you.
And if you're the kind of person
inclined to rob your parents,
that guilt doesn't work very well.
Right, and so, and you may do it again and again and again,
and they may start putting things in safe deposit boxes,
but still, the families that are willing
to just cut you off and say, that is it.
I have no son.
That's forever.
And it again fits with this free entry and exit experiment.
Rather a hypothesis.
Right, now there is an experiment
that fits very nicely with what I'm saying.
So Gordon Tullock, the great Tullock,
who has passed from us,
but his spirit is always with us.
And every time the Nobel Prize is given out,
it is the duty of every GMU grad
to curse the Nobel Committee in your heart
for not having given him the prize.
He totally deserved it.
All right, but in any case, the great Tullock.
He, as far as I know, he only did one economic experiment
his entire career,
and it was one of the most brilliant experiments ever done,
and was super cheap and easy to do,
but he alone saw some low-hanging fruit.
So here's his experiment.
He repeated the Prisoner of Selma experiment
that's been done so many times,
but with one twist.
You can change your partner if you want.
That's the twist.
So normally in the Prisoner of Selma experiment,
you get paired up with a person,
and then you can assign,
and then you may work with them,
or you make it randomly reassigned.
Tullock said, no, you're not stuck with them.
You're not randomly reassigned.
You are reassigned by choice.
So you can fire your partner
and find another partner anytime you want.
All right, and the result of the experiment,
as you might guess,
was that there was a very high cooperation,
because the person who was thinking of defecting
in the Prisoner of Selma experiment,
when that happens, quickly becomes known,
and then your partner,
the first step is,
what's the first step?
Really obvious one.
You stay, you betray your partner,
and then what happens?
Your partner dumps you.
All right, but then the really scary part
of the second is the next thing.
All right, now you gotta find a new partner.
Who will have you now?
Nobody.
Well, I think in the experiment,
you have to have a partner.
You have to be part of the experiment,
but it'll be another traitor,
another betrayer.
So then you just get stuck
into this pool of other people
that nobody else wants to deal with.
So it's like kind of being in prison.
Your only friends are people who kill people,
rob people, sell, it's scary, right?
I don't wanna be with those people.
Well, then don't get in there.
Then you won't have to deal with these problems.
All right, so anyway,
that was the idea of the talk experiment,
and I think you got something close
to full cooperation,
where people were very quickly able to see,
wait a second, if I betray you,
not only will you not like me anymore,
but I will be damaged goods.
No one will like me anymore,
and then my only partner will be scum like me.
I don't wanna be partnered with scum like me.
So that's what he got.
All right, questions, questions.
So now let's move on to monopoly and contestability.
All right, so I assume everyone here
has seen the standard monopoly model a bunch of times.
So standard monopoly model,
where you've got your marginal cost,
you've got your demand,
and then of course you have your marginal revenue curve,
and then you monopolize that marginal revenue
for a marginal cost,
providing these monopoly profits,
and creating these deadweight losses here.
So everyone's seen this model a bunch of times, right?
Okay, all right, so monopolist maximizes PQ minus TC,
says marginal revenue plus marginal cost.
All right, so does this make sense in game theoretic terms?
All right, so certainly this is an equilibrium.
This is one equilibrium,
but we can imagine all kinds of other equilibria
in this monopoly game.
So we can imagine one where consumers refuse to buy
at any price higher than marginal cost,
and if the consumers won't buy anything
at a price higher than marginal cost,
what is the monopolist gonna do?
I'll set price.
Yes, we'll set price equal to marginal cost.
So I got nothing to lose then.
Yes.
My question is, is it possible for the consumer
to refuse to buy if the monopolist's set P
is greater than a minus?
Well, so we can certainly imagine an equilibrium
where this is an equilibrium.
So if you just think of this,
what I described is a Nash equilibrium, right?
Because if consumers will not buy anything
if the price is greater than marginal cost,
then if the monopolist says,
charging price equal to marginal cost,
if consumers decide they're willing to pay more,
does that give them a better deal?
Yes, so given that they're already getting
at a marginal cost, if they decide
that they're willing to pay more,
does that give them a better deal?
No.
If the monopolist,
holding constant consumer behavior,
decides to raise his price,
does that get the monopolist anything extra?
No, because, so the equilibrium is consumers
only don't buy, so yeah.
Don't buy if price is greater than marginal cost,
and monopolist does, price equal to marginal cost.
So from the monopolist's point of view,
if he recharges more,
then he's actually going to earn nothing, right?
And from the consumer's point of view,
if they suddenly become willing to pay more,
they still get a marginal cost,
so this is also a Nash equilibrium, okay?
And of course, we can have all kinds of equilibria
in between these extremes, right?
So we can have, consumers don't buy
if price is greater than marginal cost plus a penny,
right, and that could be another equilibrium.
All right, now, but to get to your deeper question,
to your deeper question,
what do we need to add to the game theory
in order to get a result,
in order to get the standard result?
Like, why is this equilibrium,
why does it make more sense than these other ones,
which are still perfectly good Nash equilibria?
Yes?
Yeah, yeah, so you might do sub-game perfection,
so yeah, so the monopolist goes
and charges a higher price,
and then the consumers are there,
what are they gonna do?
No, I'm just gonna sit here starving.
That doesn't seem very smart.
So, yes, this threat to refuse to buy
the price is greater than marginal cost
sounds like a herdedly threat, right?
And then on top of it, of course,
the monopolist might build up a reputation,
saying, look, I don't respond to this kind of stuff,
and in the real world, it's a lot easier
for one firm to build a reputation
than for a million consumers, right?
Because, how is one consumer gonna say,
you know what I'm gonna do?
I'm gonna teach this monopolist a lesson.
All right, you can try,
and if you pay close attention,
in the real world, people do try
this kind of thing sometimes.
So, I remember after the Exxon,
oh, the Valdez oil spill,
my brother refused to buy gas from Exxon for a while.
I'm gonna show them.
So sometimes people do do things like this,
but normally, of course, this sounds like
wishful thinking that you're gonna make a difference, right?
Okay, anyway, so as far as,
so the standard textbook story,
when you think about it,
seems pretty good as far as it goes, right?
But there is an obvious problem with the textbook story,
and that is that it ignores potential competition.
All right, potential competition.
All right, the idea that just because
there's only one firm now,
doesn't mean that there couldn't be other firms
if circumstances changed.
Of course, if there is,
if this is a government-created monopoly,
or anyone who competes goes to jail,
then the simple model is great.
So, if it is illegal to compete,
then this is a fine model.
But if it just happens to be only one firm around,
then the question is,
well, how do you get to be the only firm?
And how do you make sure you remain the only firm?
So, it sure doesn't seem like Amazon is acting this way,
even though when Amazon started charging sales tax
in Virginia, I did ask my students,
so what is the second best firm like Amazon?
And people told me something like,
Recruitment or something like that.
Started down, so it was something,
it was some Japanese name,
and I sort of looked at it, it didn't seem very good.
So anyway, if Amazon ceased to exist,
where would you buy your stuff from instead?
I'll leave it at Walmart.
Alibaba?
Well, Walmart, hey, it might actually go
to a brick and mortar store,
I guess you could do Walmart.com, that sounds better.
All right, but in any case,
so on the surface it seems like Amazon
really has a fantastic position.
People can't even think of what they would do without it,
and yet, the pricing on Amazon seems very low,
for the most part.
In fact, it's like, how can it be this low?
It's so great, it's fantastic.
So, it did take me a few years
before I really internalized,
always looking on Amazon for things,
but finally I've achieved this.
You may have grown up in a world
where you don't even know the names of other places
that you might buy things.
Yeah, I think I, 15 years ago I needed a new backpack,
and I went around to different stores,
and then I said, wait, why did I do that?
Why didn't I just go to Amazon and try to get backpacks?
I knew that would be better, but anyway.
All right, so the main problem of the story
seems to be that it lacks potential competition.
So, how can we actually model potential competition?
Well, there's a number of different ways of doing it,
but one of the most influential in economic theory
is the model of contestability,
or sometimes called the contestable markets model.
This model became popular in the late 70s,
around the time of airline deregulation,
because the idea was that even if there's only one airline
that's servicing a city,
still, you can fly planes around the country
pretty easily, right?
So, if, say, the only airline that flies people
from Buffalo to Indianapolis
is charging prices above marginal cost,
some other airline could go and enter,
and therefore, the firm that is already there
needs to worry about that when it's picking its price.
All right, so anyway, these contestability models
are one of the main ways economists think
about potential competition, right?
And the basics...
set up in the simplest version of the model is you have an incumbent firm.
That's a firm that's already there. So you think about this. This is the
monopolist we see. It's the visible monopolist. Right? But then there's also
going to be a potential entrant. And the potential entrant may not only be
invisible at any one time. It may always be invisible. But we know it's there. Right? Or how would you know
it's there? Well, like one good sign is that the incumbent firm doesn't act
like a monopolist. Then that's a sign at least they believe these potential
entrants are out there. Right? In general, if you start saying the potential
things matter, it's going to be kind of hard to measure. Right? Because where are
they? Well, they're not here yet. They're only potential. If you could measure
them, they would not be potential. They would be actual. But we're thinking about
potential competition. All right. So anyway, then normally you've got, so you've
got an incumbent firm that sets its price. Then you have a potential entrant that decides
whether to enter. And if it does enter, then it picks a price. And then consumers
buy for the lower price firm. So let's think about it this way. So suppose
we've got a symbol cost function. Total cost is just equal to b times q.
So in other words, this is constant returns to scale.
So constant cost, cost of marginal cost. All right. Now let's call
P i is the incumbent's price and P e is the entrant's price if it enters. All right.
Now, suppose that the incumbent goes and charges a price that is
greater than b. All right. In that case, and again here we are assuming that the
entrant has exactly the same cost function as the incumbent. That's important.
All right. But if this is true, then will the entrant want to enter? Well, let's see.
The incumbent charges a price greater than b. Is the incumbent
making money? Is the incumbent making a profit? So remember this is total cost of bq.
So differentiate that function with respect to q. And then what do you get?
Yes. Marginal cost equals b. So if the cost is b and you charge more than b, are you
making profits? Yes. All right. Now, so far so good, but there's a little
problem. If the entrant sees that you're making profits, does the entrant want to enter?
Yes. And what price should that entrant charge in order to maximize its
profits? Yes, just a little bit lower. So we'll charge P i minus epsilon.
Where epsilon is, I remember the delta epsilon method from calculus.
Epsilon is a really small number. If we are dealing with normal monetary systems,
then we usually interpret epsilon as a penny. And it could of course be a
literally infinitesimal amount. That would be very picky. Okay. All right. So what this tells us is
it is not an equilibrium for the incumbent to go and charge a price of b,
or rather pay greater than b. All right. So if no price greater than b works,
then you can go and say, well, I don't know, maybe you charge a price less than b.
Well, let's see. If the incumbent charges less than b, will anyone ever enter the market?
No, because it's losing money already. Why enter a market where the firm that's already there is losing money?
Right. So no one will enter, but is that a good idea?
But what should the incumbent say? Well, this is an awesome strategy. No one ever enters.
This is great. No. Why is this not a great strategy despite the absolute lack of entry?
Because you're not making money. Yes, because you're losing money. So, well, great.
I managed to scare everyone off by wanting to scare myself away. So that's not too good.
So now we go to a general rule of economic theory. If a price can't be greater than something,
and it can't be less than something, then what will it generally be? Equal to that thing.
Yes. So how about we look at the equilibrium of P i equals b. That one works very nicely.
And then in that scenario, does the entrant want to enter? No. So the entrant gets zero profits
from not entering. So then there's no point in entering. And then it doesn't enter.
So that is the idea of the nestability model. So you have a firm that looks exactly like a monopolist,
but it charges a competitive price because there's an entrant that doesn't enter, but could.
But could. Okay. All right. So that is the really simple version of the model.
And it essentially predicts that potential entry has enormous power in the world,
even though it never even occurs. There is no entry ever observed in this model.
But it still runs the entire economy. The entire economy is controlled
by potential entry, which doesn't even exist. That's weird. It could exist. That's not.
All right. But the model gets more interesting when you start thinking about
slight variations on the simple model. Okay. So in the real world, normally people
don't get to become a monopolist for no reason. Instead, normally you're the monopolist
because you are something that all the other firms. Better. Better. Normally. Right?
In general, if your goal is to become the only firm in industry, good advice,
it will say, what should I do? What should I do? Well, how about you just become better than everybody else?
Oh, that. That sounds really hard, but highly effective if achieved. Right?
And then you can reverse this reasoning and say, well, what is the likely trade of whatever firm is
the one that is running the market? Betterness. Being better than everybody.
All right. So if we then go and modify the model to have two costs.
So here's Q. Here's P. And here is the demand curve. And then if we have one marginal cost here
for the incumbent and another marginal cost here for the entrant, now things are a bit more interesting.
Because now, if the incumbent goes and charges this price as equal to its own marginal cost,
does anyone enter? No. No. So, so far so good. But then what if you go and raise your price
a little bit above your marginal cost? Does that provoke the entrant to enter? No.
Because while you're making a profit, they couldn't make a profit because they aren't as good as you.
And you can keep raising and raising and raising and raising and raising and raising and raising.
And you can keep raising, in fact, until the incumbent sets a price that is equal to the marginal cost
of the entrant minus an epsilon. And then again, we have no entry by the end of the,
there's no entry, but the, nevertheless, the entrant constrains how high the price can be.
Essentially, the incumbent has to charge a price that is low enough to keep the entrant out.
Yes?
Would the entrant still be indifferent to entering if the incumbent firm sets it to equal to marginal cost
because then it would still have zero profit?
Yes. Yes. So, that is, yes. So, yes. You could do that. Again, this all depends upon whether we're thinking
about the Nash equilibrium as being one where they do enter or where they don't enter. But yes.
Although, if there were any uncertainty at all about what the entrant would do,
you wouldn't want to go all the way up because, you know, suppose there's a 30% chance that they might enter
if you charge the same price and they're indifferent. Then you would be risking all these,
you'd be risking half your profits all of a sudden. So, that's not very wise.
Okay. All right. Now, this is actually, you know, sometimes it's a special name. Sometimes it's called limit pricing.
This is pricing just below the price at which it would be profitable to compete with you.
Right? And there have been antitrust cases that have been filed against firms for doing this.
Almost like, well, what should they have done?
So, again, the heart of the case seems to be that they should have charged a higher price
so that other firms could have competed with them. Which, yes, is well.
So, you know, so what was it, like 30 years ago, a failed Supreme Court nominee wrote his,
Robert Bork wrote his really good book, The Antitrust Paradox, where he pointed out that a lot of Supreme Court cases
on antitrust appear to be about protecting competitors rather than protecting consumers.
And once you have that mindset, then looking and seeing that other firms aren't able to compete with you
becomes a reason to go do something to you. And, of course, that is a reason for the incumbent firm to not compete so hard.
And sometimes in the 70s and 80s, people would talk about, we don't want to give firms an incentive to pull their punches.
This is a boxing metaphor. When you're boxing with someone, like if you're the world's greatest boxer and you're boxing me,
you shouldn't try to hit me as hard as possible. Right? Instead, you should just say, light tap will be enough.
Right? So the same idea is that incumbent firms will have an incentive then to not compete so hard for fear of competitors
going out of business and then getting sued. So we're going to compete more moderately,
then everybody stays in business, has a good life, except for the consumers who don't get such good deals.
All right. So this is what happens when you've got a cost advantage for the incumbent firm.
Now what happens if we switch it around and it's actually the entrant that's better?
If finally the entrant comes along who's better than the incumbent? What happens then?
There's a switch of roles. Yeah, they switch roles. And so the incumbent is destroyed,
and the entrant then comes in and charges a price just below what the incumbent, so the incumbent's costs.
Right? And this is actually a model that gives us some insight into what's very common in innovative industries
where there's always one market leader, but that market leader often changes.
And firms that were huge suddenly just disappear from the face of the earth.
So like when I was a kid, the best video game system in the world was Atari,
and then it was replaced by something called Intellivision.
Intellivision. And Intellivision for a year or two was the coolest thing any kid could have.
Has anyone ever even heard of Intellivision? All right. So does some descendant company still exist?
Not to my knowledge. Just gone. All right. So anyway, there have been many other switches.
What is the market leader in console gaming now? Probably Microsoft.
Is it Xbox? Or PlayStation.
Xbox or PlayStation. All right. So these are things no one seeably. PlayStation, that is Nintendo?
No, PlayStation. Sony.
Sony. OK. So Nintendo still exists though, right?
Yeah.
Yeah. So Nintendo was also at one point the market leader in the late 80s.
So anyway, that makes sense if you've got a model like this,
but it's so innovative that entrants actually are better than incumbents at some point.
And then you see this cycling through of one market leader replaces another, and it's replaced in turn and selling.
So, interesting. All right. Now, what if we have some fixed costs?
So what if total costs are equal to something like A plus BQ?
And now we know, now we still have the same marginal cost, of course, but the average cost looks different.
So then we've got something that looks like this. So we've got, this is visible. You can see this.
So then we're going to have something like this.
We're going to have an average cost curve here.
And this average cost curve will asymptote to B, right?
Because as quantity goes to infinity, then you're dividing A,
but then remember average cost would then be equal to A over Q plus B.
So as Q goes to infinity, that A over Q goes to zero, and then the average cost gets closer and closer to B.
Sound good? All right. Now, in a model like this, what happens?
In a model like this, so, and again, let's go and draw our demand curve there.
Now, again, starting off and going back to the model where the entrant and the incumbent have the same cost curve.
All right. So now, think about this.
So suppose that you're the monopolist and you're facing an equally efficient competitor.
They can produce exactly the same cost as you.
So if you start out charging a price equal to marginal cost, how are you doing?
How is the firm doing if it charges a price equal to marginal cost?
Well, does it have a problem?
Well, look, remember, that's the average cost curve, and where are we?
Yes. Do you ever want to be below the average cost curve?
No, it's not fun to be below the average cost curve.
All right. So this is a case where if you were this person, you might say, well, look, I don't really understand the model,
but I know that I'm losing money right now.
If I charge, if I lower my price, I would lose even more money.
So I definitely don't want to lower my price.
So maybe I should try raising my price and see what happens.
What's the worst thing that happens is the entrant comes in and steals this losing business from me.
All right. So you might go and try raising your price a little bit.
And then you say, hey, I'm losing less money. And he didn't enter.
And then you can try raising it a bit more.
Say, I'm losing less money, didn't enter.
And finally, you can get to this intersection here where you're charging a price equal to average cost.
And now you're having a happy life.
It's no longer a sad life. Now you're just breaking even.
And remember, it's not that bad to break even in business because the average cost includes what implicit cost?
Yeah. Foregone interest. So, you know, average cost doesn't mean that you're making nothing.
It means that you're just making the normal rate of return. So always keep that in mind.
All right. But anyway, so you're here now. And actually, this point, you may say, well, raising prices works so well.
Why don't I try raising it again? Right.
And now we see the nestability model kicks in because if you try raising it a little bit above average cost, then what happens?
Yeah. Then the entrant says, now I'm going to come in and steal the market from you.
All right. So that means that in the Sibla model, the incumbent will simply charge a price equal to average cost.
And there still won't be any entry.
OK. All right. So and then, of course, now there is an interesting point here, which is, wait a second, demand crosses the average cost curve twice.
So which intersection? Or do we have two equilibria? Let's see.
So let's think about it. So here this is one. This is a place where price equals average cost.
But notice what's going on here. That's demand and that's average cost.
So in this region here, what's happening?
Falling cost.
Yes. Well, yes, definitely. Well, so falling average cost.
But so if a firm were actually here, what would their balance sheet look like?
So if you start here and then you cut your price a bit, what happens?
So here, of course, your profits are zero. If you cut your price to there, what happens?
Yeah, because demand is above average cost. So you'll be making profits.
So what this means is that even though this is also a place where price equals average cost, this is not an actual equilibrium.
It just looks like an equilibrium. It's not an equilibrium because at this price, whoever is there would want to cut their price.
And then once they cut their price, then someone else would see, hey, wait, you got profits, so I want a piece of that.
And so you go all the way down to the highest quantity intersection of price and average cost.
You can imagine a weird average cost curve that cuts a bunch of times.
And the only one that's an equilibrium in the stability model is the best one, like the one with the lowest price and the highest.
Makes sense? Makes sense. OK. All right.
And let's see. And then might as well go and do the more advanced modification of the version with fixed costs.
So what if we've got different fixed costs? So then we'll go and draw demand.
And then we can have this is the average cost curve of the incumbent.
This could be the average cost curve of the entrance. And now what will the incumbent want to do?
So they can be satisfied with that.
They can be satisfied with that intersection.
Yes. Well, yes. This is where demand crosses the incumbent's average cost curve.
So the incumbent's making no money there. Can the incumbent get away with more?
Yeah. Because we charge this price that's still below the average cost of the entrance.
So the entrant can't make money there. So you can keep going, keep going, keep going, keep going, keep going.
So until you are just an epsilon below the intersection of the average cost of the entrance with the demand curve.
So that minus epsilon. That minus epsilon.
And then of course, the same thing where it happens to be that the entrant has lower costs, then the entrant just puts the incumbent out of business.
Yes.
If we choose to increase its price, its quantity is still down, right?
Yeah. We still have a regular demand curve. We still have a regular demand curve.
So yeah. So when you go and raise price, it reduces quantity.
Yes. So it's true that you also need to make sure you aren't charging a price so high that even a regular monopolist wouldn't want to charge that high.
So in other words, implicit in all these models, is that the actual solution is better than the traditional one for monopolists over here?
So, I guess I got rid of it.
I guess it was over here. Yes. So we're here. So we're raising marginal revenue equals marginal cost.
So strictly speaking, you want to charge the higher of the intersection or that.
Yes. Yeah.
So, I mean, think about this. There could be one monopolist in the world, one firm produces cars, and then the potential entrant is me.
And I don't know anything about where I would start producing cars.
So the fact that I'm a potential entrant with costs that are extraordinarily high does not going to have any constraining effect on the car monopolist's behavior.
Instead, he'll just act like a regular monopolist because the potential entrant wouldn't enter at the monopoly price.
I couldn't be profitable at the monopoly price for General Motors.
I probably couldn't be profitable at ten times that price. I just wouldn't have any clue of even where to start.
I guess I'd call my dad.
Dad, how do I start a car firm?
You're a car guy, right? You know car people.
All right, so let's make cars.
All right, so that wouldn't work too well.
That is right, sir.
All right, now, so far we've been doing fixed costs, but then there's the question, what if it were a subcost?
So remember the difference between a fixed cost and a subcost?
So, and again, in the real world, if you go and build a factory that's a subcost.
at for building, for making, say, ball bearings.
So you have very specialized machinery.
I guess I was just watching this Norwegian show
about, called the Heavy Water War,
about the factory for making heavy water.
All right, so you have a heavy water factory.
All right, and then, suppose you decide
that you don't want to sell heavy water anymore.
What do you do with these stupid machines?
You gotta find someone else who wants heavy water machines.
All right, so, or we can melt it down for scrap metal.
More likely scenario.
All right, so anyway, what is the difference
between a fixed cost and a sub-cost?
Yes, well, so, well, everything's paid, normally.
But, fixed cost is?
They've occurred, I mean, you can't do anything about them.
Well, see, it's the sub-cost,
you can't do anything about them.
Yes, but, but, so the fixed costs are recoverable.
You can go and resell the factory and get your money back.
The sub-cost, on the other hand,
you spend it and you can't get the money back.
You have got to invest all this money
in your heavy water equipment.
And if there's no one else on Earth
that wants this equipment,
then there's nothing else you can do with it.
So if you go and first build these heavy water machines,
and then you decide, you know,
I want to get out of this business, I want my money back.
You can't do it anymore.
So that is the heart of the difference
between fixed and sub-cost.
Sub-cost, you can't get your money back.
Of course, when you think about it,
wouldn't it be some,
wouldn't it actually be a continuous variable?
And of course, the answer is yes, it's a continuous variable.
So for almost anything that you build,
you're not really gonna be able to get back
your full investment, unless you're really lucky.
So you build a factory,
and the factory's optimized for what you plan on doing.
If you decide you don't want to do that,
then whoever you sell it to
probably is going to not be willing to pay what you did,
because they're, what you're doing,
they're going to have to adapt what you did for their plan.
So that's not gonna be as good.
So if you have a rent, if you've signed a lease,
and there's no one who wants to buy it from you,
yes, it's sunk off.
Yeah, then it's sunk too, yes.
So even if the payments are in the future.
Yes, yeah, exactly.
There's no way to get your money back.
But if you,
in the real world, of course,
you could just go bankrupt or whatever, or run away.
So then you would say at least the future payments
are actually, are fixed, but not sunk.
But yes, but if you have a system
where there's no subletting,
you can't go and re-rent the property
that you rented in the first place,
then again, then it becomes sunk.
But anyway, so real world continuous variable,
but for purposes of doing the modeling,
just think about it as either fixed or sunk.
So what if we have a sunk cost of A
rather than a fixed cost of A?
All fixed, so all sunk costs are fixed,
but not all fixed costs are sunk.
And then it does change,
at least on the surface it changes things,
because if the,
so if the incumbent has already paid the sunk cost of A,
then if the entrant comes in,
the entrant realizes, wait a second,
well, if I come in, I'm gonna have to pay A as well,
and you're not going to leave just because I come in,
because you can't get back your sunk cost.
All right.
So, and then the entrant says,
well, given that you're not gonna leave,
if I come in, there'll be two firms,
and in this simple model that we've set up,
that means that price will just get competed
down to marginal cost,
and if you make, if you earn marginal cost,
and you had to pay a sunk cost to get in,
then how does your balance sheet look?
Bad, right?
Everybody just loses their sunk costs.
So that is the, what happens when there's sunk costs.
So if there's sunk costs,
and then the simple version is that
the entrant doesn't want to enter,
because he knows that in order to enter,
he has to pay the sunk cost,
and then if he enters, you will be there,
and then price will be driven down to marginal cost,
you'll both lose money,
and what is better for the entrant than losing money?
Not entering, right?
And if the monopolist knows that you're not going to enter,
then it can go and charge a monopoly price.
Right, it can charge a monopoly price.
All right.
And even if the entrant sees,
but you're making money, I should enter.
See, and the monopolist will say,
I wouldn't advise that, because remember,
I already paid my sunk cost, so I'm here for good.
And if you come in here,
you can't count on prices staying high.
Instead, prices are going to go low.
And so even though I'm making,
even though one firm's making a profit,
two firms will both be making losses.
So you better just let me stay here being a monopolist,
making money hand over fist forever.
Tough luck.
I mean, wouldn't you like to have been the first firm,
but you weren't.
Yes.
Do situations described as natural monopolies usually
fit this sunk cost type scenario?
So, I mean, it's tempting to say that,
although, let's see.
So, I mean, like, if we're talking about
a longer time horizon, then like,
over which, like, suppose that you have an incumbent firm
that's already, like, it's getting ready to replace its pipes
or something like that.
And you know, then, yeah, so, but yeah,
that could work, okay?
But, okay, all right.
What is, just on this issue,
but I think a classic example of a natural monopoly
is a railway.
Right, right.
That's not a sunk cost though, right?
Well, so, in the real world, I'd say,
it's definitely, it's not that sunk,
because you could always tear up the track and resell it.
Right, and during wars, it's common for places
to actually go and rip up their track.
Well, if you can't, you know, if you can get it in time,
you just want to take it apart nicely
and then reassemble it someplace else.
And of course, if you are,
if it's going to get captured by the enemy,
then you just want to destroy it before they get to it.
Yeah, but like, really, I'd say,
probably a better one is like water pipes.
So, water pipes where it's really hard
to go and recover your water pipes.
You could do it.
But yeah, as I said, in the real world,
there's always a continuous variable for fixed versus sunk.
It's not actually either or.
It's not actually binary.
All right, but now,
imagine that we have a simultaneous decision
to incurs on costs.
Now, we can think about this
in terms of the following normal form.
Switching pens.
So, suppose we've got two firms.
They can both be in or out.
In or out.
So, now, there's no longer any incumbent
because it's two firms
that are both deciding whether to enter.
And now, we can think about it like this.
So, now, if they both enter,
as we established, they both are at minus A.
Because if they both enter,
then competition drives price down to marginal cost
and then they both lose their sunk costs.
Now, if you enter,
if firm one enters and the other one doesn't,
then firm one will earn the monopoly profit
and the other firm will earn.
Firm two earns nothing.
If firm two stays out and firm one enters,
then it's firm one earns nothing
and firm two earns the monopoly profit.
And of course, if they both stay out,
they both get zero.
And this is a normal form,
but a lot like the one that we've seen before.
Now, if you look for the pure strategy
in Nash Equilibria,
it looks exactly like the story
that I've just been telling you.
So, that's one pure strategy
and that's another one.
Because if you were both there,
then someone would leave, right?
And if you're both there,
someone would want to enter.
But there's also the mixed strategy
Nash Equilibrium here.
And on your homework,
you actually get to solve
for that mixed strategy Nash Equilibrium.
But if you just take a quick look at this,
you might have an intuition
for what's going to happen
for both of the possibilities.
Namely, each side would actually,
each side wants to enter if the other one doesn't.
If the other one does,
they don't want to enter.
And then if each of them is randomizing,
then there's actually going to be some probability
of all four of these situations occurring.
Which makes sense,
because in the real world,
we actually often see two firms
go into a market where there's some costs
and they both just sit there losing money.
Happens a lot.
In the first wave of internet startups,
there were so many of them just entered
and then lost a ton of money.
So remember there's like the original dot-com burst
in 2000.
So there's that one,
like 2000, 2001.
All right, so that's a scenario.
And then sometimes people point out
that you see situations
where it looks like there should be an entrant
and it looks like there's money to be made,
and yet all the firms are there saying,
I'm worried someone else is going to enter.
I don't know if I want to go into that market.
And the other firm's saying,
well, I don't know if I want to go in.
So sometimes people thought about,
like there's like a place,
so who isn't that perfect for a scheme resort?
But the problem is if there are two scheme resorts,
then they would both lose money.
And then each firm may be saying,
well, is the other one going to go in there?
I don't know, I'm worried.
And again, in the real world,
this is complicated by the fact
that there might be gradually rising demand.
So maybe that right now you could lose money,
but if you enter now and demand keeps rising,
then you would get to be the incumbent 10 years from now.
Or as you wait around, then it may be too late.
So there's that as well.
And this is a reason why you might want to start a business
even though you know it's going to lose money for a while.
If you see a market that's expanding
and you think that there is,
that you'll eventually will be able to enjoy that,
it's one of those situations.
It's a reason to get in early.
Of course, then you wind up losing a whole lot of money
in order to capture those eventual monopoly profits.
All right, questions?
So I'm not going to solve this one.
I'm going to leave you to solve it on the homework,
but this is the setup and the intuition.
Questions?
Yes.
Well, I guess in the first dot-com bubble situation,
it just seems like there's,
the profits aren't known,
and it seems like there was a whole complete gamble
of who enters what.
Right, although there's still the question of,
whatever the profits are,
do you really think there's room for two Amazons?
Right.
Which maybe, which of course, in 2000,
I have someone say, yeah, why wouldn't there be?
And yet it turns out that it didn't happen that way.
So yeah, so I mean, of course,
these are all models where we're setting things up,
where it's all clear what's going on.
And if you want to say why the model
doesn't work in the real world,
you can just say people didn't know
which model they were in.
So there's always that.
Although, once you have mixed strategy
and Nash equilibrium, there's also,
well, maybe they knew the model,
but even the model itself predicts
that there'll be confusion.
Right, and basically that model says,
people can understand the model perfectly,
and yet people will still end up missing opportunities
or sometimes losing money
because the throw of the dice came out the wrong way.
It's just like in a game of racquetball.
Sometimes both players will go and bump,
but we'll go and bump heads against each other
and they'll hit their heads.
And like, why did that happen?
Well, we're each doing random strategies.
And this was the case where my random strategy
and your random strategy led to two bumps on the head.
So that's possible too.
Yes.
There were variants in your game too, I guess,
for payoffs as well, right?
We'll see.
So, I don't think it's, not in this model,
but yes, another way to get,
but if you make them all richer, that's true.
Okay.
All right, so moving on.
All right, so allocated versus productive inefficiency.
So most micro textbooks focus
on the allocated inefficiency monopoly,
this problem here of the bad triangles,
the evil triangles,
where you have price greater than marginal cost, right?
Okay.
And this is generally called allocated inefficiency.
And if you're ever a bit confused,
what is the intuition about what is supposed to be so bad
about allocated inefficiency?
I think we might've already done it,
but it's worth doing repeatedly
because it's so poorly, so rarely explained.
So, you know, get two explanations in a lifetime
and it'll still be worthwhile.
So again, the intuition behind what's bad
about allocated inefficiency is best expressed
in the Steve Lansburg essay, Why Taxes Are Bad.
And the idea of the essay is something like this.
So suppose that you're willing to pay $20 for a shirt
and the price without taxes is $18.
All right, so do you buy the shirt?
Sure.
And how much consumer surplus do you get?
$2.
And how much revenue does the government raise
with no taxes?
Nothing.
All right, now the government goes
and imposes a tax of a penny.
So the market price goes up to 18.01.
Do you still buy the shirt?
And how much consumer surplus do you get?
$1.99.
How much revenue does the government get?
Penny, right?
All right, now the government imposes a tax of $1.99.
So now, $1.99.
So do you still buy?
Sure.
How much surplus do you get?
Penny.
How much revenue does the government get?
$1.99.
Now, the fun part of the story.
Government raises the tax up to $2.01.
Price of the shirt goes up 21.
Do you still buy?
No.
What happens to your consumer surplus?
What is your consumer surplus?
Zero.
Zero.
What is the government's revenue?
Zero.
The tax has destroyed surplus.
All right, so that is the idea.
And of course, this isn't something
about government in particular.
It's just something about price being greater
than marginal social cost.
All right, so same thing with monopolist.
So the problem is not that you are charged,
the problem is not that you're charging these people
higher prices than marginal cost.
The problem is that these people here don't buy anything.
And that these people here lose the surplus,
and the monopolist does not gain the surplus as profits.
So that is what is supposed to be so bad
about Alkerman inefficiency.
Now, when economists started trying
to actually measure these triangles,
there were like a decade of being terrified of triangles.
And then finally people started measuring them.
There was a Chicago economist named Harberger
who did one of the first main analyses,
and it came out to a really, really small number.
So he went and tried to calculate,
what are all the deadweight costs,
all the triangles in the economy,
all the triangles that are keeping us awake at night.
And he came up with something like 0.1% of GDP.
And then it's like, well,
so why do we worry about this problem?
And of course, the obvious answer is,
well, we worry about it because it's easy to teach in class,
and it's geometry, and no one else has measured it.
So put all that together,
and of course we're gonna worry about a problem like that.
So is the deadweight loss
and the equal concept as the allocator, the inefficiency?
I'm sorry?
Deadweight loss.
Yeah, yes, the deadweight loss
and the allocator inefficiency are the same in this model.
Yes.
All right, and then there were, of course,
some other people who tried to go
and change Harper's assumptions
in order to get a bigger number.
So there was one guy in the early 70s
who did a paper where he just assumed
that every single industry in the entire economy
is monopolized, and then what do you get?
And then he got like 10% of GDP.
Which is not trivial,
but still he had to make a very extreme assumption
in order to get a number that seemed moderately scary.
And I think that,
oh yeah, so the final answer of the,
the final word of the debate, Paul Samuelson just said,
well, everything is small if you divide by GDP.
So, although he shouldn't really wanna say that
because he's been spending a lot of time
talking about how bad the costs of recessions are,
and those actually do stay large even if you divide by GDP,
so contradicts sort of like his own broader message.
But any case,
I think that's a good point.
But any case, there's the,
and then I think there's a little,
like the lamer response was,
well, 0.1% of GDP is enough to buy every person
in the country one stink dinner per year,
and that's really good.
All right, all right.
Anyway, but there it is.
Okay.
And again, if you're trying to pull,
why is it that they're so small?
Well, the simple answer is that
you're only losing surplus on the marginal units.
Right, so this would be like
the people that don't see Star Wars
because the price is too high.
Who are these people?
Well, maybe like my mom.
She's like, no, I'm not gonna really be paying $7
to see Star Wars.
All right, but losing the people who barely care
does not actually add up to a whole lot of loss surplus.
That is the intuition.
All right.
Now, far less discussed than productive inefficiency
is another kind of inefficiency,
which is called productive inefficiency.
Productive inefficiency.
All right, so.
Situation is productively inefficient
if the average cost producing a given quantity
is above the minimum average cost.
Okay.
All right, now, these productive inefficiencies
can easily get very large.
Okay, why?
Well, because of the geometry.
All right, so let's imagine we got a situation here.
Let's make it easy where we've got,
here's the marginal cost of an entrant.
Here's the marginal cost of an incumbent.
Here's demand.
But the incumbent is the brother-in-law of the dictator.
And so he goes to the dictator and says,
brother-in-law, for the sake of our family's honor,
could you please destroy that firm?
Or put jail, the jail, or put them in jail,
or whatever you want, and he's just fine.
All right, but still, this is the minimum.
Here we have constant cost,
so marginal cost and average cost are the same.
But yeah, so here is the minimum average cost
of which you could produce.
But here is the actual average cost we're producing.
All right, now, just to keep it simple,
imagine that the monopolist of the incumbent then says,
and just to be nice, we'll agree to be regulated
so we can't charge more than our costs.
All right, so in this scenario, your price is there.
So here, price is actually equal to market
the marginal cost of the incumbent.
So we don't have any of that conventional deadweight cost
of allocated inefficiency.
And if you go to the monopolist and complain,
they could easily tell you this.
Look, I'm not making any profit here,
so you have no reason to complain at all.
Society has not been harmed.
How could it have been?
I'm not making any money.
All right, now, is that correct, looking at the diagram,
that society has not been harmed?
No.
Is it true the monopolist is making no money?
Yes.
Yeah, so you're making no money,
but they're still harming society.
How could that be?
Because society lost the better deal
that it could have had with the more efficient firm.
And in fact, you say it has lost all of this here.
And this, you may go back to geometry.
Remember that something with this shape
has a special name in geometry.
It starts with a T.
A trapezoid.
A trapezoid, yes.
The trapezoid of terror.
So that is the trapezoid.
All of this is lost because we have not allowed
the most efficient firm, the lowest cost producer,
to produce.
And instead, he's been replaced with an incompetent firm
that charges its own marginal cost.
So it doesn't look like it's getting rich,
but society is still suffering.
So the sum of the losses of either the entrant
or the consumers or some combination
is this whole trapezoid here.
And in general, when people have tried to estimate
the size of productive inefficiency,
it's way bigger than allocative inefficiency.
And again, internal
that makes sense, because you're losing this on every unit.
Every unit that gets produced by the incompetent firm has waste.
So if the firm that is in the market
is producing at 10% above the minimum social minimum average
cost, then every unit has its 10% waste.
And that is a problem.
So again, if you're curious about, well,
I guess these estimates are like 30 years old from the Robert
Borg's Antitrust Paradox.
Although I don't think there have been many efforts
to make further estimates of this,
people just lost interest in the subject.
Same with me.
Why?
There's an element of fashion in academia.
I don't know.
This may come as a terrible shock.
But sometimes people aren't interested in a topic
because nobody else is doing it, even though it's
really important.
And sometimes people devote their lives
to topics that are of no importance whatsoever,
because other people are doing it.
You can try to either game the system or approve it.
That will be up to you.
All right.
Yes?
Why do you draw your marginal cost curves
horizontally instead of vertically?
So the answer is that it's easier.
And it's not wrong.
It's just a special case.
But yes, we could go and do these as,
we could go and draw them like that.
And then the diagram just gets harder.
But everything I was saying still goes through.
There is a common question about this, which is,
why don't we go and say that that's the allocated,
that's the productive inefficiency,
and then call that the new allocated inefficiency
or something like that?
And the answer is, we could totally do that.
But it's confusing.
So it is less confusing to say that everything that
is caused by not letting the lowest cost producer produce,
we'll call all that productive inefficiency.
And then we'll only call allocated inefficiency
the deadweight costs that come from your price being greater
than your own marginal cost.
So now, going back to the scenario,
imagine that after you go and put the entrant out
of business, you say, I also want to make some money here.
In that case, you're going to go and set the price that
is above not only the minimum marginal cost,
but you're going to set it above your own marginal cost.
So if you are a high-cost firm and you want to make money,
you need to charge a price higher than your own high cost.
And in fact, you will go and set marginal revenue
equal to the incumbent marginal cost, this high one.
And then we will have two kinds of inefficiency.
We'll have a trapezoid of productive inefficiency.
And then we'll also have the triangle
of allocated inefficiency.
Is it overlap?
No, actually.
It's designed to not have overlap.
So we only call the price being greater
than your own marginal cost, the allocated.
And then we call everything else the productive.
Could you relabel it?
Yes, you could.
But it's confusing.
It's more confusing.
It is clearer if you do it this way.
So what's determining that point?
This one here?
Yeah.
Oh, well, so that's just the standard equation
for the monopolist, where you put in your own,
the monopolist's own marginal cost.
So the marginal revenue curve.
Yeah, so the marginal revenue curve
is the same either way, because there's just one demand curve.
But there are two different monopoly prices
that you'll get, depending upon whether you
have an efficient monopolist or an inefficient monopolist.
So yes, an important point for understanding
the basic theory of monopoly.
So let's take the worst monopoly in the world.
Does standard monopoly theory predict that the,
what does standard monopoly theory predict they will do
if their own marginal costs fall?
So this is like the really crummy monopolist,
where it's illegal for anyone to compete with them.
And then, say, the cost of oil goes down.
What does standard monopoly theory predict they will do?
Lower price.
Yes.
Why would they lower price on their monopoly?
Because they want to go and set a price equal to,
marginal revenue equals marginal cost,
is what maximizes a monopolist's profit.
So if marginal cost goes down, even the worst monopolist
in the world wants to cut his price.
As long as it's profit.
As long as it's profit maximizing.
If it were a regulated monopoly that's
not allowed to earn profits, then it
would not decide to do it.
All right.
So now, I'm just thinking about examples of this.
My favorite one of a regulated monopolist
that doesn't allow competition is the post office.
So as you probably know, it is illegal for anyone
to compete with the United States Post Office
for delivery of first class mail.
So the post office first bans competition.
But then, it has its prices regulated.
So it is not allowed to earn really high profits.
And this makes for great public relations.
Because you can always say, all of these ignorant critics
of the post office who act like they're making money, hand
them a fist.
We're not.
We're just barely scraping by here.
And the point of this is a, that's true,
and yet you're still screwing us over.
Because you are depriving us of alternatives that are better.
All right.
All right.
Now, this also gives us some great insight
into government created monopolies
versus private monopoly versus market monopolies.
So both of them have potential for allocating inefficiency.
So remember, we go back over here.
So here, if there's a whole distribution
of different costs, and the firm that
happens to be the lowest cost will be the monopolist.
And what price will they charge?
You're already established?
So what price will the incumbent firm charge
in this simple contestability model?
Marginal cost.
Yeah, just below the marginal cost of the potential firm.
Suppose there's 100 potential entrants.
Do you take an average, or what do you do?
Go by whatever the lowest is.
Yes, the second best.
Second best.
Intuitively, what do you need to do to win a running race?
You need to run faster than the second fastest person.
Then you win.
So similarly, to be the monopolist,
you need to have lower cost than the second lowest cost firm.
So anyway, we take a look over here.
So we charge that price.
So is there going to be any allocated inefficiency
in this model?
Well, sure.
Here's your marginal cost.
There's your price.
So there's allocated inefficiency.
Because you've got price greater than your own marginal cost,
so you do have that allocated inefficiency.
But is there any productive inefficiency?
No, because in this model, the productively inefficient firms
are out-competed and die, or they simply never
form in the first place.
And the firm that stays around is the lowest cost firm.
So this says that with money monopoly,
you may very well get allocated inefficiency.
In fact, you should expect allocated inefficiency.
Unless the two best firms in the world
are tied for awesomeness.
If the two best firms in the world have the very same cost,
then you get allocated inefficiency.
Otherwise, you always do.
But at least then you don't get productive inefficiency.
On the other hand, when you have a government-created monopoly,
then if the prices are not regulated,
should you still expect allocated inefficiency?
So you can charge any price that you want,
and the government makes competition illegal.
Will you raise price above your own marginal cost?
That make sense?
But is there likely to be productive inefficiency
in this scenario?
In fact, you should expect there to almost always
be productive inefficiency.
There's only one way that productive inefficiency
will be avoided.
That's if the government hands the monopoly to?
Markets.
Yes, the lowest cost firm in the world.
And why would it do that?
That seems like wishful thinking.
So it just so happens to be that all the dictator's brother-in-laws
are the best at producing stuff.
Why else would I make my brother-in-law,
unless he was a really low-cost producer?
So the idea there is that the very fact that you
are going to the government and crying
about needing production from competition
suggests that you probably aren't that good.
And that aside, there's just the fact, well,
what are the odds that the government will pick the firm
that has the very lowest costs?
Unless there's a mechanism that ensures the government always
picks them, then there is going to be a very high probability
that somebody else gets picked.
Furthermore, in the real dynamic world,
suppose the government initially picks the most efficient firm.
Is productive inefficiency likely to emerge later
on in a dynamic world?
Sure.
Why?
Yeah.
New firms with lower costs.
Yes, new firms with lower costs are born.
And the government doesn't immediately
grab the license of the monopolist
and hand it to the new firm.
Instead, they stand by their firm.
They say, well, this firm represents France itself.
So no, we can't just go and give the license away
to some other firm, who supposedly
has lower costs and everything.
People act like just because it's illegal
that we're scared of something, which we're totally not.
So that is the idea.
So the key difference between government-created monopolies
and market monopolies, both of them
allow for allocated inefficiency.
But government-created monopolies
are much more likely to have productive inefficiency, too,
which, as we said, in the real world seems to be much worse.
So why don't we go and take our 10-minute break now.
And let's see.
So yes, you've got homework due today, correct?
Just due today?
Yes.
Yes.
So there's a look of non-recognition.
And when you go and, yes, and when you get it,
then please pick up the answer key.
And also, let's see.
And yes, also, never stops.
The hunger for econ cannot be quenched.
OK.
All right.
So moving on.
All right, so predation, end-returns, and mixed
strategies.
Now, predation is one of those very vague words
that gets thrown around a lot.
So what insight can mean theory shed
on what predation ought to mean, or the way
that we might interpret predation?
Actually, could you please close the door back there?
Before I do this, I have to tell you
one other thing about sunk costs.
So you know the standard story about once you really
understand economics, you walk out of movies freely,
because you realize you've already made it at some cost.
And so why sit there enjoying, or why sit there not enjoying
a movie, when just because you wasted some money on it?
By then, you're wasting doubly.
Then the last time that I was in California, as I often do,
I learned something new and strange about my brother.
My brother is so cheap that he actually
asks for his money back for any movie he doesn't like.
Which means that for him, even though it is not a sunk cost.
Now, think about this.
So should this make you more or less likely to walk out
of a movie if when you walk out, you
feel like you also feel entitled to get your money back?
Or, of course, is that what you want?
Yes.
So the fact that if a cost is sunk,
it should make you more inclined to stay.
So you might say, I paid $7 for this.
I only like it at $2, but it sunk,
so I guess I'll spend the last $2,
and I'll get $2 surplus out of it.
But yeah, if you get the whole $7 back,
you'll walk out right away.
Apparently, this works, too.
I mean, the people are confused.
But all right, strange, cheap, middle-aged man.
I'm going to give you a little bit of money.
Pardon me, please.
How often does it work?
Apparently, whenever he has.
I think he even asks sometimes at the end of a movie
and feels that he was there because his family made
him stay there.
Well, I won't ask to bring it for my wife.
She liked it, but I want my money back.
And I have to suffer.
Yeah.
Or, all right.
Let's just go back.
So the fact, all right, yeah, yes?
I think it might be because some movie theaters have
an agreement that the ticket price goes exclusively
to the movie producers.
Well, it's not normally exclusively.
But yeah, it's true that at first it's usually at 90%,
and then the percentage goes down.
Yeah.
All right.
But they're still confused.
It's really unusual to do this for someone to ask.
All right.
So now, going back to predation.
All right.
So the very simplest model of predation
is just that it is a hostile phrase that
means limit pricing.
All right, so imagine we've got a world just like this one.
We already drew it, where we've got lots of different cost
curves, marginal cost one, two, marginal cost three,
marginal cost four, marginal cost five, so on.
It's all the different costs.
And the most efficient firms charge the price
just low enough to keep everyone else out of the market.
All right.
So now, you can understand why you might call it predation,
because you charge the price low enough
to make it impossible for anyone to profitably compete with you.
It sounds kind of like you're being a predator, a wolf.
You're like, argh, all right, I'm
going to charge a price so none of you will be able to compete.
I'm still profitable, but none of you are.
All right.
Now, in the real world, this probably happens all the time.
As to whether or not it is done self-consciously
is an interesting question.
So who really cares?
Well, the law cares a lot.
So if you are suing someone under the antitrust law,
and you've got to remember the way I'm going to show you,
so suppose you can either sue someone
for breach of contract or for breaking the antitrust laws.
Which one do you definitely want to sue them under?
Breach of contract.
No, breach of contract.
And age old law says that if you prove that they breach
contract, they have to pay you their wages.
But if you can sue them under antitrust law,
then what do you get?
Treble damages.
Treble damages.
So I believe that's originally in the Clayton Act.
And this is why one of the most common kinds of private antitrust
cases is actually franchisees suing the mother corporation.
Because if you sue the mother corporation for breach
of contract, you only get your money back.
But if you can sell them under antitrust,
you get three times the whatever harm they did to you.
Now, so why are we talking about this?
Because in the eyes of the law, intent matters a lot.
Because remember, whenever you are actually
taking someone to trial, you need to convince 12 people not
smart enough to get out of jury duty.
And therefore, what is likely to be very convincing to a jury
like this?
A bunch of diagrams and statistics and stuff?
No.
Far better is you want a one memo taken out
of the archives of the accused firm that says,
we will destroy the competition!
Exclamation point.
And then you wave it around and say,
we don't need to talk about bad statistics.
We have it in there from their own mouths.
And that is where your lawyer's like, oh, god.
Let's settle this now.
Because in the eyes of the law, as well as
the human beings that are involved in the law,
intentions are enormously important,
even though economically you might do this just because you
are civil.
Like, we just chose the brightest and nicest
vice-profits.
I don't know.
I'm not trying to hurt anybody.
And then there might be another person,
say, like a former athlete, who's like, yeah, crush them!
Crush them!
Crack them in the ground!
And the behavior is identical in both cases.
But the attitude is different.
And if you put it in writing, then the legal outcome
is likely to be very different, too.
So you're saying this is illegal under antitrust
to intentionally undercut the prices of your company?
Well, so if you do it and you very clearly say,
we are doing it in order to destroy,
in order to acquire a monopoly and destroy the competition,
then you are likely to be in big trouble.
Of course, as to what happens, again,
it always depends upon what the jury will find.
The jury is generally so economically ignorant,
I mean, to an almost unbelievable degree.
And yet, they are making decisions
that could cost billions of dollars.
So of course, in most cases, they're a lot smaller than that.
Yeah, so even like the biggest antitrust cases,
those are just regular old juries.
They don't need to go and even go
get a bachelor's degree in economics
to sit on the Microsoft case.
They sit there doing, well, I don't know a lot about this.
But what I do know is Microsoft is good.
And then they fail.
Or bad.
And then they lose.
So this kind of thing probably happens all the time,
with or without predatory intent,
although the intent matters a lot if you're getting sued.
Now, a more interesting model than this,
this one is so basic that I'm going to admit
that it probably happens a lot.
But a more interesting model is something like this.
The incumbent has entry-dependent prices.
Where, so the incumbent has a policy, well,
here's what I do.
I price high if there's no entrant,
and low if there's an entrant.
And then the entrant decides whether or not to enter.
And of course, if you are the entrant
and the incumbent has convinced you it's going to do this,
again, you will look and you'll see
that he's making a lot of money right now.
He said, well, yeah, but I'm not going
to make a lot of money if I go in,
because the incumbent is going to change what he does if I go
in, and then there's no point of entering.
So, and remember, we already talked
about this model earlier on.
So this is often called the entry deterrence game.
So here's one where we got the options of in or out
for the entrant.
And then we have the options of accommodate or fight.
And then over here, the entrant makes nothing,
and the monopolist makes the monopoly profits.
And then over here, if the entrant goes in
and the incumbent decides to fight,
then they both make minus A, minus A.
And then on the other hand, if the entrant goes in
and they accommodate, then maybe they each make,
say, one third of the monopoly profits each,
something like that.
And as you may recall, there is a problem
with this story, which is that this equilibrium here,
this one over here, is not something perfect,
because the incumbent would not want to fight once
the entrant actually enters.
So that is the problem with this.
So this would be a case of the incumbent cutting off
his nose to spite his face, because once the entrant has
already entered, why not just go and settle
for a third of the monopoly profits?
Why insist on getting revenge and saying,
I'm going to hurt you for doing this?
Now, if you had a good teacher for industrialization
at some point who talked about predation,
they will have told you a bunch of other problems
with standard predation stories.
And they might have even told you
about some actual economic history of predation,
like what actually happened with standard oil, things like that.
All right.
So in this less formal literature that's out there,
but it's worth knowing that it exists,
people often emphasize that predation is especially
costly for the incumbents.
And why?
Well, if you have 95% of the markets,
and then you can predatorize like a dog towards $1,000,
go and start selling in a loss because one firm enters and gets 5% of the market, what
do your losses look like compared to the entrance losses?
At least 19 times as large.
So if you are the huge firm and you say I'm going to sell everything in a loss to drive
you out of business, if the entrant is small and you're big, you are losing way more money
in absolute terms than he is.
It's even worse than it seems because if you go and cut your price, then what will normally
happen to your market share?
Goes up.
So then it's actually even more lopsided.
You gain market share and every percentage point of that market share is poison.
You are losing money.
So anyway, this less formal literature just emphasizes that predation is especially costly
for a monopolist.
But here, notice there's nothing like that.
Here it's just saying that predation is more expensive than accommodation.
Now if you want to go and make this story sound more believable, what you normally want
to do is say well look, obviously nobody wants to predate in the short run, but there is
a long run benefit for predation, which is that you build up a reputation for predation
so people don't enter.
So what if this predation game is infinitely repeated, for example?
So then predation is going to be potentially sustainable.
Then it all depends on whether the short run cost of predation exceeds the present value
of the extra monopoly profits you get as a result of predating.
Right in here, all of the classic arguments of the good industrial organization teachers
that you may or may not have had come into their own.
Now these are arguments along the lines of, well look, you have to lose money, you have
to lose 19 times as much as your competitor for a year or two, and then you have to make
it up before another entry comes along and makes you do the same thing.
And then there's other arguments like, suppose you're selling a durable good.
What might your customers do during the period when you are selling below cost?
Buy up and stockpile the good.
Or what might, the entrant might actually say, you know what, I'm going to stop production
and just buy your product and stockpile it.
And I'm just going to sit on it.
And eventually you're going to give up.
And then I'm going to go and sell your own product that you sold to me for below cost
to customers.
You can do that.
Okay.
Now, so questions about that?
Anyone wondering about that?
So just to let you know, so the standard vertical and standard oil, the standard oil did not
practice predation, contrary to what Ida Charbel said.
Right, Ida Charbel?
Anyone know the back story?
What was the deal with Ida Charbel anyway?
Her dad had lost his business and blamed standard oil, and then she goes and writes a book about
how bad standard oil is.
Normally this would at least be mentioned when you are conveying history.
At least when I was taught American history, Ida Charbel's claims were presented as fact.
Even though she did have an obvious ax to grind.
It doesn't mean she's wrong, but it certainly seemed wrong not to tell the students about
this conflict of interest.
And it wasn't done, and I'm bitter about it.
All right.
Now, what does seem to be true is that for a while Rockefeller would buy out his competitors
at above market prices.
So Rockefeller did try getting a monopoly not through predation, which he considered
to be a ridiculous strategy all along.
Instead he just tried going to firms and paying them more than the cost of the refineries
for the refineries.
And tried that for a while, and then eventually he gave up on that too.
And I think there's actually a letter from him saying, well, it was just like blackmail,
where as soon as you paid it, then people started building refineries purely to be bought
out.
So I'm not going to do that.
And so his market share had declined quite a bit, and then even long before the antitrust
case, which dragged on for a long time.
By the way, do you know, like what product was Standard Oil even selling?
So yes, it was oil refinery, but this was before the automobile.
Kerosene for lighting.
So I think this story also is very misleading when you tell it to students today, because
students assume that it was being used for automobile fuel, and they think about one
firm having a monopoly or near monopoly over gasoline, and that sounds really scary.
And then they're like, well, wait, no, it was just kerosene.
At a time when the light bulb was spreading.
So it doesn't actually sound all that scary at all.
In fact, it sounds kind of like having a monopoly over like giant bulky desktop computers when
tablets were coming along or something like that.
All right, so questions about predation?
All right.
But anyway, you can go and take those payoffs, and then you can go and do the repeated game
calculation just like I was showing you last week.
And then you'll be able to find a critical beta where it would be worth practicing predation
in order to, as long as the benefits actually were not.
Oh, I have a question.
I had thought that, for instance, in the railroad industry, the idea of the predation would
be like if you had a huge network, rail network, right?
And someone came along with a small point-to-point sort of rail network, you would drop the price
on that single line, and then when they went out of business, then you use the profits
from the rails.
Yeah, yeah.
So that is more, you are correct, that is a more sophisticated version of saying that
you might just go and do that in one market.
Although, that actually leads us right into the next question, which is why assume that
the entrant is small to begin with?
Why might it not be a big firm that's going to go and try to compete with you in a bunch
of places?
And then that strategy does not work.
It doesn't have the same advantage.
So general question, so why can't two play the predation game?
So why can't an entrant predate against incumbents the same way that incumbents predate against
entrants?
And again, the natural solution, again, is think about it in terms of strategies.
You say, look, there's, both firms could practice predation, in which case they both lose money.
Or one does, one doesn't.
And then in that case, the firm that is threatening predation gets a monopoly, and the other one
gets nothing.
Or maybe they're both so scared that they're going to get in over their heads that they
don't enter at all.
But essentially, this is a case where the potential monopoly profits from here balance
out the losses of what's sometimes called destructive or dog-eat-dog competition, where
you get two firms that are competing very heavily in an industry where there's some
costs.
And then things work out badly for both of them.
And furthermore, if people have thought a bit more about the logic of predation, consider
this.
So with predation, as I say, if you are much bigger than your competitor, then you're actually
losing a lot more money in absolute terms.
Now suppose that rather than competing with low prices or selling below costs, you were
to go and try suing them.
Right now, the cost for a really big firm to sue a really small firm, does the big firm
have to pay proportionately more for the legal costs?
No.
So that seems like a much more reasonable way to try to practice predation is through
the legal system, where you just go and threaten your competitors with lawsuits.
And they can threaten you back, but if you are big and they are small, then the lawsuit
would be a much smaller percentage of your profits than of theirs.
So that might be a good thing.
Isn't that kind of what's going on in the tech industry?
Yeah, yeah.
This would be like a great model of being a patent troll, for example.
So of course, you can be a small patent troll, who just, all you do is just sue people for
it.
But the more obvious one is to be a big firm, and any time someone tries competing with
you, you sue them and say, you've infringed our patent.
The single best argument I've ever seen against patents is a single diagram that Alex Tabarrok
made of all the lawsuits of every major firm in Silicon Valley against every other major
firm.
And it's just like a giant swarm of arrows.
So you just look at that and say, this is your system for increasing innovation.
Everyone sue everyone.
It seems hard to believe.
I know it's just a diagram, but it's empirical in the sense that these are all actual ongoing
lawsuits.
And we said, my God, everyone is, almost everyone is suing almost everybody else.
So anyway, this mixed strategy equilibrium seems to make a lot of sense to me, because
there's no way that you can credibly commit to saying, look, I'm the one that gets to
predate, and you're the one that gets predated upon.
Or the other one would say, no, no, no, I'm the firm that gets to predate, and you're
going to get predated upon.
And this story says, look, the bigger the benefits of being the monopolist if you win,
the greater the likelihood that firms will be, or the greater the risk of losing money
that firms will be willing to accept.
So if this monop- so you can go and solve for this yourselves, but intuitively, if these
monopoly profits are really big, then in order to scare- then these losses are going to be
there to balance things out.
In equilibrium, it needs to be the case that you are essentially breaking even.
As you will see.
All right.
Questions?
Questions?
All right.
So now, last topic for this week's notes, although then we'll immediately move on to
the next week, is Bertrand and Curnow competition.
How many of you have heard of these two famous 19th century French anonymous?
So yes.
All right.
So all the arguments that I've been making so far rely heavily on what we call Bertrand
competition.
And to some degree, it also depends upon constant marginal cost pricing.
There is a sub-literature on how much that matters.
But anyway, not that much.
So in Bertrand models in general, the way it works is firms reserve- firms propose prices,
all customers buy from the lowest priced firm, and if the price are equal, then customers
randomize.
And then in the setup, in equilibrium, the most productively efficient firm takes over
the whole market, and they charge a price just below the- just below- excuse me, this
is actually just below the cost, just below the marginal cost of the second most efficient
firm.
And then you can get price equal to marginal cost if these two firms can produce in the
most productively efficient way.
All right.
Now the Bertrand competition strongly undermines the perfectly competitive model.
Because remember, the perfectly competitive model says that you need to have how many
firms to get price equal to marginal cost?
Infinite.
Infinite is the technical number.
And now Bertrand comes along and says, actually, infinity is more than you need.
The right number is two.
All right, so which is of course less than infinity.
Right?
And if you were paying attention, the connectability model says, you know how many you really need?
One.
So wow, all right.
So one firm can be just as good as perfect competition.
All right, which is a pretty impressive result.
Especially if you had a crummy undergraduate textbook like I always did, where they said,
look, oh, we got like the- the more firms there are, the better the market outcome.
The end.
Right?
And most of the textbooks that I had never even mentioned, that there might be some conflict
between having- realizing economies of scale and having lots of firms.
So again, like if you- like taken literally, the textbooks appear to be saying that if
we would just go and trust bust every firm down to the atomic level, that this would
be fantastic.
All right.
Ralph Nader in the 70s proposed some legislation which would- which would have put like a maximum
level of concentration at- I think it was, let's see, I think like maximum firm size
was going to be capped at 12.5- 12.5% market share for every industry.
There was one term saying, unless this would lead to significant cost increases.
So but the very fact that he put this in at the end as like a special case, suggests that
it's going to be interpreted unfavorably if it passes.
This did not pass.
There would have remained one good legal remedy, which is just to argue that you're in the
industry for goods and therefore nobody has 12.5% market share.
Right, because if you know anything about any kind of actual anti-drug litigation, your
goal is just to- the goal of the defendant is to find the market as broadly as possible
so that your market share is trivial.
So let's see.
So Visa, there was an interest case against Visa and they had some really good lawyers.
So their lawyers successfully argued that Visa was in what market?
No, no, no, better, better, better than all credit cards.
Better than all banking.
All payments, all payment methods.
All right, so that was a fine team of lawyers.
All right, so they were like, it's just like anything.
Like also burger is included.
You know, someone showing up with a bag of rice saying, what can I get for this?
This is competing with Visa at the rice store.
All right.
So anyway, that is actual litigation and how it works if you're good.
Okay.
All right, now, so this is what the Bertrand model implies.
And in my experience, economists who are very happy with the Bertrand model at first when
they hear the theory, generally become horrified when they realize what it implies.
Because again, as I may have mentioned, the typical economist is not a libertarian, not
a free market ideologue, people think that George Mason economists represent the economic
profession are just wrong and don't know what they're talking about.
So again, the typical economist is a moderate Democrat and the moderate Democrat is not
very fond of hearing the two firms is fine and otherwise, you can stop your belly aching
as long as it's two firms.
All right.
So perhaps, I think actually definitely because of this result, a very different model, also
by coincidence from a French mathematical economist in the 19th century, Cornell, is
much more popular in practice.
All right.
So how does it work?
All right.
So in the Cornell model, firms don't set prices at all, firms set quantities.
All right.
Sounds innocuous.
Right.
And then prices independently adjust to fit in the market.
So every firm decides how much they want to make, they dump it on the market, and then
there is effectively an auctioneer who clears the market and that's what happens.
All right.
So let's go and work through this model.
So let's define big Q. Big Q is equal to the sum of all the individual firms outputs and
individual firms outputs will be called little q.
So little qi.
So summation for all i of all little qs is equal to big i.
So q is the market output and little qs are the firms outputs.
All right.
And let's then go and have a nice linear demand function which makes our lives easy.
See p is equal to a minus b times q.
And then to make life easier for all of us, let's just set marginal cost equal to zero.
So of course if marginal cost equals zero, what is the perfect competitive price?
Zero.
Yes, zero.
Free.
All right.
Yes.
So this is a market where it's so cheap that perfect competition would deliver it for free.
Okay.
All right.
And of course, what is Bertrand competition predict?
All right.
Bertrand competition, if everyone's got a marginal cost of zero, there's two firms,
marginal cost is zero, what does Bertrand predict?
Zero.
Also zero.
Just like perfect competition.
As Bertrand with two firms is just like perfect competition as long as there's at least two
firms who have the minimum cost.
Okay.
Now what does Cournot predict?
All right.
So this is messy.
And this is possibly some of the, it's not the hardest math we'll ever do, but it's probably
the most involved math we'll ever do.
And just be grateful I set marginal cost equal to zero because otherwise it's even worse.
All right.
When I was in your shoes, I had to do this with like, you know, quadratic and I said,
right anyway, but it adds no insight.
So I see no reason to teach it.
All right.
So each firm is then going to maximize market price times its own little q minus marginal
cost times its own little q.
All right.
And of course, since we've got zero marginal cost, we can find that out.
Kind of makes life a little easier.
All right.
And that's going to be equal to what?
Well, we got our demand curve here.
So we have a minus b times capital Q and capital Q is going to be what?
Capital Q is equal to your Q, which you do control, plus the summation of all the other
Qs, which you don't control.
So for J not equal to I.
So all the other firms, little qs, all the times your own Q.
So you see where we get this?
So we've got your little q there and your little q there outside the brackets.
I'm just going to do one more there.
All right.
But then inside the brackets, we have this demand function, a minus b.
And then this thing here is just splitting up market output into your output and everybody
else's output.
And why is it important to distinguish those two things?
Because what does each firm control?
Its output.
Its own output.
It doesn't control market output.
Although it has a little influence, but you don't control the output of anybody other
than yourself.
OK.
So then we can just go and differentiate this profit function with respect to your own output
level.
And we get the first order conditions.
Firms are going to say a minus 2b times their own outputs minus b times the summation for
all firms other than themselves outputs equal to 0.
So that is our first order condition.
All right.
And this gives each firm's optimal profit maximizing behavior given what all the other
firms are doing.
So given what everybody else is doing, this is what you should be doing to maximize your
profits.
All right.
Now, I don't think we've done this before.
So now there is a very common solution concept that people use in models like this.
This is the symmetric equilibrium.
Symmetric equilibrium.
So intuitively, if you set up a model where all firms are identical, then in equilibrium
they're probably all going to do identical things.
Right?
Not absolutely certain, and you can come up with models otherwise.
But this one, again, this one it works.
So it checks out.
So now we think about symmetric equilibrium where all firms are doing this exact thing.
All right.
And what happens?
All right.
So all firms are producing the same Q in equilibrium subject to this.
And then what do we get?
Well, we're going to get A over there minus 2V times N plus 1.
Excuse me.
I forgot.
Yeah.
So minus V times N plus 1 times Q equals 0.
All right.
What's going on here?
So here we have two V's for yourself.
And then here we have N minus 1 V's for everybody else.
All right.
So we sum those up and we get n plus 1 of these.
All right?
So, and then we just go and solve for q. And we have q is equal to a over b times n plus 1.
And then capital Q is just going to be equal to little q times what?
N. N. Right?
So then an over b times n plus 1.
Okay. Right.
And if you take a look at this, this is an equation that your moderate democratic economist is going
to like much more.
Because this says no, two firms is not as good as an infinite number of firms.
This equation says that the more firms the better.
This firm says that as n goes to infinity, perfect competition, then q goes to a over b. Right?
And then you plug that in here.
Wait. If q is a over b, then p equals a minus b times a over b.
And so p is 0.
Right? So see?
P equals a minus b times a over b.
Cancel. Cancel.
Zero. All right.
I'm just going to give up on that.
All right.
Okay. All right.
So, and then if we are the further, and on the other hand, of course,
this means that if n is 1, if n is 1, then this just gets us the monopoly result.
So n is 1, then we have q is going to be equal to a over 2b.
And if you actually remember the way that the monopoly model works,
yes, so the monopoly model with linear demand, you get the monopoly output is just equal
to half the competitive output.
All right.
And then anything in between 1 and infinity gives you an intermediate result.
So the more firms the better.
The more firms the better.
Okay. Right.
And notice, in this model, is there any collusion of any kind?
Are any firms colluding?
Or is any firm worrying about any other firm's profits?
Nope. Right?
So we wind up getting a result that looks like a monopoly result,
like an intermediate monopoly result, even though there's no collusion of any kind.
All right.
So each firm is maximizing individual profits.
Each firm thinks only of itself.
But we still get a suboptimal outcome.
And remember, here we've got a really extreme assumption here.
Marginal cost is zero, and still firms are charging positive prices.
Right? So this is a, even the extreme case, there is totally pointless scarcity caused
by the finitude of firms.
The finitude of firms is impoverishing the world here.
Okay. All right.
So this model, so this result, I think,
explains why the current model is so much more popular.
It's not because people say, well, if you look at the world,
firms are generally setting quantities, not prices.
That, in fact, seems wrong most of the time.
There are some markets where firms setting quantities sounds okay,
like oil production, for example.
But most markets, it sure doesn't look like firms are setting quantities
and then dumping it on a market with an auctioneer.
Instead, in most industries, it looks like firms are putting price tags on things.
So in terms of the realism of the assumptions, Bertrand seems better.
But the Bertrand outcome implies a very pro-market outcome,
which most economists don't like.
Whereas the Cournot model seems to apply in much more market skeptical outcome,
much more pessimistic outcome for markets.
And so, or I think many would say a more realistic outcome,
and therefore is more popular.
Yeah?
Is putting a price tag on something the same thing as setting a price?
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Sure. I mean, that's cool.
I mean, it's one way to set a price.
You can also put, you don't have to have actual stickers.
You can also have a sign.
Or you can maybe.
With the price of like a million dollars on a piece of, on a suitcase.
Yeah. But no one's going to buy it at a million dollars.
Yes, but you know, right, right.
That's true.
Right. But, you know, but again, like the Bertrand model just says that firms state their prices
and that determines what happens.
Cournot model says that firms pick quantities and that determines what happens.
So yeah, like even putting it on realistic price sounds
like what would happen in the Cournot model.
Although not in equilibrium.
In equilibrium they would say, well, I can't sell it for a million, so that's what I want.
All right.
Now, so far so good.
But funny thing about Cournot model is that if you actually play around with it more,
you'll realize this is all trickery.
And the Cournot model actually also applies the end outcome essentially the same
as the Bertrand outcome.
How so? Well, so in the Cournot model the number of firms is just given.
Right. There's just n firms and that's it.
But since we have a constant marginal cost model here,
there's no reason why firms shouldn't be able to split into more firms.
So no reason why one of these Cournot firms should not be able to just become two firms.
Why not? So if you want to show the Cournot model is internally consistent,
it seems like you want to show that the firms wouldn't want to split.
And that's unfortunate because if you check you will find out that firms
that are Cournot will always want to split for all n greater than 1.
All right.
So I think I have you prove this on the homework.
But here is the basic idea.
So is that if you go and calculate Cournot profit of n. This is Cournot profit
of one firm when there are n firms.
It turns out that this is always less than two times the Cournot profit with n plus 1 firms
for all n greater than 1.
Yeah. So if you're a monopolist you don't want to split.
If you're a monopolist you don't want to split into two firms and compete with yourself.
But if there are two firms, each of those firms would actually make more money
if it split into two firms, which of course raises the number of firms in the industry.
And as you might guess when you raise the number of firms in the industry,
what happens to the profits of each firm?
They go down.
But if splitting lets you double your profits,
double the smaller profits is always greater than the initial profits.
All right.
So what this means is that given these assumptions,
infinite n would arise automatically.
And so you still wind up getting the perfectly competitive result, strangely enough.
All right.
Now, if you want to, if you tweak the model more you may say, well, yeah, well, of course.
Of course there's a problem with this and we'll just handle it the obvious way.
Let's add in a fixed cost.
So in that case we'll add in a fixed cost.
So there's one big problem here.
As soon as you add in a fixed cost is it now still true that infinite n is good?
If every firm has to pay a fixed cost of k, is infinite n good for society?
No. No, because that would require an infinite cost, an infinite fixed cost.
It would be, you know, say, in fact, you know,
the fixed costs are equal to n times k, right?
So where k is the fixed cost.
So as soon as you say that, then once again you have to give up the idea
that more firms is always better for society.
Right? And actually I think Mankiew had a paper on this where they proved, strangely,
that if there's a fixed cost, so if the cost function is, you know,
if there's a total cost, you know, k plus b times marginal cost.
If firms have a cost function like that and then you allow for entry, so firms just enter
until price equals average cost, they actually prove that Cournot combination isn't even second,
that this Cournot combination isn't even second best efficient.
So in other words, they prove under these assumptions
that there are too many firms rather than too few.
Which, again, is a huge disappointment for the great 1970s Ralph Nader trust-busting agenda,
which, again, is not talked about very much, although it's often,
although textbooks are often still written as if this, written to apply
that this makes perfect sense, these are the retro ones.
So, which is kind of annoying.
Let's see.
So yeah, I remember I was once a referee at a textbook where it said these things
and then I said, so look, this is just wrong and the textbook should be changed.
I don't think it just, I think it just didn't get published.
But anyway, I'm just trying to finally improve a textbook
after having to suffer through so many bad ones.
Did many prominent economists even make comments either for or against
that legislation when it was proposed?
I don't know.
So my memory is that it was a very partisan split and, you know,
your usual suspects before and your usual suspects were against.
Agreeing against.
Yeah. So, so let's see.
So, I mean, you know, there were a bunch of things going on at the time.
So, you know, famous IEO economist, F.M. Scherer, became head of the FCC and he actually,
as one of his main things, he collected the best data set ever on firms.
And, you know, because, you know, there have been a number of, we don't have time to go
into it I don't think, but there have been a number of arguments about the connection
between prices and profits and number of firms and firm concentration.
And anyway, and each side kept getting better data sets
and then each better data set basically kept leading to the new result
that the person who had researched wanted.
But then Scherer, who definitely wanted to get the standard result
on constant more time on deconcentration is good, created this giant data set
and it did not say that and then the subject kind of died.
So there must still, there must be better data sets that have been created since then.
But, okay.
All right.
So, anyway, so I'm not going to prove this to you, but in this, so the idea is that if you go
and set up a paper where you've got the kernel model where there's fixed cost for every firm
and again you want to add in that fixed cost assumption to avoid the conclusion
that infinite, that you'll get infinite firms, right?
Right? But if you do that, then you actually wind up getting, you're getting the result
that if firms keep entering until price equals average cost, that it winds up being,
that it winds up not only being inefficient, it's not even second best efficient.
It would actually be better to have fewer firms.
And furthermore, even here, if you allow for a firm to say, hey, look, you guys can all go
and dump all your quantity to an auctioneer, but I'm not, I'm going to do something else,
then we get a different result again.
So we can imagine that all firms but one go over to the kernel auctioneer
and dump their output, but one firm says, huh, well, given that there's a fixed cost here
and this is a marginal cost and here's demand, you know what I'm going to do?
I'm just going to go and charge that.
Right? And if one firm in this kernel world were to stop just acting like all the other ones
and say, you know what, like there's all these economies of scale that we're not realizing,
I'm just going to produce a huge output and sell it for a low price, then, and it's pretty,
it follows through very simply that that one firm would just take over the whole market
and no one would want to go over to the kernel auctioneer anymore.
So again, unless you impose some very ad hoc restrictions on what firms can do,
then the kernel model very quickly breaks down into something almost the same
as the patron model or the investability model.
All right.
So the idea is if one firm could just credibly commit to expand its output and take over the whole
market, then you would reach the second best outcome,
even if all the other firms are trying to be kernel.
So there's something unstable about kernel.
So I had no idea about this when I was an undergraduate, but when I was doing graduate IO,
then the professor went and wanted to go and say, well,
I just want to show you guys some things.
You know that model that you think implies that small number
of firms actually lead to bad results?
It also implies that you'll never have a small number of firms.
So it's like, you know.
All right.
Unless, of course, you just add on the assumption that firms can't sweat for no reason.
And why couldn't they?
Zero marginal cost or even if it's constant marginal cost,
why wouldn't there be tons of firms?
So questions?
Questions?
So I know this is fairly technical material to be doing at this hour of night,
but which I try to avoid, but sometimes fail.
All right.
So let's move on to week six, which then means we'll have, we were all on track
for midterm, and let's see.
The weather forecast looks like there's going to be no snow for the first time
in six years, I feel like.
I feel like every time for the last six years, the midterm has been the right for this class,
and it looks like it won't be this time.
And that means we'll be all done and be able to enjoy your spring break.
So there will be four classes for spring break, so there will be a class where we finish
up this material and then take questions and everything will be done,
and then there will be an exam.
Okay. All right.
Oh, did you miss it?
No, I got it.
I just have a question about the test.
Do you want to talk about it now?
I'm going to talk about the test next class, actually.
But if you do want to get an early start, the quickest thing to say is there are something
like 14 old exams on the class webpage, and the best way to study for the 2017 midterm is
to do the old exams under time pressure.
So the time pressure is important because sometimes people practice
without time pressure, and then they do it under real time pressure,
and then, oh my God, this is terrible.
So someone was asking whether there's going to be anything,
was asking about the more mathematical parts of graphs.
What I'll say is if, you know, it is highly unlikely, in fact, almost certain,
certain that you will, or almost, let's see, highly likely, in fact, almost certain,
that there will be no question asked on your midterm that is mathematically harder
than the hardest question ever asked in previous years.
All right.
So I'm not planning on suddenly making the math harder than it was in all previous years.
So I'm trying to shoot for an exam of similar difficulty to the previous ones.
Because the one difference is I used to make the exams longer,
and now they're a little shorter, so it's the only change.
So if you look at the early ones, they'll be a bit longer.
The most recent, the ones in recent years are the length that you will experience.
Okay. So now let's immediately move on to more Bertrand and Cournot stuff.
And now we're going to do Bertrand and Cournot collusion.
Okay. So before we were doing competition.
Now we'll do the collusion.
All right.
So just for review.
All right.
So assuming you've got at least two firms in the room with minimum marginal cost,
the one-shot Bertrand game, as well as the finitely repeated Bertrand game, is a simple solution.
And that's price equals marginal cost regardless of the number of firms,
as long as there's at least two firms.
Okay. Right.
I guess I already said that.
So yes. So for all n greater than 1, with Bertrand competition,
and as long as you've got at least two firms that can produce the minimum marginal cost,
then you just get price equals marginal cost.
So it's just like the competition.
And the result, although not the mechanism.
All right.
Now, once we have an infinitely repeated Bertrand game,
then we've got more equilibria sustainable.
All right.
So let's think about the perfectly collusive equilibrium.
So where every firm shares a 1-th part of the monopoly profit.
All right.
And remember the idea of the trigger strategy.
So as usual, if we think about firms using the harshest possible punishments,
this will tell us the maximum level of cooperation they can get.
All right.
Because the maximum punishments provide the most favorable incentives for collusion.
Right. Whereas the milder punishments are, the harder it is for collusion to work.
All right.
So this would be something like OPEC says,
if any member country here ever produces one extra barrel of oil above its quota.
Actually, that would be for now.
If any member of OPEC sells oil for one penny less than what OPEC has decreed,
OPEC will be destroyed.
We will never have OPEC again ever.
So you better watch it.
All right.
So what's going to happen?
All right.
So this is going to be one defection leads to the permanent inclusion.
So collusion is going to be sustainable as long as a 1 over n share of the monopoly profits
is valued more than 100% of the monopoly profits once followed by 0 plus forever.
And if we write this down, it says, well, look.
All right.
So we can either have 1 over n from time t equals 0 to infinity of the discounted sum of the monopoly profits.
So that's what you get from colluding.
Remember, that is your personal discount factor,
although it could be based upon market interest rates or it could be based upon individual patience.
So if you collude, then you get 1 n of the monopoly profits forever.
On the other hand, if you defect, then you get all the monopoly profits once.
How do you do that?
Well, all the other firms are charging monopoly profits.
And what do you do to steal it from them and steal it all from them?
You charge how much less?
Monopoly profits minus epsilon.
Yes, exactly.
And that will steal the entire market for you.
And again, if it's truly infinitesimal, then actually mathematically it is to exactly equal the monopoly profits.
It's just rounding here.
So you get all the monopoly profits for one turn.
And then if we have a blank trigger strategy, so one episode of collusion ends collusion forever,
then what do recurring firms earn forever more after that?
No profits at all.
So it's a pretty easy equation to solve, pretty easy inequality to solve.
So you can either have all the monopoly profits once for breaking the collusion,
or you can have a 1 over n share forever.
And if you just do the math, wow, we can even divide through by that pi m,
and then we get the result that cooperation is sustainable as long as n over 1 minus n is less than or equal to beta.
So now this does get us the results that the undergraduate textbook writers would like.
So this here says, look, more firms is good not because there's anything intrinsically better about more firms.
It just means more firms makes it harder to get collusion.
So as long as you have two firms, competition always works.
But the problem is that you're less likely to have competition if you only have two firms.
Because two firms are likely to say, there's only two of us, why don't we collude?
Whereas if you have 10 firms, then that's less likely to try and of course much less likely to succeed.
When n approaches infinity?
Yes, well, when n approaches infinity, this means that you would have to have any number of firms.
but you would have to have no discounting in the future
at all to have collusion.
Right.
So it's almost a disqualifying act.
Right.
OK.
And a further thing, a striking result,
is how many firms do you need to fall
below the critical value for collusion to break down?
So how many firms does it take for cheating?
How many firms have to cheat before the cheating happens?
One.
Right.
So if there is a distribution of betas, then who actually,
is it the average beta that matters?
No.
No.
Which beta is it that matters?
The one that's not.
Yeah, the minimum beta.
The minimum beta.
And that's another way in which having more firms
makes collusion harder.
It's more likely you'll have one impatient firm.
More likely to have one firm run by a guy who
thinks he's going to die soon, so he
doesn't care about the future.
So that is another way in which collusion
tends to break down.
OK.
All right.
So Bertrand is really easy.
And if you look at old midterms, sometimes
the Liebertrand problem will usually
make it a little bit harder, because it's too easy in a way.
Although I've also noticed by the time
people take the preliminary exams,
then even the basic one is generally forgotten.
So it's depressing.
But don't depress me.
So you guys can all remember it.
No reason, just because all previous groups
have poorly remembered it, doesn't mean you have to.
OK.
Now, what about Cournot collusion?
What about Cournot collusion?
So Cournot collusion, and what would be the trigger strategy
in Cournot?
It would just be threatening to go back
to regular old Cournot behavior.
So a bunch of Cournot firms say, let's all go and agree
that we're each going to produce one-nth of the monopoly output.
And then if any of us breaks that deal,
then we will all produce the Cournot output forever.
So there are two big differences between this Cournot collusion
and Bertrand collusion.
So first one is the punishments can't
drive profits below the non-cooperative stage
gain profits, which means, and since in the simple Cournot
model, firms do earn profits, the threat to revert to Cournot
is not that bad.
Because so like in the Bertrand collusion,
either monopoly profits or nothing.
In the Cournot collusion, either monopoly profits
or Cournot profits.
So the punishment isn't as bad in Cournot.
But in Bertrand, the defector gets
to steal the entire market.
But in Cournot, the defector does not
get to steal the entire market.
Because in Cournot, a defector just produces a larger output.
And when you produce a larger output, you get more money,
but you don't get all the money.
So if you sell your oil for a penny less per barrel
than everybody else, then everybody buys your oil.
But if you just produce double your quota,
everybody, you are not the other oil, gets sold too.
So we don't have to give it to them as large.
Second, now formerly you get Cournot collusion,
or referred to be sustainable.
Again, on the left-hand side, it's the same equation,
or it's the same expression, rather.
So 1 over n times 2 from the summation from t
equals 0 to infinity of beta over h of t times pi n.
I guess I've been doing it as superscript c
or superscripts.
I'm just going to go with the new subscripts.
All right.
So anyway, the left-hand side is exactly the same.
But the right-hand side is hard.
And I think this is the most horrible algebra
we'll ever do in this class.
All right, so I think I've lost like nine hours of my life
doing this, because I kept messing it up.
Anyway, I'm simplifying the algebra for you,
because I don't want you to suffer like I did.
I don't think I learned anything extra from the suffering.
So I think I had to do it with having marginal cost
be something.
And then that can only be by the theorem.
I'm just going to do it with zero marginal cost.
All right.
So anyway, so that monopoly of profits
must be greater than the defection profits, so defection
profits, plus the summation from t equals 1 to infinity
of the discounted sum of the kernel profits.
OK.
So that pi d is defection profits,
and pi c is ordinary kernel profits.
So if we use the functional forms from just a few minutes
ago, actually, from week five notes,
then we know pi m is just going to be a squared over 4b.
And pi c is equal to a squared over b times n plus 1 squared.
Just as a consistency check, remember that n equals 1,
or monopoly is just a kernel with n equal to 1.
So does that work?
So if n equals 1, then kernel profits are what?
a squared over b times that squared.
And that's what?
4?
Yes, OK.
All right, consistency.
Good.
OK.
But figuring out pi d is a giant pain in the neck.
And we're going to do it anyway.
OK.
So how do we figure it out?
Why are we doing it?
Not just to suffer, but I think it actually does teach you
about Nash reasoning to some degree.
All right.
So here's the thing.
So remember, the collusive slash monopoly output
is a over 2b.
So remember that?
That is what monopolies produce.
So if all firms other than yourself produce that,
or if all firms other than yourself
do produce one nth of that, then the total production
of all firms other than yourself will be that times n minus 1
over n.
Like if there's 10 firms, and all of you
say, let's each produce 1 10th of the market, 1 10th
of the monopoly outputs, then how much do the firms
other than yourself produce?
9 10ths.
9 10ths of the monopoly output.
If there were three firms, and you all agree,
then the firms other than yourself produce 2 3rds
of the monopoly output.
And then you decide what to do.
Ha ha.
Were they suckers, or were you going along with it?
All right.
So that is the summed output of everybody other than yourself.
So what a defecting firm will maximize is going to be a.
Remember, we have the same demand function.
So now we've got p is equal to a minus bq.
So we've got the same demand function.
So a minus b times your little q plus that mess there.
Plus n minus 1 over n times a over 2b.
Square bracket, curvy bracket, and qi.
OK.
So that's what we're doing here.
So again, this is just maximizing that thing.
But we're plugging in for everything.
So this is p.
And if all firms other than you collude,
then p is going to be given by a minus b times quantity,
your output, plus n minus 1 over n of the monopoly output.
And then take all that and multiply it by your output.
And that will be your profit.
OK.
So there.
You're maximizing that.
And once you do that, then it's not that bad.
So if you differentiate and simplify,
then you find out that your q, your optimal q,
is going to be a times n plus 1 over 4bn.
And then we have to do even more algebra just
to find out total market output is now
the output of all firms other than yourself plus your output.
So it's that algebra, which isn't that horrible,
plus that.
But summing those two things, it's
a pretty ugly algebra, right?
Maybe you can do this all in your head.
I cannot.
All right.
And that gives us the messy expression at the bottom.
So I'm sure all of you can just look at this
and say, of course, big Q is going
to be equal to a times 3n minus 1 all over 4bn.
Duh.
I can't do that, but you can.
And then finally, we go back to the demand equation.
p is equal to a minus bq.
Plug that thing in.
And then we find out that when you defect,
that will drive price down to a n plus 1 over 4n.
And here, I don't have any intuition
to offer you other than you just have
to work through all the algebra.
That thing at the top, there I have some intuition.
All right.
So then we go and multiply together.
We find out that we've got that p and that q.
So the defection profits will be given by, of course,
line i on the notes, on the second major notes,
a squared times n plus 1 squared, all of it
over 16bn squared.
And now, we go back, back in time,
to the original inequality right here.
We go and we plug in every term, and we solve.
So we put in monopoly profits.
We put in defection profits.
We put in curtail profits.
And then we get the inequality on line j,
for sustainable collusion.
And I'm not going to read it aloud.
You can take a look at that yourselves.
Now, if you're looking at this, you
may be getting a brief moment of mathematical terror,
because at first glance, it looks like it's
a fourth degree equation.
And economists don't know how to solve fourth degree equations.
And if you've ever looked up the formula for a fourth degree
equation, it is multiple pages.
It goes on and on.
So there is a formula for it, but nobody knows this formula.
Nobody uses it.
And then there's a really weird proof
saying there can't be an equation for a fifth degree
equation.
All right, I'll just take mathematicians' word for it.
But anyway, you're looking at this,
and you may be sitting there, my god,
I must have done something wrong,
or this model should not have ever
been done in the first place, because it leads us
to a fourth degree equation, and we
don't know what to do with it.
So instead of feeling smart, we feel stupid at the end.
But then you go, oh, wait a second.
We're not solving for n.
We're solving for beta.
And this equation is only quadratic.
This equation is not fourth degree and beta.
So then we're OK.
All right, fine.
The thing that we want to solve for
is not actually fourth degree.
So then we get this equation for beta.
So and again, it's very messy.
But if you look at it, it's perfectly solvable.
There is nothing that you, conceptually,
there's nothing to solving it that you haven't done
a bunch of other times before.
And probably actually even in first year algebra.
And you look at it, and I will say
there's no good intuition for this.
But you can just go and put in some numbers
and convince yourself.
So n equals 2, and beta star is 0.53.
And if you go and put in a bigger n,
then you'll get a bigger beta star.
So let's see.
And I believe if you put an infinite n,
then beta will asymptote it to 1.
OK, so questions?
Questions?
All right, 7A.
If I guess n.
I think I can honestly promise we'll never
have to do any worse algebra than this in this whole class.
All right, now remember, these examples, these models,
they abstract from a great many problems with collusion.
And again, if you had a good industrial organization
teacher ever, then they will tell you
that the fundamental problem with collusion is do entry.
Collusion attracts entry.
And then in the real world, there
is a great dilemma faced by the cartel, to cut the entrance in
or not to cut them in.
And both are evil from the point of view of the cartel.
Because if you don't cut them in, what happens?
They'll out-compete you.
Yeah, they compete against you, and they ruin the cartel.
And if you do let them in, they've got to cut the money.
Yes, you have less money.
And also, you have just created a very perverse incentive
to create new firms and say, hey, let me in,
or else I'm going to have to compete with you.
Yes?
Has anyone ever applied this model
to big tent versus small tent political movements?
Big tent versus small tent political movements, probably.
I don't remember anything specific on it.
Again, of course, with political movements,
you're not generally trying to say, the thing you're maximizing
is probably very different in the functional form
than profits.
So for power, for example, you just
want to be the most powerful.
You want to have highest relative power.
Whereas when in business, you're concerned
about your absolute profits, at least normally.
There are some weird models where firms are concerned
with their market share rather than profits.
Although, there have to be some limits to these models,
because what is the simplest way to get a great market share?
The really easy way to get 100% market share.
Just throw the new product in for free?
Yes, give your product away for free,
and tell you you're going to go bankrupt, at least.
So there's something fishy about market share models,
because it's too easy to get a really high market share.
You might say, well, it's maximized market share
conditional on not going bankrupt.
I don't think I've ever seen that one tried, but you're
right.
So anyway, these models are totally
abstracting from new entry, which
in any real world analysis of collusion
is incredibly important.
Questions?
And furthermore, people often think,
well, you don't really need to worry about new entry
when entry is hard.
But normally, when entry is hard, exit is hard too.
So for example, you're OPEC.
You push up the world price of oil.
And at first, this doesn't cause the sudden discovery
of any new oil.
But eventually, when the price is high for a long time,
it does get countries looking around.
Do we have any oil here?
It's really expensive.
And then once they find oil, then OPEC
is in a worse position than it was before it
got the price high, because now you
have a bunch of places with new oil producers who can either
be invited to join OPEC, in which case
you're cutting down the share of all the members,
or they stay out, and then they ruin OPEC.
So according to all of the normal energy economists
that I've talked to, so not George Mason, weird people,
anything like that, just normal, boring, vanilla energy
economists, I was very surprised to find out
very standard view is OPEC accomplishes nothing on balance
other than provide jobs for some bureaucrats who
work at OPEC, I guess.
So anyway, that is a very common view.
And again, it would fit with, in the long run,
when you go and push prices up, then all you're really doing
is creating a period when prices are going to be even lower,
because you've incurred this new entry, which
took a while to enter, but now it's
going to take a long time to disappear.
Could that be why it persists, and why it still
sticks around, even though it's sort of like a facade?
They're just like, we don't want to lose face, I guess?
Yeah, at least the usual story is it's all political,
and it would be humiliating for the governments
to admit that what they're doing hasn't been working.
And again, it is an old-fashioned public choice
special interest story, where a lot of members
of the royal Saudi family are probably working for OPEC.
And then for the Saudis to say, well, it's kind of dumb,
it doesn't work.
They are undermining their own regime.
And yeah, they could go and buy them out,
but then they are publicly admitting
that they're parasites, whereas now they
can claim that they're working for the good of the people
of Saudi Arabia.
Yeah.
OK.
All right, so questions about collusion?
No one happy?
OK, then let's keep forging ahead.
All right, so I assume everyone here
is familiar with all the basic concepts of public goods
and externalities, right?
You've heard this stuff before.
All right, now many of you, oh, yes?
I haven't come to the notes, so maybe I'm at a miss list.
Are many of these Stackelberg-type?
Let's see, I think that there may be a homework
problem involving Stackelberg, but we're not actually
going to do it in class.
Yes, so yeah, I'm pretty sure we don't do it in class.
But yes, with Stackelberg, it's essentially just like Cournot,
except there's a first mover.
So you go and you get the equation
for what a Cournot firm does.
And then the first mover goes and sets its output
in order to take advantage of the other firm's behavior,
in order to take advantage of the other firm's reaction
function.
And punchline, so even though people
have looked at the Stackelberg model
as saying, ah, this shows how things are really
bad in this first mover, Stackelberg actually
gives you a higher level of output than regular Cournot.
So it's the opposite of what people want the result to be.
All right, so we assume you've all
heard about public goods and externality at some point.
Now, it is common for textbooks to talk
about two different features of public goods,
namely non-excludability and non-rivalry.
Non-rivalry, in my view, is just a distraction
because we see non-rivalry everywhere.
So you go to a movie theater in a matinee,
look, witness the non-rivalry.
There's a ton of empty seats.
So non-rivalry is all over the regular for-profit sector,
things that we never think of as having
anything to do with public goods.
Non-rivalry is all over the place.
So talking about it as being a special feature of public goods
is just distracting and confusing.
And if we really wanted our students to understand,
we would have stopped doing it that way.
But anyway, all I can do is try to help you
once you're in graduate school and to say,
you remember all the stuff about non-rivalry?
It really was just a distraction.
Non-excludability is the real key
because with non-excludability, there
is a basic logic of selfishness that it says, look,
if a good is not excludable, then by definition,
there is no feasible way to exclude non-payers.
So it's not excludable.
So there's no way you can stop someone who has not
paid from enjoying the good.
Next, so that's just a definition.
Assumption one is just a definition.
Assumption two, though, is a behavioral assumption
and says that since you don't have to pay to use it,
selfish people will not pay to use it.
And of course, in the end, there is a blah.
I guess that's just a definition too until you add on
the key thing, which is human beings are selfish.
That's what makes it empirical.
So but anyway, if you don't have to pay to use something
and you're selfish, someone comes to you and says,
well, you don't have to pay to use it, and you're selfish.
Do you want to pay anyway?
No.
I don't want to pay for something
that I don't have to pay for.
And then the last step.
So if no one will pay for it, why would a selfish producer
produce it?
So just imagine going and passing a hat to collect donations
and how much money do selfish people put in in total?
None.
And then if you go to a producer and say,
if you agree to produce this public good,
I will give you the entire contents of this hat.
And you're like, show me the hat.
All right, there's nothing in the hat.
All right.
Now, there are two different ways
you can go and diagram these non-extremal benefits and costs.
I'm just going to do one that I like better.
It's not the only way.
There's another way.
All right.
So, the first one, so if this is standard market, QP,
we've got supply, we've got demand.
And then if there's a positive externality,
one way we can diagram this is to add a social benefits
curve on top of the regular supply and demand graph.
And the social benefits curve includes all the products,
all the products, all the benefits, includes the bank
curve.
So, that new, so customers are part of society, right?
But it adds on this additional value from the bystanders.
Additional value from the bystanders.
So, social benefits with positive externalities,
of course, exceeds the private benefits.
And then similarly over here, if you have negative externalities,
then we've got supply, demand.
And now, with negative externalities,
we draw social benefits below the demand curve.
Because for every unit that's getting produced,
there's some bystanders who are choking or gagging
or looking in horror or disgust at what you're doing.
Or disappointment.
Percurbation.
You may hear some very mild disapproval.
But anyway, something negative, something negative,
where they have some willingness to pay.
Well, then why don't they pay if they're willing to pay?
Because of the non-excludability.
If one of these people here says,
hey, I'll go and pay you guys to produce less.
Then who gets the benefit?
All the people who are suffering get the benefit, not just
the payer.
So, the marginal gain for the payer is essentially nothing.
Now, one thing that you might have
noticed when you listen to economists
talk about the real world, is that they
seem to deviate from the textbook.
Because in the textbook, positive externalities
and negative externalities aren't the same thing
as public goods and public bads.
And in fact, there isn't any clear connection.
There isn't a clear, simple way to translate from one
to another.
But when economists actually talk about the real world,
they often will talk about, they often
will interchangeably say positive externalities
and public goods very, very easily.
And negative externalities and public bads very easily.
So people sometimes say, well, education
is positive externalities, so it's public good.
And say, well, the textbook said those were different things,
and kind of related, but not related in any simple way.
So, there's two things that we could do.
One thing is we could just reform our language,
so that we always use public good and public bads purely
in the textbook definition.
And then otherwise, we say positive externalities
and negative externalities.
So that's one option.
But another option is to pay more careful attention
to how would economists do in practice.
So when do economists say positive externalities
versus public goods in practice?
So I have a pet theory of this, of how economists
use the word in practice.
We use both words in practice.
And now I will share with you.
You may decide for yourselves whether this accurately
describes usage of the terms.
This is what I think is going on.
So when do economists actually say public goods rather
than positive externalities?
So I say that economists say public goods when
it's an extreme positive externality.
So I say that when economists switch over
from saying positive externalities to public goods
when they think the social benefits are substantial,
but private demand is basically zero or negligible.
So this is not from any textbook I know of.
But if you just look at the way that economists use the word,
it seems to me that they talk about public goods
in cases of extreme positive externalities,
where the market equilibrium would be roughly zero.
And yet there is some big social benefit to existing.
And then similarly, I have an analogous claim
for public bads.
In practice, economists treat public bads
as being very extreme negative externalities,
so that these are goods where the social benefits are way
down there.
It would pretty much be better if the thing
didn't exist at all, but where demand is up there.
Now, what would be a difference to you?
What would be an example of this?
Well, so negative externalities, in a classic example,
that would be something like air pollution,
where there is a problem, and yet the products that
are making the air pollution are very useful.
So think about this.
Suppose that you could go and wave a wand right now
that would prevent all use of an internal combustion
engine on Earth.
This wouldn't give us any new way of getting energy,
at least at first.
It would just stop all internal combustion from working.
In fact, it would just stop all fossil fuels from working.
So what would likely happen over the next few months
after you wave that wand?
What's that?
You've done terrible things.
You guys are just great as monsters.
Yes, obviously.
Well, I bet.
So it seems very reasonable that most of mankind
would simply die, because our food production
uses fossil fuels.
Our transportation of the food, because remember, the food
is grown nearby.
So this would destroy both the production
and the transportation of food.
Now again, of course, if there were
time to do something different, maybe it
would be a different story.
So if you could wave a wand and simply
prevent anyone from using fossil fuels,
this would be a terrible thing to do.
Now, suppose you could wave a wand
and prevent anybody from murdering anybody else.
How about that?
Well, I'd say murder is much more like a public bad,
where you stop all murder from happening.
It's like, well, what if we really need to murder a person?
What if there's enormous benefits
from murdering somebody?
Really, the only good examples I know
of big benefits from murdering people
are to stop people from murdering people.
So if there's someone who's going
to go and detonate a nuclear weapon,
then let's kill that guy to stop him murdering people.
If you already waved the wand that stops murder,
then we no longer need to go and murder people to stop murder,
because it's already stopped.
So other examples where there's really any big social benefit
to murdering somebody?
I don't know.
Maybe it's out there.
I don't think it much.
What's that?
It's almost a find out of existence,
because we find out that murder is understood.
Yeah.
But you could say, well, rudeness is a terrible problem.
And if we couldn't execute people for rudeness,
then society would cease to exist.
What about communists, maybe, who aren't intentionally
trying to murder people?
Yes.
Well, you know.
So I guess it builds into the definition of murder is intent.
Or actually reckless indifference.
So I say the communists are guilty.
There are others.
But now, think about just a milder case.
How about waving a wand to prevent all car theft?
I mean, there he's all right.
Well, maybe someone would need to steal a car
because they're being chased by a murderer.
Something like that.
But still, it seems like if you could just wave a wand
and stop all that from happening,
that would probably be quite great.
And even if there's a few optimal car
thefts that don't happen as a result of it still, big game.
So those are cases where they seem more
like the extreme ones.
And we'll talk a bit more about this in the next class.
So everybody has the new homework.
And answer B for homework three.
So we'll do that next week so that we
Yeah, in two weeks.
