You don't have to learn everything, actually,
as far as you know.
So remember, big strategy.
If you just learn everything, then you're safe.
So just learn it all.
All right.
So last thing we were talking about in the last class
was nominal rigidity.
And there is a classic solution to nominal rigidity,
and that is just to inflate it away.
So if you've got real wages stuck at 10%
above the market clarity level due to nominal rigidity,
you could either try to somehow wait around
for the wages to go down, or you could just
go and pump up the money supply by 10%,
wait for prices to rise by 10%, and then the real wages
will actually be fine just the way they are.
All right.
Now, practice is more easily said than done.
So there's a really neat paper from Robert Lucas
in the 70s showing that the countries where inflation works,
the countries with very little inflation.
And the countries where it doesn't work
are the countries with a lot of inflation.
Now, if you wonder, how do you get
to be one of these countries with lots of inflation that
doesn't work, the answer is you start off with low inflation,
and then you try it, and it works.
And then you try it again, and it works worse.
And you keep going and doing more in order
to try to get over it.
So it's sometimes been compared to being a drug addict, where
you keep increasing the dose because you need more and more
in order to get the same hit.
Of course, what's really going on
is that people get used to the idea of thinking in real terms
when inflation is high enough.
So if you've ever been in a high inflation country,
you may notice that people right on the street
seem to do real nominal calculations very easily
in their heads.
More or less in Turkey, the kids could go and do
five different from the others.
This was actually like 1997 when inflation was higher in Turkey.
But kids on the street could do calculations
in five different exchange rates very easily.
And they would tell you that if there was any disparity,
they would know which of the five
was actually the best deal.
So places where inflation is high,
people get very used to thinking in real terms.
Places where inflation is low, that's
where people are likely to make mistakes.
I know that when I give undergraduates
real versus nominal questions, they generally just
mess them up very badly.
So of course, maybe the kids would also
mess it up in front of a paper and pencil,
but on the street, they do it well.
There's actually research in psychology
on how kids who are street vendors
can do complicated math that they can't do in a classroom,
as long as you talk about selling papayas,
something like that.
So something that they're used to selling and buying
that the math actually works.
How could that be?
That's how actual thinking is.
It's not logic.
It's psycho logic.
So questions about inflating weight and homogeneities?
Pretty basic.
All right.
And then, last topic on labor, efficiency wages.
A very unfortunately named topic,
because it suggests that these are the only efficient wages,
or these are the efficient wages.
And not only are there other models where the wage is also
efficient, but in efficiency wage models,
the wage is not efficient, as it turns out.
So I cannot help the standard language,
so you just have to get used to it.
So I'll just put it in quote marks.
Quote efficiency wages is what we're talking about.
All right.
Now, just for background.
When you've got unimplicit working conditions
in a standard supply and demand model for labor,
so we've got L, W, we've got supply, we've got demand.
So this is for a normal occupation.
And suppose that something changes about the occupation
so that it becomes an unpleasant job to do.
Which curve shifts, first of all?
Supply, yes.
Because does the fact that you're miserable
mean that your employers want to pay you more in and of itself?
Yeah, like if you're going through personal trauma,
does your boss say, well, market wages now
require me to give you a raise because you've got
problems, your son's a disappointment.
That's not how it works.
So demand does not shift at all just
because the job is pleasant or unpleasant.
Instead, what shifts is supply.
People don't want to do it.
And of course, when the job is unpleasant,
supply shifts which way?
Yes, yes.
Supply falls.
And notice, this does have the amazing effect
of raising wages.
So it's not that people are totally
confused when they think that somehow the boss has
to pay you more for the unpleasant job.
It's just that it doesn't come out of any need
to make you feel better right away.
It doesn't because they want you more.
It's because there's fewer of you around,
and so you're more valuable.
So this is the very basic stuff here.
And when this occurs, this difference
between the regular wage and the wage in the unpleasant job,
it's got a special name called a compensating differential.
So it's a differential in the wage
that compensates people for having an unpleasant job.
Now, suppose there's a job where you're just
required to work really fast all the time.
Is that any different from a job that's
smelly or disgusting or socially frowned upon?
Or is there any difference between a job
where you just have to work double time all the time?
Not really.
No, it's exactly the same thing.
All right, a job where I have to be running all the time,
great.
Or a job where it smells bad all the time,
or a job where the customers spit on me.
All of these are the same kind of thing.
All of these very naturally go and reduce supply,
which then raises wages.
Very simple.
All right, so as long as we got symmetric information,
as long as both sides know what's going on,
then you can get workers to work harder just
by paying them more wages.
So you're right, fine.
You have to go and do something unpleasant.
Well, then supply will be lower, and then wages will be higher.
But this is a symmetric information model.
This is a model where both sides know what's going on.
But what if we've got asymmetric information where
the workers know more about their effort
than the employers?
So the workers know if they're working double time,
and the employers just have to guess.
Is he really working double time or not?
The employer, of course, knows how fast he's working.
The employer, on the other hand, has to wonder.
Now, you may remember there's the question, well,
why can't you just look at the output?
Why can't you just see, well, he's
really working double time.
How could he only produce five widgets?
And if you may remember, the standard answer
is, in that case, the asymmetric information problem
just solves itself, and we're basically
back in the symmetric information world.
But suppose that there are other reasons.
There are valid excuses for why you would only produce five.
Like maybe some customers are really difficult,
and they sit there while you're supposed
to be running the cashier.
But maybe you get unlucky, and you
get the really slow customers who sit there going, no.
I don't know.
On the one hand, I could get a hamburger.
But all right, if you get a bunch of customers like that,
you will only ring up a few customers,
even though you were doing exactly what you're supposed to.
And if employers know that might happen,
but they don't know whether it did in fact happen,
then again, we're back in this asymmetric information world.
Now, a standard solution to this asymmetric information
is to say, look, maybe you'll go and cheat,
and you'll shirk on the job, and you won't work fast
like you're supposed to.
And maybe you'll get away with it, but maybe you won't.
And if I ever catch you going and slacking on my dime,
you're fired.
This sounds like a pretty good tactic.
But there's a little weird thing about competitive markets.
So if you've really got perfect competition,
and you lose your job, what can you immediately do
with no transaction cost at all?
Get another job.
Get another job that is just as good.
So how scary is that threat?
Do you know what's going to happen
if you don't go and do just what I say, something
very unpleasant?
You're going to have to go and find another job at no cost
yourself, and you'll be just as good as this one.
Wow, that's really scary there.
That's absolutely terrible that I
would have to endure that kind of humiliation.
So the idea of efficiency wages comes from saying, well,
then what could you do to actually motivate
your workers?
What can you do to make the threat to fire them scary?
Well, of course, one thing you could do
is to make sure that their next job is terrible.
But that's hard to do, right?
So yeah, there is the old, you'll
never work in this town again after what you've done.
But I've never seen a movie that actually bothered
to follow through on the threat and show the person
unable to get another job.
It's more of just an empty threat, right?
But there we go.
But what, you control the entire industry?
Everyone in the industry likes you?
That sounds like a real thing.
Like, how long do people even remember what I did to you?
You may remember how I betrayed you for years,
but no one else cares.
All right, so since you can't go and effectively ruin
people's options with other employers,
at least that doesn't seem too likely.
So if I can't get you to appreciate your job
by ruining your other options, what
is the other route to make you appreciate your job?
Make the job you have better.
Yes, make the job that you have better so that you
would be scared to lose it.
This is how people control you.
They give you a good deal and then
threaten to take it away if you disappoint them.
Right?
Really, whatever you're worried about losing,
that's because you're getting a good deal, right?
If you're just getting a totally mediocre deal,
then why would the threat to lose it be bad?
All right, so anyway, and then, of course,
if we've got this is our market clearing wage,
or this is a market clearing wage,
what we need to do is to move the wage above that.
So you move the wage above that.
And when you move the wage above the market clearing wage,
we get which of two market outcomes, both of which
start with S?
Surplus.
Surplus.
Yes, you get a labor surplus.
And in English, what do we call a labor surplus?
Unemployment.
Unemployment.
Yes, a labor surplus and unemployment are the same thing.
They are the same thing.
And notice, once you're getting this high wage,
then you're worried about losing your job.
And then if someone threatens to fire you, that is bad.
All right?
Right?
Because then it's going to be hard for you
to find another job that is just as good as your last job.
That is the whole idea of United Nations wages.
Now, it's natural for people to say, well, that doesn't really
explain anything.
Because if everyone offers above market wages,
then it's no longer scary to lose your job.
But actually, if you look more closely, it's still scary.
Because suppose that all employers are there.
What is the bad thing that can happen to you
if you lose your job?
Can't find another.
You just can't find another job at all.
So yeah, so the problem is, even if all jobs that exist
pay high wages above the market-faring level,
the problem is that you may be unable to find
another job at all.
So either you'll find another job that's as good,
then everything's fine.
Or you'll be stuck, and you won't be able to find
another job.
And if you're thinking, you're wondering
about an analogy that may be relevant to your future,
a very standard outcome when people have a 10-year track job
is they are desperate to get tenure.
Now, why are people so desperate to get tenure?
Why are people so desperate for tenure again?
I can never remember.
Because that job is better than the next job
they're likely to have.
So I've actually been on the Tenure Promotion and Oversight
Committee for the College of Arts and Sciences.
So I can definitely say that there
are people that receive strong votes to get tenure
in certain departments, which will remain in the main list,
which might be English.
And you look at the BDA, and you're like,
I don't think they could get a job at a community college
with this BDA.
They didn't even publish the dissertation.
They had 15 years to do it.
And yet, they got maybe 100% vote for tenure.
And they're desperate to get it because they
know that if they don't get tenure,
then they are going to be struggling to get a job
at a community college, likely.
And on the other hand, they could easily
be replaced with lots of people at community colleges
who publish far better.
There are people at community colleges
who publish far better than people
who get a 10-year track jobs.
But there is a giant system of corrupt nepotism
that exists in universities below the top level.
So this is all good information for you, by the way.
Write it down, giant system of corrupt nepotism.
Yes.
So out of all of the key choke points
in preventing you from getting a dream job for life, which
is being a tenured professor, the really key one
is just getting that first tenure track job.
Those are genuinely hard to get.
Not so much economics, I'll leave it there.
Not easy.
But anyway, once you get that, then actually,
if you were at a school ranked below for a worse than 50
or so, it's likely that they'll tenure you almost for anything
from what I've seen.
Just keep in mind.
Not economics, of course.
We have high standards.
But all these other departments, low, low standards.
And standard argument for not against the raise
of the standards is other universities at our level
do the same thing.
And I made the reply, how will we rise above this level
if we don't raise standards?
That's not our concern.
Well, who's concerned about that?
It seems like we're the gatekeepers.
Now, no one listened.
Not on the committee.
Anyway, so yeah, if all employers think this way,
then they all raise wages above the market-bearing level,
which causes a permanent labor surplus.
Now, some people have misinterpreted this
as some kind of confirmation of the Marxist concept
of the reserve army of the unemployed.
Here's the thing, though.
The whole point of the reserve army of the unemployed
is supposed to be to prevent wages from ever rising.
The whole idea here is that they're already too high.
So essentially, the Marxist story
goes and combines two incompatible ideas.
One, that wages are permanently low.
First of all, it's a model explaining why wages are
permanently low.
And second of all, it's a model explaining
why there's permanent unemployment.
But the only reason why there'd be permanent unemployment
is if wages are generally too high.
And now, so then why is it someone
doesn't go and take advantage of this big group
of perfectly good workers?
At least in a simple version of the model,
these surplus workers are just as good as the employed ones.
There's no difference other than luck.
And the reason why is that given this asymmetric information
problem, if you offer to hire these other workers for lower
wages, their productivity falls at a faster rate
than the wage cut.
So if you say, hey, I'm happy to hire you for 20% less
than the current wage, and people say, yes,
we'll have productivity 25% less than normal,
you say, fine, I'll cut it again.
Productivity falls even faster.
So it's just like the market for lemons, right?
Why can't I just go and cut the price
that I'm offering for the used car?
Because then the cars that you get
will be worth even worse than that.
So that's not going to work.
All right.
Now, efficiency wage models often somehow
assume to be the same as this.
And they're totally not the same.
They have nothing to do with each other.
You can combine both models, but models exist totally separately.
And standard efficiency wage models
are totally real models that have nothing to do with inflation.
So keep that in mind.
All right.
Now, what is the point of these efficiency wage models?
Well, if you go into the math, it's
easy to show that at least sometimes it's
going to be an inefficient outcome.
So obviously, this is going to be counter-efficient,
because these people would be happy to work for less,
as long as we knew how good they were.
So as long as we actually knew what's going on,
they would be happy.
So basically, they would be willing to go and put
in a full day's work in exchange for a below-market wage.
However, since there's no way to actually enforce
that contract without having a higher wage,
then they don't do it.
So definitely counter-efficient, but even
in some second-best sense, you can
show conditions under which you're
getting an inefficient result.
So then what's the point?
Well, efficiency wages have been used as a rationale
for industrial policy, usually for things
like subsidizing Rust Belt, subsidizing manufacturing,
on the theory that these are industries where the efficiency
wages are especially big.
So the efficiency wage issue is particularly severe.
Now, again, if you think about it more, it's a little bit
confusing.
It's like, well, wait, why is it so hard to monitor productivity
on an auto assembly line, but it's
easy to monitor efficiency on a potato assembly line?
There's a famous model that people talk about it
a ton more, rather, on their motto,
on their slogan that in the 80s, when
some of the Reagan administration says,
it doesn't really matter whether we make potato ships
or silicon ships, all the same thing.
And so then they're widely criticized.
But again, in terms of this model,
you'd have to say that there's somehow worse information
about the productivity of a potato chip maker
than about the silicon chip maker.
It's kind of hard to understand by that point.
But anyway, if you were in a very similar model where
it was just like, you really could just be one industry.
But anyway, the idea is that you could do something
like do a lump sum tax on everyone who has a job
and then use it to create a wage subsidy.
So that, potentially, could go and reduce the efficiency
of that.
Although, once you're in that mode,
then you realize, wow, there's a lot of things
we could actually do to reduce this unemployment.
In fact, anything that makes unemployment less pleasant
reduces unemployment in this model.
So remember, the reason why unemployment exists
is it needs to be bad enough to scare people.
So one way you can make unemployment
bad enough to scare people is to get the unemployment rate at 20%.
Another way, though, would be to make unemployment terrible.
And what are some simple ways to make unemployment terrible?
Cut unemployment insurance.
Yeah, so cut unemployment insurance.
Or we could increase the stigma against people
that don't have a job.
You could have there be public service announcements saying,
are you dating an unemployed person?
Don't.
Stay away from him.
He's a dirty man.
Or there could be campaigns to educate parents.
If your kid loses a job, kick him out.
Get rid of him.
A little time on the street will show him what's what.
Or, of course, you could even go full Soviet
and have a law against bankruptcy.
So the standard thing is so a union, you've got to have a job.
So if you don't have a job, then you can get a job.
a rest in remake industry, and then you go to a slave labor
camp.
So that's really bad.
None of this has got to be key to the legal system.
Just to point out, an interesting wage model
is usually seen as a left-wing model,
but it immediately gives you an argument
against unemployment insurance that
exists on top of all the other ones about disincentives.
So of course, the standard one, that unemployment insurance
reduces the incentive to get a job.
But then there's this one saying it also just increases
the unemployment rate by making unemployment so pleasant
that you have to get more unemployment to make it scary
again.
And again, I'll suggest there's this kind of futility
in unemployment insurance because you go and give it,
and then that just causes the unemployment rate
to go up in order to compensate to keep
the level of fear the same.
So there we go.
So questions about efficiency wages?
Copy efficiency wages?
Oh, yeah.
In general, if you go and read textbook accounts
of efficiency wages, at least half of them
will just mess up and describe compensating differentials.
So for example, not that you're likely to,
but if you go and get Dornbush and Fischer's
Intermediate Macroeconomics textbook from the early 90s,
I've got it on my shelf, they have
a discussion of efficiency wages that exactly describes
compensating differentials.
And when I went to Bill Dickens and said,
I said, look, there's no difference.
He said, you don't know what you're talking about, right?
Of course there is.
And I showed him the textbook.
Look, these two fancy and famous guys from MIT,
they're saying exactly what I'm saying.
And Bill said, well, they're just wrong.
Oh, and then he went and showed me the math.
I said, see, there is a difference.
All right, well, why didn't they say that?
Great question, so possibly a case
where people were very, you know,
really like a standard argument for using math in economics
is you can express yourself clearly.
But there's the problem, like all the back translation
problem of when you do all the math
and then try to explain the result in English again,
a lot of people can no longer do it.
So it might have actually been clearer
not to have translated into math in the first place.
You notice I didn't actually do the mathematical model
efficiency wages.
So I say my version better than their version without the math
because what I said at least makes sense
and was different from composition differentials.
So which is the whole point of the model
is to say something different from the really easy model
that everyone should know from HRE.
All right, we're now ready to move on
to finance and portfolio theory.
All right, so let's start with permanent income anomalies.
First of all, who here is diminishing
marginal utility consumption?
All right, most people have diminishing marginal utility
consumption.
Who here has access to intertemporal markets,
such as a credit card?
All right, or could get a credit card if you wanted one.
If these two things are true, then it
makes very little sense to tailor your current consumption
to your current income.
Why should you base what you are consuming now
on how much money you are taking in right now when
you could just go and borrow?
So assume in grad school your income
is low compared to what you expect for the rest of your
life, so why not just go into debt,
and then you can live nicely right now,
and you'll have to pay it back later.
But if you've got diminishing marginal utility consumption,
isn't it better to smooth it out so that you
have an intermediate lifestyle for your whole career
rather than living in poverty now
and then living in luxury later?
So the smart thing to do is to base your consumption
on your permanent or expected long-run income.
So your permanent income, expected long-run income.
And actually, this is the main thing that won Milton Friedman
his Nobel Prize.
Not monetarism, not creaches, not that stuff,
but his work in the 50s on the permanent income hypothesis.
That was what really won him the Nobel Prize.
It's the main thing that got cited.
And obviously, there's a lot of truth
in this permanent income hypothesis.
We don't know if this is that people base their consumption
on their expected long-run income
rather than what they happen to have earned this week.
So for example, young people tend to build up a lot of debt,
and they also tend to pay it off as they age.
Well, none of that.
And then when people retire, they generally
consume out of assets they built up when they were working.
All pretty well in fact.
Experienced this before.
But when behavioral economists have
taken a closer look at the world of consumption and savings,
they come up with a bunch of violations
of the permanent income hypothesis.
So at least it doesn't seem to work perfectly.
In fact, fairly far from perfectly.
So for one thing, consumption does actually
seem moderately sensitive to current income.
So we look at medical students.
Medical students have an enormously high graduation
rate.
It's like 95% of people that start medical school
finish medical school.
Really high.
And doctors, you may have heard.
And of course, if you would finish medical school,
then you're very likely to become a doctor.
And doctors are very likely to have very high income.
So given that there's not much uncertainty that
gets resolved during this process,
you would think that medical students would just
rack up piles of debt.
And not just for medicals.
Not the obvious one, where I can't get for medical school.
That's a given.
So why don't you go and rack up lots of debt
to eat at nice restaurants when you're in medical school?
And have a nice car and live in a nice apartment.
Why not go and rack up debt for all of these things,
and then pay it off out of your $300,000 or $400,000 a year
salary once you're done?
Why not?
Why not?
But when people actually look at what medical students do,
they see that there is a very predictable rise
in consumption right when they start working.
So you start working, and then it's
like, oh, fine, time to go and buy a nice car, buy nice stuff,
get a nice apartment, now that I finished medical school.
In fact, this is such a standard reaction
that we don't really think about it as weird.
But it is weird.
One thing, if finishing medical school
was like a one in 100 event, then
finishing medical school is like winning the lottery.
Then it does make sense to go and ramp up your lifestyle
a lot if you happen to finish.
But if you're almost certain to finish, then it's weird.
So it was almost certain that it was going to happen.
So why weren't you already living like a doctor?
Why not live like a doctor early?
And so I'm as guilty of this as anyone.
So when I was in grad school, I lived so poorly
in terms of materially.
So there was one where actually it was so dumb,
you can't even explain it by current income, by deviation.
So the day after I got married, I changed my own oil on a day
we were supposed to be packing for the honeymoon.
And so we didn't wind up leaving until midnight
because I am not actually good at changing oil.
And it was a really hard day.
And this is one where we had a giant bag of cash gifts.
And I could have simply gone in there
and taken 1% of that money out and taken it to Jiffy Lube
and had it done.
The only excuse I can plead is that I
was raised in a family where no one ever changed.
My dad always changed our oil.
And so I was just not really familiar with the idea
of paying people for this stuff.
Oh, you didn't.
If Sarbhati showed up and I said,
you are aware there are places that do this, right?
Then I wouldn't have said no.
I didn't know that.
I would have said yes.
And you realize that you are miserable now.
Yes, I know.
You realize that there is a big basket of money in there.
Yes.
So do you see where I'm going with this?
And I think I would have done it if someone had just
come and helped me in this way.
And I kept changing my own oil in grad school
for a while, actually.
I blame my friends for not making fun of me
for my economic illiteracy.
If one of them had walked by and just said,
ha ha, you're working for less than minimum wage,
that would have been a big help to me.
But no one did it.
And so I worked for less than minimum wage,
changing oil, which is almost the worst job I've ever had.
Anyway, so this is something where I am a sinner right now.
Repented, but.
So I'm helping you now.
So just imagine me laughing at you
if you're working for less than minimum wage,
doing something that you don't enjoy.
Anyway, consumption does seem moderately
sensitive to current income.
There's an old paper by Greg Mankiw
where he estimates a model where half the people just
consume whatever they consume out of current income
and half do permanent income.
So essentially, it's one where there's
just two types of consumers, in other words.
Realistically, there'd be a continuum of people.
But anyway, in a model where you assume
that either you are a dummy who just mechanically consumes
out of current income or you're Milton Friedman,
then his estimate is half the population is Milton Friedman
and half is dumb.
So it gives you some idea.
Further result is that consumption responses seem
to vary with the nature of the income.
Consumption responses vary the nature of the income.
So when people get a one-time cash bonus,
then they are likely to use it to buy a one-time big cash
thing.
So you get a bonus.
A lot of people just take the whole bonus
and buy something with it, which again, is not
what the permanent income hypothesis would predict.
Normal prediction would be that if you get a cash
bonus of $1,000 you didn't expect,
this will have the same effect as if your expected lifetime
income goes up by that amount of present value.
Yes?
Why can't you explain something like the medical school
thing with sort of like an expected value kind of thing?
Like the probability that you don't finish medical school
might be really small.
But if it happens and you spent, you took out a whole bunch
of loans to live lavishly while you're in,
like you're really screwed and your life's going to be
terrible, but how bad it is to just sort of not
eat at a nice restaurant for a few years
while you're in medical school isn't nearly probably as bad
as the rest of your life would be if you have all that debt
and for whatever reason you're in the 5% that doesn't finish.
Yeah.
So the answer there is just like with the expected utility
theory in general, the problem is
there seems to be this excess sensitivity to a few percent
risk.
So it seems like, again, not much difference
in the response between someone who has a 1% chance of not
finishing and a 5% or a 10% or a 20%.
In both cases, you finish and then cha-ching,
whereas if it were just a simple expected utility model,
then you're right.
There would be some response, but it
should depend upon how much uncertainty is being resolved.
And that seems like there's a big range where
there's any difference.
And again, remember that just the fact
that you're a doctor does not actually guarantee you anything.
And yet people sort of act like, well, now I'm a doctor.
Now everything is sure.
It's like, well, what if you lose your license
because you made a mistake?
And then you build up a lot of debt,
and then you're in big trouble.
But that one doesn't seem to bother people the same way.
Yes.
So again, there's these pseudo-certainty effects
where you reach a social milestone of, I finished.
Now I am a doctor.
Now I'm entitled to spend.
It's like, well, yeah, but so many things could go wrong.
You could get in a terrible accident.
Like if you're a surgeon, your hands could get paralyzed
and just list off all the things.
So even then, there'd still be reasons for you to go and take
extra precautions.
And yet there's a lot of these where
people seem to not be planning much at all, if at all.
All right.
Now, yes.
You used to say that people are loss averse.
So in the back, they usually take a larger risk
than they exactly have.
So actually, what I said is that many behavioral economists
think that people are loss averse.
Yeah, so again, that would mean that, yes.
So actually, that seems strange.
Because remember, what loss aversion
says is that you'll be risk preferring for losses.
So actually, this should mean that you
shouldn't be worrying about a small chance
that you don't finish medical school.
At least that's the simple version.
And remember, there's the fourfold version,
which makes it more complicated.
All right.
Yes.
So it is possible that a better life
is that kind of life purpose.
If I already live very well now, I lose my purpose of living.
So I would like to leave some space
that will work harder to reach a better life in the future.
Right, right.
So that means that you're sort of getting,
at least in a general sense, you're
getting rid of a simple diminishing
marginal utility consumption model.
And instead, it's one where at any point in time
it's diminishing.
But over my life, I want it to be rising.
So I feel like my life is improving.
So that again would give you a very different model
than the usual one.
But that makes quite a bit of sense
as a description of people's behavior.
All right, now if you have durable goods,
this gives you a little bit of extra room.
But even there, not too much.
Again, so when you add durable goods
into the permanent income hypothesis,
this says that it's basically an optimal stock of durable goods
that you want to have given whatever your expected lifetime
income is.
And this means that if suddenly there's some new news,
you may want to go and buy nicer durable goods.
But again, the problem is it seems
like people also have this excess sensitivity
for current consumption.
It's like going to restaurants and things like that.
So it is true that if you find out
that you're going to inherit some money, that is a reason
to go and buy a car.
Or even if you find out that you're
going to get a 10% raise, that is a reason
to go out and buy a new car today because you see,
well, now it makes sense for my stock of durable goods
to go up.
But anyway, so durable goods do make some difference.
And with durable goods, this is the main way
where in a simple model it can still
make sense for you to run out and buy a really nice thing
when you get a raise.
But it's got to be a durable thing.
So in the model, it doesn't make sense
to go to a nice restaurant when you get a raise.
It doesn't make sense to get a car or get a better car
because the restaurant is the current consumption,
whereas the car is a durable good.
And furthermore, also empirical evidence
that people are reluctant to borrow against or tap
into pensions and home equity to smooth their current income.
So if you have home equity, if you have any home equity
built up, you actually have a fantastic source of credit,
which is you just borrow against your home equity.
And the rate is ridiculously low,
especially adjusting for taxes.
So very common rate if you have a decent amount of home equity
would be like prime rate minus a half.
And then all that interest is deductible on your taxes.
The Trump tax reform changed a little bit, but not that much.
And so actually, there's a lot of people
who effectively have a negative real rate
they can borrow against up to an enormous amount of money,
especially if they've been older and they've
been building up equity.
Now, there was a question back there.
Yeah, is that historically true?
Like pre-2007, say?
That you could do this, that it was possible to go and borrow
against home equity?
No, no, no.
Oh, that people are reluctant to do it?
Yeah.
Yes.
So historically, people were definitely reluctant.
During the years up to the Great Recession,
it seemed like some of the psychological barriers
were starting to fall a bit.
And then as to how much they've been restored,
I'm not clear on this.
So anyway, there is this reluctance
to tap into things that are called savings,
even when it's a really low interest rate.
And you could say, well, yeah, it's called savings.
But what's the difference between something
called savings and something not called savings if they're
both the same?
And again, there are people who are so silly as to have,
say, $30,000 in credit card debt and $100,000 in home equity.
And there's a very simple financial transaction
you can make to greatly reduce the amount of interest
you have to pay while maintaining everything else.
So if you've got $100,000 in home equity, $30,000
in credit card debt, what is the simple operation
that you would be well advised to try?
Use the home equity to pay off your credit card.
Yes.
Borrow $30,000 to get your home equity,
pay off your credit card.
Because the credit card debt interest rate is,
in real terms, actually, maybe 1,000 times the rates.
That you are paying on home equity.
Home equity really could be a negative.
Actually, it could easily be a negative rate.
And the credit card, probably a 15% rate.
So and yet, well, why not?
Well, but that's my home equity.
That's like my special status of protection.
And this credit card, well, that's
the monument to my profligacy.
But let's keep it there to remind me of my sin.
And again, so you guys are familiar with what
a reverse mortgage is?
Yeah, so there's some comedians who
have talked about it in general.
But they make it sound stupid.
But it's actually a really good idea.
And with a normal mortgage, there's
a person who wants a house, but they don't have money.
So they go and they say, look, if you give me a house,
I will agree to go and pay the bank money every month
for 20 or 30 years.
And with a reverse mortgage, you start out owning a house.
And you want the bank to give you money.
So you say, tell you what, you give me
money for 20 or 30 years.
And then at the end, you get a house.
Usually, they're structured so that you
get money until you die.
And then the bank gets the house.
And then normally, of course, they have extra revisions.
Like if you die in a month, then the bank
doesn't get the entire house.
Although there's a good reason to actually sign
a contract saying the bank can get the entire house
if you die next month, which is they'll give you more money.
They'll give you more money if they get this more
favorable contract.
Anyway, so reverse mortgage has originally been very unpopular.
And even for the people who make a lot of sense for them
to do those, to get them, it's like elderly people
who are living very modestly, sometimes eating dog food,
in homes of great value.
So put that together, and the reverse mortgage
makes a great deal of sense.
This is another case, by the way,
where the regulatory response to people underusing
reverse mortgages has been to try to prevent
more reverse mortgages.
So government regulators generally
have the view that only a dummy would ever
want a reverse mortgage because you're losing a house.
And so you're just taking advantage of the elderly.
Rather, the more sensible view of it's just
stubborn elderly people who don't realize reverse mortgage
isn't right for them, which I would say
would be a more reasonable thing would be for regulators
to be trying to ram the reverse mortgages down people's
throats and sending them things saying,
unless you fill out these, if you write an essay explaining
why you don't want one, you get one.
And then it gets graded by someone
on your financial literacy.
So just make sure that you understand
what a great opportunity you're missing out on.
Probably some of it is people's kids
are mad that their parents get to live nicely
and they don't get to inherit a house.
Those are called bad kids.
Regretting this to your parents.
So this does bring me to my very favorite conversation
about my dad's economic illiteracy, reflective of it.
So this is like around 2005, 2006.
The homeless.
that my parents bought for $35,000 in 1972
became worth over $1 million.
This is all nominal.
But yeah, so in Los Angeles, during the housing bubble,
so the price of the house, it goes over $1 million.
And my dad, as usual, is angry about it.
So he's like, how many prankers have gone
to places that have gone completely crazy, Brian?
I'm like, well, why aren't you happy?
You own one of the houses that has gone way up.
And then he goes, what good does it do me?
Because I don't want to sell.
And I said, well, you could go and get a home equity
loan against the extra value and spend it on anything you want.
He goes, no, you can't.
You can only use that row of improvement.
I said, well, that might have been true in the 1950s.
But now you can spend it on anything you want.
And then it only takes about five seconds.
He goes, what would I spend it on?
I said, well, I don't know, you could give the money to me.
I don't know.
I don't know.
So really, it started off with a complaint that made no sense
and ended up with money does not help me anyway.
So it's like, are you serious?
There's really no winning in this conversation.
Does it mean that actually your dad has perfectly rational
purchasing preferences?
Because if he gets money, that means
he has reached perfect marginal utility on everything.
He has no idea what to do with the extra dollar.
It's even worse.
The story's got zero marginal utility,
marginal utility of additional consumption, which
almost describes him, actually.
Yeah, I mean, now, my confession here
is there is something very jerky about what I'm doing,
which is he still works very hard earning money.
And all of this, since he doesn't spend a dime on himself,
will go to his descendants.
But still, the story is just too good not to tell.
Some people can be angry about any possible economic
occurrence.
And my dad, getting mad that his house
was worth over a million dollars, was one of them.
OK, so there is a standard neoclassical explanation
of why the permanent income hypothesis fails.
And this says that it is due to what are called liquidity
constraints.
And there's totally something to this story.
So this says, look, suppose you're in medical school,
and you go to a bank and say, I'm a medical student.
I'm going to be a doctor pretty soon.
So I'd like $300,000 cash now.
How would most banks respond to this request?
No.
What collateral do you have?
Look at it.
Doctor material.
Right here, baby.
Right here.
Like these hands, that's my collateral.
So in general, banks would not be very interested in this.
And the reason is that it seems that despite the fact
you're lending to a doctor, still they
are skeptical that they will get paid back in anything like full
because it's an unsecured loan.
They don't know there's no way they could garage your wages
or anything else.
You could just declare bankruptcy.
And so they don't want to make the loan for that reason.
All right.
So any time that there is an issue with collateral,
then this can explain what's going on.
It's a good story for a lot of cases.
But the only cases where these work are, of course,
ones where people are genuinely liquidity constrained,
when it is a person without collateral who's trying to just
get an unsecured cash loan.
But once you've got decent collateral,
and again, the most obvious one in the modern economy
is home equity.
Home equity is some of the best collateral around.
You can use it to get really low interest loans, which
are even better than they seem because you can deduct all
that interest.
There's a little issue.
Technically, sometimes the interest
is only tax deductible if you say
it's being used for home improvement.
But how well does the IRS monitor
whether you're really using your loans for home improvement
or you say you're using them for home improvement?
I've never heard of any monitoring of any kind.
So you just say it's for home improvement,
and you're looking good.
All right.
So anyway, so once people have significant home equity,
then the story no longer makes much sense.
But even there, it's pretty easy to see significant deviations.
So if this is not a full explanation, then what is?
So usually, behavioral economists
come up with a different concept, separate concept
where they call debt aversion, which is people
dislike being in debt as such.
So if you could have two different portfolios,
they have the same value, but one of them
contains something called debt, and the other one doesn't.
Normal human beings prefer the portfolio
that doesn't have stuff called debt in it.
OK.
So what are some kinds of evidence for this debt aversion?
So one thing, so second mortgages
are generally taken out for home improvements,
not to smooth consumption.
There has been some relaxation of this, but even now,
that's still probably the main purpose.
And then here's one that's very striking and maybe relevant
to you guys.
We see people who prepay low home mortgage and student
loans.
So I can be like, my brother, he had a bunch of student loans
with 0% nominal interest rate.
He prepaid them.
Why would you ever prepay a student loan
with a 0% interest rate, 0% nominal interest rate,
negative real?
Why would anyone ever pay such a loan?
Prepay, prepay.
You might repay so that you don't go bankrupt
or something like that.
It might ruin your credit rating.
But why prepay?
Well, like he said, I'm going to be totally out of debt
in three years.
And what does that mean?
It means there will no longer be any asset
in my portfolio called debt.
Rather than be responsible about debt so much more
indoctrinated that debt's going to destroy you
and it's going to be the end of you,
are there any cultures where debt is not
this evil force in your life?
Well, even in our culture, there's
a list of exceptions, kinds of debt
that you're supposed to take on.
Like if there was someone who said I'm not going to buy a
house until I buy it for cash, what would their parents
probably tell them?
You're never going to buy a house.
Yes, you're crazy.
That's ridiculous.
In our world, like, no, no, you should buy a house.
Buy the house, boy.
And so student loans, a little bit more iffy, right?
So let's say, student loans, I don't know about that one.
Let's see.
So like societies where there's a more general positive view
overall.
So yeah.
Maybe in Switzerland that's what happens,
because nobody is an owner in Switzerland.
Like everybody's renting their house or whatever.
Nobody owns a house.
So maybe they just dislike being indebted and buying a house.
But then who owns the house?
Yeah.
Money.
Yes, they will.
So what the capitalists do.
Well, OK, you were the parent.
Capitalists own the house.
Landlords own the house.
People who bought it for cash get it.
It's a monopoly, man.
Yes.
So a part of the problem may be just like lack of knowledge,
like a knowledge problem, but then also like time as well.
Because like probably a combination
of people who know their investment opportunities
on a broad market, and then they also
know that it changes someone's own amount of time.
They probably overestimate the time.
I'm pretty sure if I told my brother that he
was making a mistake and explained it,
he would not have changed his behavior.
There's a lot of very stubborn people in the world.
If you go and you try to educate them about basic economics
and they just persist in their folly,
they won't walk out of movies even when they're not happy.
So I'm quite bolestful with some people.
So as I said, I would have stopped changing my oil.
A fellow grad student had just stopped by
and philanthropically mocked me.
But yes.
Well, I think it has to do too with availability bias.
A lot of people have a friend who
was drowning in credit card debt,
had taken out a whole mess of the alignment of credit,
and his house went down in value,
and the bank wanted to collect and he lost his house.
And so people are like, oh, well, I
have these negative anecdotal evidence about debt.
And so I'm just going to stay away from it.
Because it's like, if you're a toxicity expert,
you know some level of poison is not bad.
But if you don't know anything about poison,
you're like, oh, shit, I know this poison's bad in general.
So I'm just going to stay away from it.
Yeah.
Could be that.
Meaning it relates like, well, do you
understand what a 5% interest rate means?
It means that you have to pay 5% of the value of this.
So it seems like a pretty low level of knowledge
to be able to go and see, be able to know this amount,
nothing to worry about.
Again, the really hard one is you've
got a 0% interest rate.
What kind of level of understanding
is required to realize you don't want to pay that back early?
Seems like it's a really hard thing to not understand.
So again, the story here is just that people just
feel uncomfortable by the very idea of being in debt.
I am indebted to another.
Someone else owns me.
Something like that.
Was there a question back there?
Yeah.
I was going to ask if there's a case to be made
in paying a loan offer early.
I don't know, like raise your credit score,
give me a lower interest rate, the long run,
and then you can leave.
I mean, I don't know how you do it.
I've got no idea.
Well, it's complicated because actually one way
to have a bad credit score is to never have any debt.
Then you haven't shown that you ever pay anything back.
So really, like usual stories, you
want to be in this moderate zone of prudence,
where you show that you can borrow and then pay it back.
So if you ever want to do improve your credit score,
there is a list of things that you want to do.
But having no debt at all is not one of them.
You want to have a moderate level of debt
and a record of repayment.
And that's what's really good for your credit score.
I think more for just paying it off early.
That gives you a record score.
That can hurt your credit score.
Oh, that can hurt your credit score.
So yeah, it's just like the canceling credit card.
Yeah, so canceling credit cards that you don't use,
to understand the piece of advice.
So yeah, so if you prepay in a way that's
detrimental to lenders, then they might say, hey,
well, we don't want to do this.
So you have to be prepaying away, which is good for them.
Maybe you guys were running the other way around.
All right.
Now, the general lesson of all this stuff,
if you were to just go and listen to the moral lesson
that behavioral economists are trying to instill,
usually it's that people are too impatient
and people need to have more prudence and weight and so on.
But actually, all this stuff, the net aversion
is saying the opposite.
Saying that the problem is people would eat better off
if they borrowed more to live better today.
So again, going back to, there's a big difference
between the broad brush moralizing behavioral economics
and the actual detailed recommendations.
And again, it's the detailed recommendations
that people should really be focusing on.
Because the broad brush, where does that come from?
That comes from people are looking for reasons
to justify things that they already believe.
And of course, a normal view is that people
don't care enough about the future
and they are too present-oriented.
And yet, there are these counter examples
that do get discussed, but they aren't usually pointed out
as counter examples.
So I am here pointing them out as counter examples.
And again, the number of elderly people
who just save money for Lord knows what,
like stubbornly going and suffering.
It seems like if you want to just make
a list of serious social problems,
the need is a paternalistic help.
Sounds like a pretty big one.
How many people know elderly people
who keep going and doing hard menial labor for themselves?
Like doing like people in their 70s
who scrub their own floors, even though they have
plenty of money.
And they get hurt, and they may need
to go to the doctor to go and deal with the problems
they develop going and doing this stuff.
And if you just pry open your wallet and pay someone $50,
how hard is that?
And yet, there are a bunch of attitudes
that make it very hard for people to do this.
So you might want to go and try to undermine some of these.
So as a good son, I urge my parents
to spend more on themselves and say, look,
why don't you just go throw some money at the problem?
And you can trust me because it's really my money.
So this shows that I don't just have a PhD in economics.
I also have a financial interest against telling you
what I'm telling you.
But I'm still telling you.
They still don't listen to me, which
maybe is why I'm so comfortable giving this advice,
even though they may be a little bit of a tucker.
Is the odd preference for being paid in 12 installments
over nine function?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's another good one.
So again, people often want to tell a story
of I'm pre-committing to make sure that I don't
end up in total poverty.
Maybe you should also consider about the possibility
that you will wreck your body, and you
live in misery for the last 10 years of your life
because you hurt me.
Think about how bad it is to have a permanently injured knee.
Right?
And the odds that you might get this going and doing
is risky stuff.
It was OK when you were young.
Yes, my dad's going to turn 80, and he still does not only
hard physical labor.
He also goes and does things like trims his own tree
on a high ladder.
And when I say, you shouldn't do this,
he's like, you should see what I'll do when you're not around.
Ha!
Ha!
Who do you think you're getting the better of here?
Like, it's precisely people like you
who have a very active lifestyle who
should be very careful about doing anything that will prevent
you from ever having an active lifestyle again
for as long as you live.
Doesn't listen to me.
So I mean, there's kind of a counter-argument to that.
Because a lot of older people live really active lifestyles.
It's like you make the argument that you don't just
want to sit.
Yeah, I mean, like, look, there's low intensity stuff
where you're not risking your long-term health.
Yeah, if there's some optimal amount of exercise.
Yeah, yeah, so you get like low-level cardio,
just staying active, fine, but doing
things that are likely to lead to a broken bone
on an elderly person, or like tearing joints,
things like that, things that you'll probably never recover
from and where you just throw a little money at the problem,
and you don't have to do it anymore.
And again, it is a textbook case of efficiency
for someone who will never be able to walk again
if they fall to go and pay someone who can just stand up
and get back on the ladder again to do the job.
Like, what could be a clearer case of efficiency
than having 70-year-olds pay 20-year-olds to go up
on ladders to trim trees?
So clear, but.
I'll do it.
Yes.
Yes.
What you got?
All right.
So, yes.
I think part of the problem, even though it doesn't apply
with you and your parents, is that you have to have
the most important issue of all, right?
Right, right.
In general, it's just the word.
I noticed when you were talking about college students,
it just sounds like somebody who's
trying to sell you something.
Somebody who's trying to get you in debt and spend money.
So even as you were saying, there's
no reason for a med student not to live like a doctor,
as I close my eyes, this is the words of the used car salesman
who's trying to get me right now to borrow money for the car.
Well, maybe he's right.
I'm just a natural suspect.
And I feel like a lot of people would
be suspicious of the advice.
So it doesn't seem like the level of suspicion
is that much lower if it's your best friend, or your kid,
or somebody else.
Yeah, so actually, most of the pressure
I've ever been under to spend money
has come from my brother, who would always
make fun of me for being an over saver when I was young.
And he was right, actually, as it turns out.
I had a 95% savings rate when I was 10.
I spent next to nothing.
And my assets grew at a very high rate.
Although, when I look back, I say, wow,
I should have just been having more candy and toys.
And all of that privation for what?
I don't know.
Good stories.
Does he have a PhD in economics?
No, no, no.
Totally not.
Totally not.
Immediately, this was just a case of he was being impulsive.
But it turned out the impulsive thing was actually,
in this case, a better idea than the long-run planning thing.
Maybe if I didn't have that brother, then
I would have spent more money.
Part of it was, well, he spends his money.
So I'm going to be the good kid who doesn't spend money.
All right, so moving on.
Present discounted value diversification and risk premium.
So in a world of total certainty,
every asset has to sell for its present discounted value.
So remember present discounted values.
So remember those?
In a world of certainty, every asset will sell for that.
Because any asset that is selling for below its present
discounted value is an arbitrage opportunity to go and buy it.
Anything selling for more than its present discounted value
is an arbitrage opportunity to sell it short.
And so the only stable result is the equal
of present discounted value.
And if we've got risk-neutral agents,
so either everyone's risk-averse or the marginal person
is risk-averse, then actually this
holds under uncertainty.
Then everything sells for its expected present discounted
value.
If we've got either everyone risk-averse
or we've got at least the marginal agent risk-averse,
because again, if the marginal agent is risk-averse,
then any time something is selling above or below
the expected present discounted value,
they will either just buy it or sell it short.
And you say, oh, it's risky.
He's like, yeah, but I don't worry about risk.
I'm just neutral.
So no problem.
But once we've got enough risk-averse agents
that the marginal person isn't risk-averse,
the world is risk-averse.
So once we get to that world, which almost everyone thinks
is the actual world, so the marginal person
is actually risk-averse, then the present discounted value
is no longer the sole determinant of an asset's price.
It's always important, but it's no longer
the sole determinant.
Instead, what we expect is that things
are going to sell for their expected present discounted
value minus some risk discount.
Or we can also say that everything
earns the normal return plus a risk premium.
How can one asset sell for risk discount
but earn a risk premium?
Was that possible?
Well, this is exactly the same thing as, look,
how can bond prices go up when interest rates went down?
Not only is it possible, it's mathematically absolutely
required.
Remember, because if a bond has a face value of 100
and the price goes from 90 to 95,
so if it's face value of 100 and the price is initially 90,
then the interest rate is approximately 11%.
And if the price goes up to 95, then the interest rate
has now risen or fallen?
Fallen to about 5 and 1 1.
So you see the bond price went up.
And when that happens, the interest rate goes from about 11%
to about 5.5%.
And that is exactly 10 percent more likely to merchants
It's mathematically necessary that bond prices and interest rates move in opposite directions.
So again, one of the most commonly misunderstood things in the world.
People, once people really know it, then they act like no one could ever be confused about
it.
It's really easy to be confused about this.
Right?
I'll even go so far as to say it's counterintuitive.
So same idea here.
This here is looking at the price.
This here is looking at the rate of return.
So it makes sense that when the price, that if risk is bringing the price down, it's bringing
the rate of return up.
You all feel good about that?
Same thing here.
Notice, that price could have gone up because the riskiness changed.
So me saying this, these are not two different things.
These could be the numbers that reflect exactly this.
So it could be that riskiness goes down and then the price of the asset goes from 90 to
95.
So that means the risk just steps lower.
And then when that happens, then we're going from a normal return.
So let's see.
So yeah.
So let's see.
Yes.
And then because it's less risky, then that means that we are getting a smaller risk premium.
We're getting a smaller risk premium.
So then that means the rate of return will be lower.
Let's see.
I'm getting some confused faces here.
Let's see.
You anyway.
So just to repeat, bond is a face value of 100.
When it sells for 90, what is the interest rate that you're earning on that bond?
11%.
Roughly 11%.
And then suppose that it turns out there's new information, like the socialists lose
power so there's not going to be a default on the bonds.
In this case, it makes sense the price goes up to $95 because the bond is no longer as
risky.
That means there's a lower risk discount.
But at the same time, just as a matter of pure math, this means that the interest rate
has fallen because the price went up.
So you now earn less per year holding onto this asset because there's a smaller gap between
the current price and the maturity price.
All right.
Now, this whole thing, though, is complicated by another fact, which is that there are many
risky assets in the world.
So this would all be fine in a world where there's just one safe asset and one risky
asset.
But in the real world, how many assets are there again?
Like is it like three, four?
We've got seven.
Yeah, there's millions of assets.
There's millions of assets.
You own billions, really.
Like every house is an asset, right?
So a huge number of assets.
All right.
Okay.
And we go back to basic probability tells us that the average riskiness of a bundle
of different risks is going to be less than the average riskiness of the same dollar value
of a single risk.
So the average riskiness of only owning Microsoft stock, of only owning $1,000 of Microsoft
stock, is going to be higher than the riskiness of having $1 of 1,000 different stocks, $1
each of 1,000 different stocks, because those stocks do not all move in perfect synchronicity.
Whereas Microsoft stock all does move in perfect synchronicity.
It's all the same.
There might be a few different kinds of Microsoft stock, but you get the idea.
All right.
And what this means is that to some extent, you can diversify away risk.
So you can diversify it away.
So you can take a bunch of assets, every single one of which is risky, but then you get a
small amount of each of them, put them all together, and that bundle may not be very
risky at all.
All right.
And suppose you're a highly risk-averse agent, but then you're given this very safe bundle.
How do you feel about this very safe bundle as a risk-averse agent?
Pretty good.
It's like, well, it doesn't scare me very much, because it's $1 each of 1,000 different
things.
So what this means is that there's a pretty simple thing that you can do to make a risk-averse
person feel safe.
And once they feel safe, you don't need to go and pay much of a premium to get the middle
of the asset.
So the result of this, then, or the general implication, is you shouldn't expect this
diversifiable risk to earn a premium.
So when we say that there's a risk premium that you earn, or a great return, or there's
a risk discount of the price, that doesn't refer to this diversifiable risk, where you
can basically do a simple strategy and get away from it.
This would be like, suppose that there were a simple hat that you could wear that would
completely protect you against getting hurt on a construction site.
In that case, how much would you have to pay someone who was worried about having being
crushed?
You wouldn't have to pay them anything extra.
It's like, look, here's the hat.
Solves the problem.
It's like, OK, well, I'm really scared of having my head crushed, but given that the
hat prevents my head from being crushed, you don't have to pay me anything extra to be
here.
So you only would need to pay that person for the risk of the accident that the hat
doesn't protect him from.
And similarly, you only need to go and pay this risk premium, and you don't need to pay
the person who's worried about having their head crushed.
So you don't have to pay them anything extra to be here.
So you only would need to pay that person for the risk of the accident that the hat
doesn't protect him from.
So when you earn a premium for what's called undiversifiable risk.
And what does this mean?
Well, if the return on an asset positively correlates with the average market rate return.
So if the asset positively correlates with the average market rate return, then you should
expect a risk premium.
Because the average market rate return, that's what you can get.
That's what you get for diversification.
But in the real world, the problem is that even if you do just have $1 each in 1,000
different stocks, you still don't have real certainty, because the whole market sometimes
moves.
In fact, every day, the whole market moves.
Right now, you're still unlikely to be wiped out if you have $1 each in 1,000 different
stocks, whereas you might really be wiped out if you put all $1,000 in one stock.
So it's not as risky, but still, it's not anything like a perfect solution either.
Now the further this means that if you could find something that actually had a negative
correlation with the market interest rate, then it would actually pay more than its present
kind of value.
I don't think this actually works, but you might think of something like resume services.
It's like resume services you might think would negatively correlate with the market
rate.
I don't think it's actually true.
I think it was the first big market crash in 2007.
In the entire S&P 500, there was one stock that went up that day.
$499 went down, one went up.
You won't be able to guess it, but it will make perfect sense when you hear it.
The one stock that went up plus Campbell's Soup.
So Campbell's Soup went up that day.
Now I have no evidence this happens generally.
It's just a very memorable example.
But the story that it's almost impossible not to tell is people say, well, there's going
to be a lot of people who are going to be cutting back on luxury foods and eating Campbell's
Soup.
So Campbell's Soup may actually increase its production during this period, possibly.
All right.
Questions?
Questions?
All right.
So these are some basics.
So I just did my talk with Nassim Taleb.
And he often did it.
So this is where he gets kind of angry at stuff like this.
Or the idea of, well, you're giving people this false sense of security.
And I'm always thinking, well, you're going and complaining about people that know a lot
who should know a bit more.
But you've got to remember, there's like a giant 95% of people who don't even understand
this thing.
And you don't seem to talk about those people at all.
So before you get really mad at people who understand this but take it too far, you might
want to remember there's a bunch of people who don't even know that.
But I didn't want to get very mad at you.
Plus, I had better things to talk about than Nassim Taleb.
All right.
So questions?
Questions?
I'm happy.
All right.
So now mean variance efficiency.
All right.
Now, a popular simplifying assumption.
So it doesn't mean it's true, but popular and it's in it.
And it's simplifying.
People use it in finance.
Say people care about only two things.
They care about the meaning of consumption and they care about the variance of consumption.
All right.
So they don't care about, say, the kurtosis of consumption or anything like that.
All right.
So the idea is that the higher the mean and the lower the variance, the higher utility.
So utility goes up when the mean goes up and utility goes up when the variance goes down.
All right.
And what this means is that people are going to be selecting portfolios that are on a mean
variance budget constraint.
All right.
So if this is mean, this is variance, then the only way you're going to take it other
than to be indifferent.
So you think about a point of indifference.
It could be something like this.
Where if mean goes up and the variance goes up, you could be indifferent.
So start off like moderate mean, moderate variance, high mean, high variance.
So all of these are possibilities for your indifference.
And then you always want to be on one of the frontier at least.
There's never a reason to go and say, go to here.
There's no reason to be there.
So look, if you're going to be at that level of variance, why not go out to that high mean?
Or at least, if you're going to be that mean, why not go down to that low variance?
All right.
Now, if you work through the assumptions of a model where people only care about mean
and variance, then you get a classic equation in finance.
And the equation is this.
R bar A is equal to R naught plus sigma E over sigma E times R E bar minus R naught.
Parenthesis, this can be proven.
I'm not going to prove it.
You won't have to prove it.
It's in the next book.
All right, now, the translation makes a lot more sense than the equation probably.
So left hand side, the expected return on asset A.
It's all bar A.
The expected return on asset A is equal to the risk-free rate.
So R naught is the risk-free rate, which when people do empirical finance, usually it is
put in the 30-year treasury bill or something like that.
So that's, of course, you might say, that's not really certain, is it?
Some countries default.
But usually in practice, people say, oh, it's probably narrow.
I don't know.
Let's just figure.
Of course, if you're in Greece, then you might say, well, it's the EU debt, not Greek debt.
Which is risk-free.
All right, so equals the risk-free rate plus the difference.
Let's see, plus the difference between the average market rate, which is R bar E, and
the risk-free rate.
So that's what those terms represent.
So that is the expected rate of return on the whole market.
And that's, again, the risk-free rate.
And then times the ratio of the covariance of A's return on the average market rate
to the variance of the average market return.
Now, this thing here, you might recognize that as a regression coefficient.
Remember the formula for regression coefficients?
So covariance over variance.
Remember that one?
Remember this?
All right.
That's actually the coefficient you would get if you regress asset A's return on the
average market return.
So just imagine we get a data set where we get the return on one asset.
And then we also get the return on whatever stock index you like.
And then you just go and do that regression.
And that thing is the coefficient you'll get.
And remember, what Greek letter do we usually give for the regression coefficient?
Beta.
Beta.
Yeah, beta.
Right?
And that's why this is called the beta of the asset.
Have you ever heard, you know, the asset's beta?
Yes, it's beta.
That is the regression coefficient of that asset's return on the overall market rate
return.
Yeah, so you know, like you got a beta of.8, that says that when the market goes up
by one, this thing goes up by.8.
Make sense?
Right?
And then of course, if beta were zero, it would indicate that the thing had no correlation
at all with the market rate return.
Right?
And that works.
Yeah?
Okay.
All right.
So questions about formula?
So, again, it's a little complicated, but makes intuitive sense once you break the piece
of art.
And proving it's art, but we're not going to break it.
So, here we go.
We go and take our 10-minute break now.
And then we'll see.
We'll see.
I've still got homework for Amy.
Please.
Oh.
Louie, can you get the door?
All right.
Now, moving on to something else that bothers my dad, the efficient markets hypothesis.
All right.
Now, once you've got this formula for return on assets, it's pretty obvious what's got
to happen when new information comes along, which is that market prices have to adjust.
So they rise if there's good news, and they fall if there's bad news.
Why?
Because otherwise the return equation wouldn't be satisfied.
So if you got some good news and prices didn't change, this would mean that you're paying
the same amount for an asset that's expected to be better.
Right?
And if you can expect an asset to do better than originally, this means that it's earning
a higher return.
All right?
So it makes sense that when new news comes in, that prices will go up.
When good news comes in, prices go up.
When bad news comes in, prices go down.
Even if the good or bad events are far in the future, as long as you can see them coming,
or as long as the probabilities even have altered, that's enough.
All right.
Now, this seems super obvious until you reflect deeply on what it means for information to
arrive.
When does information arrive?
When does it arrive?
The answer is, oh, sorry.
I thought there was a hand going up.
So when does information arrive?
Like, here's when information arrives.
Yes, now.
All right.
Information arrives.
So we like, anyway.
Information often arrives long before anything changes.
And on the other hand, very often if you look at the front page of the newspaper, there's
no news in the newspaper.
Like, if you go and open up the newspaper, like, no Israeli-Palestinian deal reached
again.
Well, that's just what I expected would occur.
So the news is not news.
All right?
It needed to be true news.
It would not have to, it doesn't mean that it appears in a newspaper.
It would have to be something different from what was foreseeable before.
All right.
So like, you find out a firm is going to have to pay a million dollars ten years from now.
The price has to fall now.
You don't wait around for the actual bill to come.
The bill is not the news.
You know, it's the legal ruling.
Or maybe it's the judgment of legal experts that a ruling is likely to come out a certain
way.
Or maybe it's the judgment of the forensic accountants that when people find out about
what's going to happen with the numbers, that then the legal experts will say something.
All right.
And of course, this applies totally to probabilistic news.
So if there's like a 30% chance of a hurricane coming and then it goes to 40, it's a reason
for prices to go and change right away.
Right?
Even though the hurricane hasn't even begun yet.
But say, well, just the odds of a hurricane are bigger and that's going to change the
prices of everything.
All right.
Now, of course, this means the occurrence of any expected pattern is not news.
So when you think about how many headlines are just like, duh, of course.
Like, how is that even news?
Right?
So, like, although of course it gets even worse for headlines saying that it's not.
Right?
But anyway.
But normally, there's a lot of so-called news where it's like, you know, Trump gets nomination
when a day before, like, he had all the votes, everything was lined up.
Journalists will still consider this news, but economically it's not really news.
Right?
Anyway, of course, you might say, well, there's always a little bit of news.
Because there was always a chance that he could die of a heart attack.
All right.
All right.
Fine.
All right.
But then what really should be reflected in the market isn't that he got the nomination,
which is already well known, but that he didn't die of a heart attack, which was a very small
lingering probability.
It was always there.
Right?
But still not much.
Yeah.
So, like, what's the audience?
Like, if somebody operates under the probability that something will happen versus somebody
operating that it won't happen.
Right.
Right.
And the official answer to that is it all depends on the information held by the marginal
trader.
So, the marginal trader and what he knows is what's crucial.
Yes.
In fact, there's some kindergarteners who don't know where everything is news to them.
Like, whatever you say is like, what?
Or, of course, they might not even understand what the claim is.
They don't matter.
They're not buying or selling assets anyway.
It's the marginal trader, the marginal person, and what that person knows that's actually
crucial.
All right.
Now, there's a surprising implication out of all this, and that is that asset changes
should be totally unpredictable.
Asset changes should be totally unpredictable, or technically they should follow a random
walk, such as expected value, expected price at time t plus 1 equals the price at time
t.
And equations like this, this is known as the efficient markets hypothesis, EMH.
All right.
Okay.
So, EMH was widely denounced during the last recession, and of course was widely denounced
before that as well.
But there's two kinds of denouncers of the efficient markets hypothesis.
There's the denouncers who just say, it's complete total garbage.
There's nothing to it.
And they don't know what they're talking about.
And then there are the actual quants who criticize it, where if you strip away the adjectives
and just read the actual appearance, it's like, fine, it's 95% true, but I found a 5%
deviation, so.
All right, so give me 10, all right?
Right?
But now, again, of course, that 5% deviation might be the basis of getting really rich
in a world where other people don't know about it.
So, it's not totally trivial.
But at the same time, when quants go and step back and say, well, like, how true is the
efficient markets hypothesis compared to being completely wrong?
And that's where very normal for even someone who has a reputation for being a critic, like
Richard Thaler or Robert Shiller, to go and say, well, of course, obviously this.
But then if you read the book, the obviously part might only be three sentences in a book
of 300 pages, because they want to talk about the 5% deviation.
But still, every now and then, they will go and someone will say, so according to you,
there's like a get-rich-quick scheme I could do.
And they're like, no, there's not a get-rich-quick scheme.
There is a get a little bit richer if you have a whole, a very long time to go and act
on this contrarian strategy.
But, you know, that's, of course, pretty disappointing.
Right?
You know, the people who want to say it's totally wrong are normally people who want
to sell you a get-rich-quick scheme.
Go and pay me $1,000 a month for my newsletter and I will tell you information and I'll get
you rich.
Gee, why are you giving this information away for $1,000 a month in a newsletter?
Like, why don't you just keep it to yourself and get really rich?
Oh, well.
I'm already so rich I don't need any more of a myself.
I just want to help subscribers.
It's my goal.
You just need to find two subscribers yourself.
You just need to find two subscribers yourself.
And then they find two people.
And then they find two people.
Like something might be like, look,
I mean I only ask for $1,000 a month
just so you take me seriously.
I just want you to know that this is a serious matter.
So I mean, it's just $1,000 just to get you paying attention.
And then, I don't need the money.
Why would I?
So anyway, so even strong critics,
as long as they actually do math,
will admit that it performs very well in a lot of ways.
So it's not in the bin of theories
that are completely wrong, whatever people might sound
if they're just doing a sound bite.
So for example, it is very common for asset prices
to fall when firms announce good news.
And the efficient markets hypothesis
is a very clear explanation.
Why would prices fall when I announce profits?
Yes, because the market expected even better profits.
Why can the price go up when you announce losses?
Because the market expected worse losses.
This makes no sense in terms of a naive,
present-oriented model.
It makes great sense in terms of the efficient markets
hypothesis.
And my dad has repeatedly complained to me
about how good news came out, and the price went down.
Explain that.
Actually, it's a prediction of the standard model.
And yet, it really bugs him.
And now, anyway, so my dad is a very smart guy.
So that's something where we tell him that.
It's like, for that conversation, he's like, no,
it's OK, I get it.
But he doesn't retain it at all.
He gets angry again the next time it occurs.
And efficient markets hypothesis also
passes some surprising empirical tests.
For example, you cannot really predict annual returns
for the S&P 500 using early annual returns.
So I've tried this.
So you just put them in.
There is a standard view among a lot of investors
that it's either a good year to invest or a bad year to invest.
And the basic story seems to be, if there's
been a few good years in a row, then this
is going to be another good year.
And a few bad years, it's going to be another bad year.
There could be a turnaround.
But normally, it's based upon just saying,
well, things will keep going kind of the way
they've been going in this sort of short to medium run.
This is one of my dad's favorite ideas, is, is this a good year?
So there are good years, there are bad years.
And the data say there's just no such thing.
Now, it's so easy to believe this, though,
because any time you get two good or two good bad years
in a row, the theory is confirmed.
There's just a little problem.
What about when you have a good year and then a bad year,
a bad year and then a good year?
That throws off the whole correlation, right?
And again, the reason why we don't find anything
in the regression is because those two,
the patterns all bounce out.
And so in the end, it's just a blob of dots.
And yet, any time there's two good years in a row,
there's people saying, see, I told you so.
Last year was good, this year's good.
That's the way the world works.
Except when it doesn't, which is about half the time.
All right.
I mean, it wouldn't literally have
happened if when there's a turnaround, it's very sharp.
So it could actually be that 2 3rds of the time,
like it went up last year, it goes up again.
But if it splits from going up to going down, it crashes.
Then again, that would give you no, like a zero regression
coefficient.
And no, there's a whole industry of specialists
out there who do tell you whether it's
a good year or a bad year between investing.
And data say that they're just wrong.
As to whether they are mistaken or lying
is an interesting question.
So they could just be highly innumerate.
So what do you think about people who run astrology funds?
There are real astrology funds out there
who use astrology to break the stock market.
So do you think that they know that they are making stuff up?
Or do they drink their own Kool-Aid?
Or a little bit of each?
Sorry, I'm not a mind reader.
I do have a lot of trouble believing someone
could work in Wall Street and trade
on the basis of astrology.
But that could just be a failure of my imagination,
lack of empathy for other people.
And the Efficient Markets Hypothesis
has had great real world success in explaining
the rise of the index funds, which
is one of the most counterintuitive investment
opportunities in the world.
The idea of an index fund is we're
going to stop trying to beat the market.
We're going to stop trying to succeed.
We're giving up on success.
Instead, what we're going to do is just buy one share each
of everything in the S&P 500 and sit on it until we retire.
Until you want to sell.
That's the plan.
That's the whole idea of the index fund.
Just go and buy whatever the S&P 500 is,
or buy whatever some other index is.
Buy the Dow Jones, or buy the FTSE, or buy the DAX.
Just buy that and hold it.
And then how will you beat the market?
We won't.
We're not trying to.
We've given up on that.
It's like, well, why should I give you my money then?
Because you will do better than if you tried.
Right?
And boy, how can I do better?
How can I do worse if I try?
It's like, well, let's just do an experiment.
All right, you go try, and I won't.
And we'll see who has more money at the end.
And a lot of what's made index funds so successful
is just this demonstration.
Look, I'm going to buy it, and I'm going to beat you.
And you're going to be like, but I can hire the smartest
people in the world.
You're welcome to try.
Hire them all, for all I care.
I still think I'm going to beat you.
Now, an obvious reason for this would
be that you just burn up so much in the cost of hiring experts
that it just doesn't like that you just wind up
once not being worth it.
Although actually, at least in the US,
index funds have generally done better,
even on the gross return.
So never mind net, where you subtract out
the transactions costs or the fees.
Even on gross, it's very common for the S&P 500
to beat the gross of actively traded funds, which certainly
just seems to suggest that the active traders,
like they know less than nothing.
They actually have reversed their buoyance.
Well, actually, they put in a lot of effort,
and they managed to do something worse than just the most
obvious thing.
So again, this is counterintuitive,
because normally we think that you will do better if you try.
And again, this is another thing that
gets my dad very, very annoyed, is that he actually
does own index funds, and he knows
they're beating the market.
How can they beat the market?
They're not even trying.
And when I tell him, look, there's actually
good reason for it.
And then he'll understand it for a couple minutes,
but then next time I talk to him, he's angry again.
Why would you be angry that you're doing something
that is really easy and does better than people trying?
I don't know.
There's some kind of violation of the Puritan work ethic,
that you can beat the market by making no effort at all.
So anyway, Fish and Market's Analysis predicts this,
because it says that since the market is not predictable,
if you simply buy and hold a diverse portfolio,
you will do as well as anyone else,
but you'll save on transactions costs,
and so you'll actually do better.
And let's see, are there, say, probably more than one paper.
There's one paper a few years ago showing
that at least holding general investment strategy constant,
women do better than men, because women trade less.
Men are more likely to get the idea they know something
and then buy it by herself.
And then on average, they're wrong,
but they still lose the trading fees.
And the origin of these index funds,
so it does actually come out of academia,
where they, so let's see,
Princeton professor that I TA for, Bert Malkiel,
teamed up with an investment guy named John Boggle,
and they were both instrumental in Vanguard.
Not quite sure how, Malkiel at least was close
to the ground floor.
So Malkiel is mostly best known
for his random walk down Wall Street book.
But anyway, it's the idea of, well,
given that the market follows a random walk very closely,
why bother going and hiring any experts to go and pick stocks
when you can just go and buy and hold a simple index fund?
Right, and again, the idea was so counterintuitive at first
that they only, they started off with,
of course, 0% of the market.
It took them years even to get to like 5%.
I think now they're up to like 40, 45% of the market.
And of course, people who hold these funds,
probably most of them have no idea why it works.
All they know is it's fairly simple and other people do it,
and it does as well as the market, or better,
and the transaction fees are super low.
And while you're on the transaction fees being super
low, know that Vanguard is way, way lower
than Teacraft for exactly the same fund.
So George Mason bizarrely lets you use Vanguard
for some things, or he lets you choose between Vanguard
and Teacraft for some things, but you have
to do Teacraft for the others.
So this is a small difference.
For Vanguard, the fee is like 0.02%,
and for Teacraft, it's like 0.2%.
So by that, it's 10 times the difference,
and we're doing exactly the same thing.
All right.
And then as I said, when you look at net returns,
that is even more weird that index funds are not going,
are not even bigger than they are.
Because the asserts theory suggests
that it should be the net returns that equalize,
but so far, it looks more like the gross returns
that equalize.
Right now, many people pointed out quite properly
that if everyone did indexing, it wouldn't work anymore.
But we haven't gotten there yet.
Indexing had been around for 50 years,
and we're still slowly moving towards final equilibrium.
Like once it was 99% of people indexing,
then the few people that were around who would say,
you know what?
The hurricane's coming to Florida,
so I'm going to go and buy orange futures, which
no one else would be doing.
All the indexers would just be ignoring the weather.
So there'd be a few people who would continue
to be aware of the world who could then
have very low-hanging fruit, very easy ways of making money.
But we're not there yet.
We don't see this even close.
We don't have any concrete world of this.
All right, questions?
Everyone happy?
Everyone indexing already?
All right.
Yeah.
All right.
So despite the logic of the AMH, there
are some noted anomalies.
All right.
Some of the best publicized are so-called calendar effects.
And the best known one is the January effect, which
at least used to be super solid.
Now, the least in common view is the January effect
has finally gone away.
But it still lasted for decades.
So it's still worth talking about, even if it's gone
and doesn't help you anymore.
So Thaler goes over the evidence at the time.
Yeah, Jonathan?
Do you think part of the reason that it went away
is that this was published 35 years ago now?
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So something that people would say,
the industry would sometimes say is now the January effect's
happening in December or November.
And then eventually, it's like, well, we can't find it anymore.
But yeah, so that's pretty simple.
All right.
So anyway, so for the period that Richard Thaler
is talking about, so you've got an average New York Stock
Exchange monthly returns from February, December, 0.5%
per month, and for January, 3.5.
So seven times the average for one month.
That seems pretty good.
And looking more closely, seems like it's primarily
just from really high returns for small firms during January.
So it's a subset of the one month, one subset of firms
driving this enormous return.
And if it were just one country, it'd be easy to dismiss.
But so at least what Thaler's writing,
January effect's found in 15 out of 16 countries studied.
So again, that's pretty impressive.
So that's the big one that's been talked about.
And again, now, it may no longer exist.
But the fact that it was around for decades still gives one
pause.
What's the explanation for it?
So good question.
So if you read Thaler, and I believe
the chapter is assigned for the final exam and everything,
one popular story is something to do with tax law.
And a lot of people just want to go and sell stuff
right before, either right before or right after.
But again, I think what he said is actually
if you go and look at countries where they do or don't
have these tax incentives, you didn't actually
see much of a difference.
So that's wrong.
So then it's pretty hard to know.
My memory is Thaler doesn't have any good story.
It's like, well, you could either
sit around saying I won't believe it until you
have a good story, or you could just make some money going
and buying in January.
And it worked pretty well for a couple decades.
All right.
Now another calendar effect, which again is not as
devastating and harder to actually make money on it,
but it's called the weekend effect.
So when you go and leave money in the bank
over the weekend for three days, how many days worth of interest
do you earn?
Three.
Three days.
When you go and when the stock market closes over the weekend,
how much of an extra return do you get on Monday
when it opens up?
It seems like you only get one day instead of three days.
And that seems weird.
So if you hold debt, you get three days worth of interest
over the weekend.
So why don't you get the same for stocks?
But anyway, Monday returns don't seem especially high.
And again, that's weird.
You think there'd be arbitrage, like why not go and dump all?
So since debt pays triple over the weekend and stocks don't,
why not dump all your stocks right
before the end of the day Friday, put it all in bonds.
And then every morning, you get out of that extra interest,
buy stocks.
All right, now there is the problem of transactions costs,
which Thaler is happy to admit.
Even there, though, they're at the margin.
If you were planning on selling, why not arrange all your selling
to be at the end of the day of stocks,
sell all at the end of the day on February,
arrange all of your buying to be at the opening on Monday?
So that would seem like a good idea.
So Thaler, being one of the reasonable critics of EMH,
is willing to admit cases where transactions costs mess up
your opportunity to make money.
All right, but again, like he says,
well, look, still, we should see people going and timing
all of their sales and purchases around these things.
So basically, if you know that you're going to sell,
why not sell at the minute where it's going to be best for you?
If you know where you're going to buy,
why not buy at the minutes that are going to be best for you?
And yet, it seems like very few people actually do this.
All right, so let's see.
And then there's actually a series of papers on,
what is it?
So stock markets and seasonal affective disorder.
So at least there's a paper in the ER
saying that you can actually see that stock markets
around the world, so basically, like, so let's see.
So basically, stock prices go up in the northern hemisphere
during the summer and go down during May through July
and go down in the southern hemisphere.
And actually claiming that even if you
look at the city of the stock market,
that the amount of sunlight they're getting
seems to be affecting the price, which on the one hand,
is a little hard to believe because you think,
like, arbitrage should handle this.
But the pattern is actually pretty interesting.
I did meet one of the authors, and she
seemed to have a lot of details.
I haven't talked to anyone who disagrees with you,
but you've got a pretty good story anyway.
I seem to pass a bunch of surprising tests, like the
closer you are to the equator, the lower this is,
because then the less of a change in daylight
you're getting.
Because seasonal affective disorder
is all about people getting depressed by too much night.
Could be too depressed to arbitrage.
Yes, too depressed to arbitrage.
That astrology thing wasn't so crazy after all.
Well, the constant problem with astrology
is there isn't even a standard astrological prediction.
Seasonal affective disorder does have predictions
that are specific and so testable.
All right, now we come to one of my favorite ones,
a mean reversion.
So Fisher-Marcus hypothesis says that returns are unpredictable.
You can't use past returns to forecast future.
But there is a literature on mean reversion
saying that that is too hasty, and at least
for certain assets.
The fact that rates have been the thing,
the market's been going up a lot,
means that you should predict it will go down.
And the fact it's been going down
means it should go up.
Which, notice, is basically the exact opposite
of the normal theory.
The normal theory is like momentum.
Good things follow good, bad things follow bad.
Mean reversion is the opposite.
It says that you know how everything's been going great?
Expect bad stuff to happen.
You know how everything's been going poorly?
Expect good things to happen.
All right, yes?
Just sort of clarify, though, with mean reversion,
would it then, like if something goes up by a certain amount,
does it have to drop by that same exact amount?
Or just a significant amount?
Right.
Again, the way that you normally do it statistically
is just to see whether there is a statistically significant
tendency for higher average returns
in the past to actually have a negative sign.
But yeah, so it doesn't actually require that you
go back to a specific mean.
It just means that when you're above a historic mean,
you tend to go down.
And but again, like tendency can be quite slow.
So mean reversion is one of my favorites.
So when I was betting Tyler Cowen on the price of gasoline,
mean reversion was in my mind.
That's all I knew.
So I talked to James Hamilton, by many accounts,
the best empirical energy economist in the world.
And he totally believed in mean reversion.
And the argument got started because Tyler Cowen said
Julian Simon didn't know what he was talking about,
because the EMH rules out the idea
that natural resource prices tend to go back down
when they're high.
And I said, you know, Simon had 150 years of data on his side,
and you've got a theory.
So I'm going to go 150 years worth of data.
And yeah, so 10 years ago, when the price of gas
was really high historically, that's
when I went and bet that it would fall a lot.
And I won.
So of course, Tyler will say, like, this
doesn't prove anything.
I just got lucky.
Right?
But I mean, that really doesn't prove anything.
But that you would put no weight on it all seems kind of odd.
Right?
Again, especially when the actual,
like the standard view among people
know the data is gas is like petroleum in general
is mean reversion.
So again, as to why that might be,
so again, like we're talking about commodities.
The storage cost alone could give you mean reversion, right?
So again, like suppose that the price of something
is really high.
Right?
You might say, well, it's not possible it's going to go down,
because people knew it was going to go down.
And they would just sell off their whole stockpile.
And that would drive prices back down to the normal level.
All right?
But again, what if it's actually a big problem
to go and sell it off quickly?
For example, like to sell off petroleum really quickly
right now, suppose you knew that, like,
suppose you owned an oil well.
And you knew that next year the price of oil
would fall by 90%?
Would you actually be able to pump every drop out this year?
Probably pretty hard to pump every drop out this year.
So that kind of thing alone can give you some mean reversion.
If just the fact that the price is temporarily high,
is not enough to induce perfect arbitrage.
So, and then similarly,
it could be that it's hard,
so could be that you know that in 10 years,
there's going to be a lot of new oil discovered.
But that doesn't mean that you,
but you don't know where it's going to be.
So, it could be hard to know where the new oil is going to come from.
You can know in general on average it will be found without
this meaning that you can actually extract it right away.
So, there's a lot of possibilities like this.
And then, so for the S&P 500 is not so clear,
but at least there's other stock indices, maybe.
And then furthermore, if you go and look at say monthly returns on the S&P 500,
then you do see a bit of sign of mean reversion.
So, that means that if you are actually capable of trading at
a monthly level in a cost efficient way,
then you do have a little bit of room to go and profit from this knowledge.
All right. Okay. So, anyway.
So, Thaler actually is a pretty funny suggestion and he says,
the reason why mean reversion works is that there are systematic overreactions.
Systematic overreactions, right?
And this is similar.
So, James Hamilton actually,
he told me, you know why?
You know why there's mean reversion?
Because people in the industry don't believe in mean reversion.
So, imagine that you're in the patrolling industry,
and the price is really high and you think it's going to stay high forever.
What are you going to do?
Keep buying.
Keep buying and try to,
look the price is going to be still going to be $150 a barrel forever.
Let's go and find, find, like more wells,
get more wells, pump, pump, pump, go.
And then, what happens when a bunch of people think this way?
Mean reversion. So, and I say,
well, it's kind of against the facts.
It's a little hard to believe they're that dumb.
But, well, I don't know, what's your story?
But, anyway. So, but you know,
so, look at what you feel,
you could just be from frictions and adjustment frictions,
or as long as you just didn't have a cost-returns-to-scale technology.
Like if doubling production of oil this year would cost more,
would more than double the cost,
that would be a way in which you could get mean reversion from that.
Right? Because you could know full well that the price is going to go down this year,
but wouldn't, wouldn't convince you to go and double your production this year.
Because it would cost, because you could get it out,
you can get it out at a lower cost if you,
if you just do a more moderate amount in each year.
All right. Okay. So, anyway.
So, but you know, Thaler's story,
these past returns negatively forecast future returns,
because too many of you will believe the wrong thing of thinking that good pattern,
that good things just persist and go,
and go year after year. Yes, Louis?
Is not Austrian business cycle theory mean reversion in a way?
Is it mean reversion? I guess so.
It's kind of like a mean reversion story.
Yes, of course it's not the only mean reversion story.
There are many mean reversion stories.
Again, here's the thing. So, if you believed,
don't worry, Austrian business cycle theory is not the test,
but if you believe,
Not this test.
Yes, this test.
Not this test.
Right. Think about this.
Suppose that, first of all,
Austrian business cycle theory were true,
but all investors had rational expectations.
Then it's hard to understand why there'd be,
why there'd be any mean reversion in the stock market,
because everyone would see it coming.
Right. So, and then furthermore,
like if everybody knew that when things are going well,
this means they're going to go badly,
then again, it would seem like people would just cut back.
It's sort of the Austrian story is,
people just keep it like during a boom,
people not only invest,
but they do investments that the economists can foreseeably see,
can foresee are not going to work out,
but somehow the people in the industry don't.
So, even, so basically like,
in order for the usual Austrian business cycle story to work,
you need to add in some extra psychological story.
But then once you're willing to believe weird psychological stories,
there's so many weird psychological stories that you could believe.
So, why that one?
Right. Then it's like, let's be open to all of the weird psychological stories.
Yeah.
Actually, I don't know how relevant,
but wouldn't it be difficult then,
it's like even if you're expecting mean reversion,
wouldn't it be difficult to determine when it happens though?
Oh, sure. Investors don't like,
so for any one investor, that's a problem.
Yeah.
But as an investment strategy,
just saying, knowing that when things have been going up,
on average they go down,
it's really helpful to know that that's true rather than things are going up,
they keep going up. Right.
So, you don't need to say like,
so market timing in general,
like of course, the better your market timing knowledge is,
the better for you.
But just knowing what to expect next is helpful.
Right. So, that's useful.
That's by itself useful.
And again, something else that totally seems to work for mean reversion is exchange rates.
So, like when you see that the dollar is really strong,
the reasonable view is not that the dollar will stay strong for eternity.
The reasonable view is that you should head over to Europe and go and have
a nice vacation because it's not going to stay that strong forever.
Right. So, that's important,
more than the data. So, like exchange rates.
While again, they don't adjust as quickly as you might think still,
like there is enough mean reversion
where there really is such a thing as a good time to visit Europe.
Whereas, like a good year to buy stocks,
so basically S&P 500,
probably not such a thing as that.
All right. So, you only need to know one thing.
Right. If you only need to know one concept, then know that.
But if you want to know two,
then maybe add that one as a second one.
Now, that, but in general,
like if you are going to go and think of things,
things, and things have a pattern,
think of it as having a self-reversing pattern rather than a snowballing pattern,
which is not the normal thing.
Really, so there was index a while ago,
what called the dogs of the Dow,
where basically they just bought like the 10,
I think it was like the 10 worst performers in the Dow Jones,
and for a while that seemed to actually be yielding above normal returns.
Last time I checked, it wasn't working anymore,
which is of course a credit to that.
Right. Credit to a vision market,
I acknowledge that anything that seems to work,
work gets out, and then people bid up the price of the thing,
of the strategy that's working, and then it stops working.
See, is there a question? There. Yes.
So, the price will reverse to the fundamental value.
Is there any difference between mean reverse and fundamental value?
No, no. It's exactly the same idea.
That if you believe there's a fundamental value of something,
that you believe in mean reversion.
And again, the whole idea of the random walk is,
there is no such thing as a fundamental value.
It can like, wherever it is,
you should expect it to stay there forever.
It could go up even more,
it could go down, but you shouldn't be expected to go anywhere.
Right. Now, again, so when you're just mentioning like,
the Julian Simon stuff on commodity prices.
So, you like, you know, a variant on this is what's called random awkward drift,
where you say like, the expected price,
time equals one will equal the price of time t,
plus like, some drift term.
Right. And so, this could be something like,
like, like stocks or bonds,
where actually, they do tend to go up over time.
Right. So, it could be that you expect it to be whatever it was yesterday,
plus a little bit of gain,
a little bit of return. All right.
Now, for Julian Simon,
for, for natural resources,
he actually said, well, over the long run,
there's negative drift, but plus mean reversion on top.
So, both things. So, first of all,
over the long run, the price of net,
of commodities tends to fall by about one percent in real terms,
but also when it's temporarily high,
it tends to fall very rapidly, by comparison.
Yeah. So, I mean,
the fall that I got was even bigger than I was expecting,
but, so, let's see.
I think it was, it fell by about a third over,
over that decade. Yeah.
So, questions?
Students are very happy.
All right. Good.
Right. And when I did that,
that I was basically thinking, well,
the drift gives me a little bit,
and then the mean reversion gives me a lot.
Put those, put those two together,
and I'm going to, and, and just given how,
how historic, how historically high the price,
the price of oil was at that time.
So, I can't remember what the max was.
It's like 170 a barrel or something like that.
So, given how, how high the max was,
that like, we don't even,
we even like quite moderate mean reversion
will give us a big decline in the price.
All right. So, last topic,
a betting market anomalies.
So, remember, Robin Hanson,
betting markets, betting on terrorism,
betting on all kinds of horrible stuff,
you know, betting for finding profits,
betting for, betting for knowledge,
betting for knowledge. So, help
mankind understand the world by betting.
Right. And by setting up new bets.
So, betting markets are
a special kind of asset market,
where you buy something that pay,
that pays if an event happens,
and if it doesn't happen, it's worthless,
and you can look at the price to see what does
the market think about the probability.
All right. So, anyway, so all the same techniques
that have been applied to asset markets in general
have been applied to betting markets
specifically because betting markets are
just an asset, bets are just assets, really.
You know, a piece of paper that pays
$100 if the US unemployment is
above 6% in five years.
But that's an asset. It's a bet also.
Right. And we can go and bid on it.
And when you bid, you are basically making a bet.
All right. All right.
So, when you go and just look at
the empirical betting markets,
again, a lot of what you would expect to see is there.
So, efficient markets hypothesis
predicts a high correlation between
objective and subjective probabilities.
Right. So, we go and grab,
here we got market price,
and here we got observed frequency.
Then we are, then these are,
we're pretty close to the 45 degree line.
Not perfectly, but still,
like if the market's price of an asset is 0.5,
for something, you know, if it sells for 50 cents on it,
for something that pays a dollar,
then on average that happens about 50% of the time.
Right. So, you see how these are two different things.
One's price, one's frequency.
The price you see before it happens,
the frequency you tell them after they happen,
and then you go back and say,
how good were those prices?
How good were those prices?
Of course, this always means that for any one event,
it's either going to be worth zero or a dollar at the end.
And then people say, see,
the market is wrong no matter what the market said.
Yeah. So, if the market price was 80 cents,
and it happens, and they say, well,
it said 80, but actually it happened.
And if it doesn't happen, it said 80,
but it didn't happen. So,
there's a, either there's a 20 cent gap,
or there's an 80 cent gap.
Either way, markets were way off, right?
You know, like the fair standard,
and you have to collect a large enough number of events
where you can actually get a continuous number,
or whether it was, otherwise, of course,
every event after the fact, either happened or didn't.
So, it's not going to help you understand the world.
In fact, if you base your whole view about betting markets
based upon that, it will lead to great confusion.
So, you know, a lot of people after Brexit and Trump,
just said betting markets are worthless.
Why? Because two really high profile
betting markets were off.
Yeah, but what about all the ones that work?
Of course, you know, so look,
if betting markets say 15%,
then it should happen 15% of the time, right?
So, if things the market said were 85% likely never happened,
that would be a problem too.
All right.
Okay. So, a lot of the stuff is just what you expect.
Everything's fine.
The fission markets analysis is working.
But, as usual, when everything seems to be working about fine,
there are people who say, yeah, about,
but what about the exceptions?
What about the counter examples?
And here are some that have been talked about.
So, the best known counter example is called long shot bias.
Best known counter example to this is long shot bias.
All right.
And what long shot bias says is that expected returns,
specifically in horse racing, is where it's best studied,
although people will generalize it to others,
expected returns increase in the probability
of the horse winning.
So, a horse that has a 90% chance of winning,
you have a higher average payoff than for a horse
that has only a 10% chance of winning.
You may say, well, of course, because the 90% chance wins
90% of the time.
Yes, but you have to remember, what happens,
if the horse is expected to win, what happens to the payoffs
at the betting track?
They go down.
Right?
In fact, the way that racing markets work is normally what's
called paributral betting, where essentially you adjust the odds
so that you balance out the total amount of money bet.
So, if there's 10 times as much money bet on the favorite horse
as on the disfavorite horse,
then you basically set the odds at 10 to 1.
And that way, you will always be,
the track will always be able to pay.
Of course, in reality, these are tracked out of commission.
Right?
So, if people want to put $1,000 on the favored to win
and $100 on the disfavored to win,
then if you do 10 to 1 odds,
this means that if the disfavored horse wins,
you take the $1,000 and give it to the people
who bet on the disfavored horse.
And if the favored horse wins, you take the $100
and you spread it around all the people
that bet on the favored horse to win.
Right? So, that means the people that bet on the favored horse,
they only get, what would that be?
So, they get, you know, they get their,
they get back their initial money plus 10 cents.
Whereas the people bet on the disfavored horse win,
then they get back their money plus 10 times what they bet.
Okay. Now, why would this be?
Well, the folk wisdom at the betting track,
which Thaler is happy to relay,
is that there are a lot of people
who want to finish in the money, in the money.
Right? So, a lot of people want to make sure
that they leave with as much,
at least as much money as they arrived with.
All right.
Now, if you have lost a bunch of times during the day,
as you normally will, and you are down to the last few races,
what is the only, you know, you go and bet safe
on those last races,
you will still walk away having lost money.
So, what is your only hope for not having
to explain why you gambled away your whole paycheck?
Bet on the three-legged horse.
Yes. Bet on the three-legged horse.
And then, maybe you lose everything,
but maybe you go and then there's a small chance you win.
And there's a bunch of people who think this way,
who go and bet on the three-legged horse
to an even greater deal, like they pour that money in.
This goes and actually messes up the odds,
because there's too much money going
on that three-legged horse.
And that means that it puts the balance closer.
And then, since three-legged horses
on average really have very low chances of winning,
this means that even when you do win in the long shot,
you actually wind up getting a worse payoff on average
than if you bet on the safe horse.
So, it's a loss aversion story then?
Yeah, I mean, it is similar to loss aversion,
because it's a little bit more specific,
because there's this very specific thing of,
I want to make sure that I have greater than or equal
to the amount of money that I came with.
So, it's one where there's kind of an insensitivity
between losing everything and losing 90%.
But yeah, like I said.
So, the best time to bet on horses
is just bet on the healthy one at the end?
Yeah, yeah, bet on the safe horse at the end.
And I think Thaler actually has further documentation
in support of that.
Now, a key thing to remember is that
since the commission is substantial,
I think even Thaler will say,
you still on average lose money.
So, you have to actually enjoy being in the horse races,
or the thrill of betting, or something
to make it worthwhile.
There's one casino where actually the odds
are in the gambler's favor,
and that is, of course, the stock market.
So, that is the,
the way this is,
is a slogan, it seems like,
if I ran the stock exchange,
I would actually put this in front of,
like put this on our main webpage,
and I would carve it into the stock exchange,
and like, the New York Stock Exchange,
the casino where the odds are in your favor.
Exclamation point.
Right, and it seems like,
it seems like a really good slogan to me,
but I guess they know what they're doing,
so, I mean, I guess people don't wanna hear it's a casino,
because they think of casinos as places
where you lose money.
No, no, no, but it's like a casino except you make money.
Like, eh.
That sounds like a place where you lose money.
All right.
All right, and then another example of something similar
is in lottery betting.
All right, so there's, conventionalism says
lotteries are just a tax instrument.
All right, so someone goes and buys a lottery ticket,
and like, what an idiot.
Why would you ever do that
when you could say buy a share of Apple?
Something like that.
All right.
But Thaler points out there actually are ways
where you can get up to a positive expected return.
Right, and how so?
Well, there's a lot of people,
so they'll be like, if there's a lottery
where you're allowed to pick your number,
and again, if it's this kind of parimutuel betting
where the way that they handle out the payoffs
is that if a lot of people pick a number,
they have to split the payoff,
but if only one person picks the number,
then they get the whole payoff,
then there's a very simple strategy
for dramatically increasing your payoff,
and that is you just wanna pick unpopular numbers.
Right now, say, well, like, what is an unpopular number?
Well, again, so probably like superstitions
about like seven being unlucky and 13 being lucky.
That's one place to start,
and again, do you wanna pick lucky numbers
or unlucky numbers?
Unlucky numbers, you wanna pick the numbers
that your society believes send you to hell.
Those are the good numbers,
because your society's wrong, all right?
All that it leads to is earthly riches.
All right, but then other things,
there's a lot of people who do things
like betting their birthday.
So bet numbers that are not anybody's birthday.
Bet like 1332, and then, let's see,
right now, hardly anyone, but anybody else,
so like bet like 1332.01, right?
Because there's hardly anyone buying,
or actually, even back in, but now bet like 17.
There's no one girl that's buying lottery tickets,
and there's probably not too many people
consider a lottery ticket to be a good gift for,
it's a lottery ticket for your infant child,
with the dates being the kid's birthday.
I think that's pretty odd, so that's a good one.
All right, now, Thither goes on to say
that to actually have a good chance of making money,
you need to live 1,000 years,
so we're playing the strategy,
so don't get your hopes up too much,
but still, interesting that a lot of people,
these strategies do, can triple or quadruple,
or even, you expect your returns,
so out of all the people who do buy lottery tickets,
why don't they do this?
So you have a good idea.
All right, so questions about this?
Questions, yes?
Is there any evidence in betting markets
of people voting against upsetting outcomes
in order to smooth their consumption?
Let's say I would be really distressed
if Trump got reelected, so I bet on Trump,
so that either way, I'll get the money.
So if anything, I'd say the evidence
is the people bet on the outcomes they hope to happen
because they feel guilty if they bet on other stuff.
There's certainly a norm in sports
that if you're gonna bet, don't bet against your own team.
But Pete Rose got in trouble for this
because he bet against his own team.
Anyway, defenders will say there's no evidence
that he actually pulled his money.
punches or anything, but still.
It's hard to believe that there isn't something,
a little something going on.
But again, even if you're just a fan
where you have no actual ability to fight the outcome,
a lot of people feel bad about it.
Yeah, that would actually be very wise, right?
Is to say, well look, either I'll be rich
or I'll be ruled by somebody I like.
One of the two.
But there's some sense in which it's traitorous
to go and do this or even to admit there's a chance
that the other side could lose.
That's treason too, right?
Some of the sorts.
Certainly during a war, you don't wanna say,
look, I'm a proud patriot,
but we're totally gonna lose here.
Right, that's the only, no,
then you're not a proud patriot.
A proud patriot would be convinced
that Bulgaria can beat Russia.
Why?
Shut up, what I said.
They didn't have to predict that.
Yes.
Right.
All right.
So other questions about betting market anomalies?
I'm worried about this stuff.
All right.
Okay, so we now move on to the last topic.
One that's one of my favorites.
So economics and politics.
And of course, not just my favorite.
It is a traditional favorite of George Mason.
So George Mason first came on the map
of academic economics because of public choice.
So James Buchanan won the Nobel Prize in economics in 1986.
He brought his whole group a few years earlier.
So public choice is permanently in the DNA of GMU econ.
And in fact, all of George Mason in some sense
is at least believed by outsiders
to be accused by public choice,
even the departments that want nothing to do with it.
Yeah, so I probably mentioned Democracy and Change.
So book all about the incredible influence
of James Buchanan.
Many people know the facts,
like, well, was he that influential?
Like, I mean, he did supervise a lot of dissertations,
but still, that plus a Nobel Prize
doesn't really mean that you won't change voters' minds.
Probably Milton Friedman was a lot more influential.
But anyway, public choice is a primary research interest
of, say, half the faculty here.
At least it's one of the primary interests
of half the faculty.
And while George Mason is not the first place it happened,
it's the place where a lot of the most famous work occurred.
Right, so not just Buchanan,
Talek, co-author who died a couple years ago, right in.
All people, all good people believe
that he deserved a share of Buchanan, right?
Even though he did not, right?
And so, you know, Talek was great in many of his own ways.
All right, so let's just start with the basics.
All right, the Median Voter Theorem.
So let's start with a bunch of assumptions about democracy.
All these assumptions are unrealistic.
However, you might remember a little model
called perfect competition and how realistic
are the assumptions of perfect competition.
Also pretty iffy, most of them.
And yet, is the perfectly competitive model
totally true in every way?
Now, is it a useful model?
Yes, yes.
And the same goes for the Median Voter Model,
or so I will endeavor to convince you.
First, we gotta understand how the pieces of the model
fit together.
All right, so first assumption.
First assumption is that voter preferences are single peaked.
So this means that voters have an ideal point,
also go to bliss point, and the utility declines
monotonically as policy moves away from that ideal.
So think about whatever you think
the best policy in anything is,
this assumption just says that if you get more of that,
you know, you move in either direction,
so you can be more or less,
either way makes you less satisfied.
So if you think that government should spend
3% of its budget on education,
this means that if your government spending
goes up to 3.1, you get less satisfied,
3.2, even more, four, even less, 70, even less.
And similarly, if it goes down to 2.7,
less satisfied than three, 1.2, less satisfied than 2.7,
and so on.
Assumption seems super obvious,
but it's not that hard to come up with a counter-example
so Vladimir Lenin had a slogan
that he liked to repeat a lot,
and the slogan was, the worse the better,
the worse the better.
And what he meant by this is that
he wanted the czar to be as oppressive
and terrible as possible,
so the people would get more and more dissatisfied
leading to revolution, which would then lead to communism.
Ruled by Lenin.
All right, and what would be a terrible policy
and what would be a terrible outcome in Lenin's view?
Like a moderate socialist reformist regime,
get some power, constitutional monarchy,
things, everything's fine, and then no revolution,
and then he stays out of power forever.
So for Lenin, first choice is communist dictatorship,
second choice is czar's despotism,
and then third choice is some moderate, livable regime,
and that's the worst thing, all right?
Or another example, during the Vietnam War,
there were many people who said,
we shouldn't be there at all, but if we're there,
we should be there to win
and go over everything we got, right?
And that's one where if you line it up,
you'll see what they liked to do.
Aggressiveness, how to fight it.
And so that view is like either,
that's why it was so,
first choice is don't, right?
That's like zero, that's like one,
so first choice is don't.
Second choice is this,
and then worst possible thing is what we're doing,
fighting with unarmed tie behind our backs,
that's the worst possible thing, right?
So notice he's got two peeps, see?
And we're ruling this stuff out.
Okay, secondly, suppose we got a two-candidate election
or a two-party election, so really you just need two sides.
All right, so of course this makes a lot of sense
in two-party systems like the US,
although it's pretty easy to argue
that the same story basically works
in proportional representation systems
because normally in proportional representation systems,
you get two coalitions.
And normally, yeah, normally you don't get coalitions
of say the radical left and the radical right
joint forces against the center.
Normally the coalitions are with people
that are close to you.
But not in every case, but yeah,
so then sometimes, say Israel will be
a small religious party and some other group
that can't stay in them says we need three more votes,
so let's bring in these three weird rabbis
and the complete system, all right.
And then, so like, we're atheists,
they're rabbis, and they hate us, we hate them,
but fine, what do you guys want?
All right, and you want more money for your kibbutz?
Okay, fine, got it, now you'll have the rest of the time
to do whatever you say, good, all right.
But normally that's not how coalitions work.
And normally it's people who think of themselves
on the same side, so like in France,
socialists and communists will join forces,
right, something like that.
All right, so, and then, so the third assumption
is we got a winner takes all rule.
All right, and then if we're doing theory,
then we have to worry about an issue
that doesn't matter in the real world,
which is what happens if there's a tie.
So you're a theorist, you need to cover all your bases.
So we'll just assume that there's a tie, you flip a coin.
All right, and then we've got an assumption
about the motivation of the sides.
And simple story is they want to win, right,
but in particular that they want to win
more than everything else put together.
So they might have other values,
but if they have to give up everything else or lose,
they'll give up everything else.
So you can imagine that last election night,
the devil himself came down to Hillary and said,
I will flip the outcome of this election if,
and then he unrolls a fiery flaming contract.
And what would have to be in that contract
for her to tear it up and say, no, I won't do it?
All right, so, so, okay, like you're thinking,
right, well, before he did, you know, Romney's like,
well, you're gonna have to sacrifice all your sons.
Well, on the one hand,
I do love them, but wouldn't they want me to do it?
Don't they love their country enough
to want to see their father in charge?
We'll be united in eternity anyway.
So, yeah, well, all right, so you can see
the level of rationalization that a person might go through
when it really comes down to either make massive compromises
or lose power, right?
And Romney is a very nice example
because here's a guy who managed to change his mind
about abortion twice.
All right, so started off his pro-life
until he realized that he wanted
to be governor of Massachusetts.
And that would be bad from there.
And so then, well, yeah, it's not murder.
And then when he wanted to become a Republican candidate,
he realized, oh my God, I tried the first time around.
And never seemed to have the kind of mea culpa
you would expect of someone who changed his mind twice
about such a momentous issue.
To me, it's the kind of thing, like, if you believe it,
then it would seem like it would have to be
the main thing you think about all the time.
But again, this is just my failure
of empathy for other people.
No, not true.
All right, and then finally, the parties compete
by taking stands, and by the way,
it was just by taking a stand on the issue.
All right, so we just got one issue.
All right, all right, now, so assume
that the issue is left versus right.
It could be something else, but that's easy.
So if the issue is left versus right,
we start off by showing a distribution
of these bliss points, right, these ideal points.
So you have that distribution.
Usually, you make it a normal distribution,
but actually, these assumptions don't require that.
And it's perfectly fine to have, like, a double,
to have a bimodal distribution of references.
When a country has that, what are they often
on the verge of?
Civil war, yeah, so that's, well, not always,
so maybe the US would be up there,
but still, no one has the energy to fight, so.
It'll just be a Twitter war.
It's okay.
All right.
All right.
So, third quote, which is much better
for the children, anyway.
It'll last longer.
It's just a matter of, all right, anyway, you got that.
All right, so usually, you'd usually draw on as normal,
but it doesn't have to be.
All right, now, if, say, this is initially
the Democratic position, and this is initially
the Republican position, now, suppose you get hired
as a political strategist by the Republicans,
and they say, what is it that you want me to do?
Well, you can start off by saying, well, look,
right now, the Democrats get all those guys for sure.
How do we know?
Because preference was single peaked.
So notice, that assumption rules out the possibility
that there are, say, Green Party members
on the far left saying, we won't vote for you
because you're just another tool of the capitalists.
Instead, single peaked ensures that people always
choose the lesser of the two evils.
All right, and then similarly, the Republicans
get all of these people here in region three.
All right, so we're not gonna lose anyone
saying you're too soft on abortion.
Instead, everyone's saying, well, we see the less soft
on the other side, so that's good.
And then, we have this intermediate zone here, zone two.
All right, and these people actually
are totally up for grabs.
We don't even know that this guy will vote Republican
because we haven't assumed anything about the loss function.
So imagine this person's function crashes really quickly
when you get to right wing, but has a very flat slope
when you get more left wing.
So that's still single peaked, right?
And we haven't ruled that out, so it's conceivable
that guy votes for Republicans, given our assumptions.
So we don't really know what any of these people
actually do, right?
But still, as a political strategist,
you have a way that your candidate can advance.
Yes?
Move to the middle.
Yes, moderate, moderate, right?
Because when the Republican moderates,
zone three expands automatically because now
all of these people vote for you for sure.
And since we're in a single peak,
you know you haven't lost a single person in there.
You may have gained some people in there,
and you definitely didn't lose a single person in there.
So you get these people for sure,
and you get greater than, or equal to zero from there,
and so you increase your vote share by moderating.
And then similarly, what would a political strategist
advise the Democrats to tell them to do
when they're of electoral interest?
Moderate.
Moderate again.
So now the Democrats scoop up all these people
and they don't lose anybody.
All right.
And you can probably tell this is going.
If moderation always pays, then in equilibrium,
you must, both parties must be the same.
All right, so both parties must be the same.
So this gives us our first equilibrium condition.
In equilibrium, the Democratic platform
and the Republican platform must be the same.
All right, and this is called platform convergence.
All right.
Now, many people look at this and just say
this is a crazy conclusion.
Although, a lot of this depends upon two things.
First of all, whether you only know about American politics
in the current year, or whether you're aware
of the breadth of political differences
around the world and throughout history.
So if you were just doing a sampling
of all known civilizations ever, with humans,
all right, then how much do American Democrats
and Republicans in fact agree?
A lot.
Yeah, a lot.
99% is kind of a lie, but still,
there's all kinds of things where they never argue about them
because they agree.
So there's no debate about slavery,
and yet most societies run humanistary as slavery.
And then there's no debate about executing gays.
Lots of societies have done that.
Right, there's no debate about women's suffrage.
There's no debate about whether
to abolish government altogether.
No debate about whether,
which is no debate about whether
we should support our troops or not.
So all of these things, a lot of similarity.
And then furthermore, it's very important,
even at a point in time, to distinguish rhetoric from policy.
So if you only listen to the rhetoric,
then you would get the idea
that the two parties are extremely different.
But if you look at actual policy,
then you will often see, strangely,
one party continues the policies,
the other one they criticize very strongly.
So Democrats in 2008, it sounded like
they were gonna close the Gitmo camp,
and then it didn't get closed.
And when I pointed this out to a Democratic friend,
he says, look, that doesn't show anything,
it's just because the Republicans wouldn't let us move
those of the inmates to other prisons.
Like, I'm really confused.
I thought Gitmo was bad because people
were being held indefinitely without trial.
I didn't realize it was about the latitude and longitude
of the prison.
But, we like it like that.
So, that possibly shows my lack of understanding
of what people are arguing about.
Sorry.
Should there be a fifth assumption of 100% turnout?
Because if I were, hypothetically,
super right wing, and the Republicans moved to the left,
I would stay in quadrant three, I'd just stay home.
Right, right, yes, so the way,
here's the key thing is, it's not 100% turnout,
but it is implicitly assuming that turnout
does not depend upon the positions of the parties.
So, you could have 50% turnout, for example,
that'd be fine.
Or you could have 10% of the population
who's saying it's democracy and what we're anticipating.
This is only supposed to be the distribution
of preferences of voters.
Now, you're right if the distribution itself
depends upon the platforms, then there's a problem.
And in a more advanced course, we'd go over that.
That's right.
Okay, so, yeah.
Or let's see, so you can think about the policies
that Trump said he was against,
that in fact, not really have changed.
So, any favorite examples?
Yes, yeah.
So you didn't wanna go to war in Syria?
Yeah, so, good one.
Nice one to start.
Yeah, go for it.
Yeah, he hasn't really meaningfully changed the,
people that are in the room.
I'm sorry, I didn't hear that.
When he rules on people traveling into the,
well, he doesn't really mean it.
Yeah, yeah.
The super, yeah.
So, yeah, so, anyway, so that's another thing
to think about.
Now, again, none of this means
that conversions literally holds,
but it's easy to dismiss it without really thinking
about how much convergence there actually is, right?
Again, if you were to go and look at the reaction
that people had the day after the election,
and, so what do you think is going to occur?
And, or any other, so, if you were to just think about,
so what policy changes am I aware of
from, with my own two eyes?
So, it doesn't count if you read it in the newspaper
or on the internet.
Like, if you, like, if the only news,
if the only clinical knowledge you could gather
was from walking around the society and looking at stuff,
how would you even be able to tell who won the election?
Would it even be visibly obvious?
Again, of course, if you personally know someone
that's being deported, that is different.
Yes, but, but in general, the typical American
just wandering around the country looking at stuff,
can you see a difference even?
So, I don't really see one.
I remember there's like a list of,
regular, of new regulations that Trump is planning on
either repealing or just not enacting.
And, again, they were like so minor.
So, so, again, like, so Betsy DeVos,
big fight over her confirmation.
And, like, what is one of the top five regulations
that people are mad at her for stopping?
Well, there is a new regulation defining a credit hour
for colleges for purposes of determining eligibility
for student loans.
Right, and that, and anyway, so the new regulations
were gonna be in place which would specify that,
which would totally solve the problem
of use of student loans and everything, right?
Is if you define the credit hour.
So, it's time?
All right, so it is now time for student evaluations.
So, I will accuse myself to avoid
intimidating the electorate.
And, next class is next week.
I was sitting here thinking,
last class marks for my.
