is an idiot.
So anyone who continues to believe
that minimum wage causes unemployment is an idiot.
So as it turns out, if you apply Bayes' rule,
you will see that neither of these extreme conclusions
makes much sense.
And rather, the sensible view is that you
should move your view in the direction of just leading
the standard view, that minimum wage causes unemployment.
But depending upon how good you think
econometric studies are, and how confident you
were to begin with, you may not actually
end up with a view that's very different from the standard one.
So here is the general application of Bayes' rule.
So Probability Minimum Wage Causes Unemployment,
given the Karl Kruger findings, is equal to the probability
that you'll get the Karl Kruger findings
if minimum wage does cause unemployment times
the probability it causes unemployment
all over probability Karl Kruger findings.
As you get those, if min wage does cause unemployment,
the probability it causes unemployment plus the chance
that you get the Karl Kruger findings,
if minimum wage does not cause unemployment,
All that times the probability does not cost any money.
So I just picked some numbers, which
may seem plausible to me.
The numbers you pick may vary.
Remember, if we're dealing with basic and prior probabilities,
then who says what they should be?
Yes, you say what they should be for yourself.
Someone could go and say your prior probabilities are silly.
But nevertheless, the formula does not
give any explanation as to where they come from.
You just have to get them.
You say, well, how do I get them if I don't have them?
Well, fortunately, you already do.
So there's no issue where you don't already
have some opinion, even if it is something
as obscure as, will this substance I've never
encountered kill me?
Well, most of us assume that things we never encountered
won't suddenly kill us.
Once in a while, it turns out to be wrong.
But usually, if there is a new food in a room,
you don't run away in terror saying,
I have no proof that won't kill me.
But instead, your presumption is, well, if it's food,
if it's around humans, probably it is not immediately fatal.
So I should not run.
But you could, of course, be the paranoid person
who does assume the worst, a new food,
and thinks it will be fatal to ingest it.
Anyway, so the probabilities that I just picked out,
because they seem reasonable to me, is first of all,
probability that we get the current career findings
that the minimum wage does cause unemployment is 0.3.
So let's see.
So we get the set of another set of like this part.
We have this term here.
And actually, this term's the same here.
So I assign those equal to 0.3.
And again, the idea is that if the minimum wage does
cause unemployment, at least you would
expect it's more likely that you would get a result consistent
with that than not.
Seems reasonable.
So if the minimum wage really does cause unemployment,
and you do a high-quality empirical study,
you would think that it is more likely you will confirm
the truth than that you wouldn't.
You could imagine a perverse world
where whatever is true turns out to be disproven experimentally.
Like your experiments are controlled by Satan
or something, so he's always there to deceive you.
Whatever the real result is, you're like, ah, I don't care.
I'm going to push the results to make it the opposite of whatever
it seems to be.
I'll plant the world with fossils
to spread the lie about Musa or whatever.
All right, fine.
Normally, you would not think that, at least I wouldn't.
And then similarly, we have probability
that you get the Karl Kruger findings if it does not
cause unemployment.
So this term over here, let's say that's equal to 0.8.
Namely, that if the minimum wage doesn't cause unemployment,
then you would expect a good empirical study
to find that it doesn't cause unemployment.
Yes?
I was curious why I was doing that up to 1.
So here's the key thing is that these probabilities don't
have to because they're not complementarily probabilities.
So think about it this way.
Could be that, so for example, it
might be that there's an 80% chance
you get the Karl Kruger findings no matter what because the
methods are not informative.
And say, you might think it's just a correct process where
whatever the truth is, 80% chance
that they'll just say the minimum wage doesn't
cause unemployment.
So in general, there's no need for the probability
of A given B plus the probability of A given not B
to add up to 1.
So you think about the probability that you will.
Let's see, what would be a good example here that makes sense?
So the probability that you will go past the exam
if you drank tea the night before, so that might be 0.9.
And the probability that you will
pass the exam if you didn't drink tea the night before
might also be 0.9.
And that sums to 1.8.
And how can that be?
Because there's no reason for those two things to sum to 1.
Make sense?
But it's a very good question.
And now, there is a part that does have to sum to 1.
So probability of causes plus probability of not causes,
that does have to sum to 1.
And then, I'll let us go and put in some probabilities that
make sense to me.
So I would just say, before there's any empirical studies,
I just say 99% certain that the minimum wage
causes unemployment.
Because that intro textbook and how awesome it is.
And also, how someone said that a minimum price for asparagus
wouldn't cost surplus asparagus.
You'd be like, what?
Come on.
No way.
All right, and like, if someone just
started making up examples of products and saying, hey,
would that one cause a surplus?
Yes, that one would.
And that one.
How about a minimum price for markers?
Totally, that would cause a surplus of markers.
And paper.
Suddenly, all of these other things, then why not labor?
I don't know.
Doesn't seem like it would.
But then, of course, the probability doesn't.
That does have to equal 1 minus the probability it does.
So that will be 0.01.
And then, we can plug all these in.
So we get 0.3 times 0.99 over 0.3 times 0.99 plus 0.8 times
0.01.
And what do we come up with?
Well, we have the anodized bias, which is 97.4%
the minimum wage causes unemployment,
despite the Karger findings.
And again, how can we come up with so much confidence
in the orthodox result, given that the actual empirical study
said something else?
Well, there's two parts.
First of all, how confident were we to begin with?
And then secondly, how good are the methods?
So if the methods are not actually that great,
even at their best, and you just sit around thinking
about all the ways things could be messed up,
there's endless ways things could be messed up.
So you probably heard about the replication crisis
in psychology.
So there's a bunch of ways that things seem messed up
in psychology.
So economics has not been doing as badly.
But still, if you have actually been
involved in any empirical work, you're like, wow,
things could be really messed up.
Or if you ever tried to replicate anyone,
did anyone here ever have a replication project where you
just tried to go and match what somebody else did?
And you'll find problems there.
And then, of course, there are two senses of replication.
So you may have heard about John Lott's libel suit
against Steve Levitt.
I think it was Steve.
Yeah, I think it was Steve.
What was it?
It was the Levitt co-author.
Anyway, so I want to be careful here.
When you're talking about libel cases,
you better describe them accurately.
But in any case, the lawsuit involved
the definition of replication.
So someone, Lott sued someone who
said that his results did not replicate.
And Lott said they totally replicated.
Because to replicate means to get the same result if you
do exactly the same thing.
And the other guy said, no, by replicate,
I meant that if you just do another empirical study,
you'd get a different result.
And these are two senses.
But anyway, which sense is actually?
So there's the low bar of getting the very same result
if you do exactly the same thing.
But that's not all that impressive, is it?
Right?
Because you might then say, yeah, OK,
if I do it exactly the way, I get exactly the same result
you did.
You passed the very basic test.
But my real criticism is your methods were crummy.
And that would be a stronger criticism.
And that's something that you can always apply.
So what about for an experiment?
Even for an experiment, you can find problems
with an experiment.
So in experimental fields, people
would criticize, well, the experiment
wasn't really done very well.
Or you were sort of leading the witness.
Or it doesn't mean what you think it means.
So there's always problems.
All right, so questions about this
as a general approach to scientific inference?
Yes?
I mean, I guess in a sense, this isn't really
how we work as humans, right?
Ah, great question.
So we're going to talk about that a lot after the midterm,
because there's a lot of scientific work,
especially in psychology, but also in economics,
about whether people really do this in practice
or act as if they do.
We know they don't really do this,
because if I gave everyone here a test with a bunch of problems
like this, I bet a lot of people would blow a lot of the problems.
And you guys have way more training and familiarity
with this kind of stuff than almost any human.
So if you guys can't do it perfectly,
well, the odds of my mom's doing it.
That seems really unlikely.
But then there is the question, well,
maybe people act as if they're doing this,
at least when they're dealing with familiar problems,
things like this.
So we will come back to that.
But that is a key issue.
Now, the main thing you can say is, at minimum,
this is what we call a normative principle.
This is the way you should be updating your beliefs.
This is the way a reasonable person updates their beliefs.
Doesn't answer the question of where
does a reasonable person get beliefs
in the first place, which is probably also very important.
In fact, it's certainly also very important
to where you start.
I don't know if Don Boudreau did this explicitly
and dumbed it down for a debate, but he
made this argument in the debate about the minimum wage,
basically saying that we have 99% confidence in the theory.
And yes, there is countervailing evidence,
but it's just not strong enough to overcome the theory.
Right.
And also, the end view.
Karl Kruger's study is probably the most famous
in the history of minimum wage research.
There's a lot of other research.
More recent.
So we can sort of the way that Karl Kruger framed it as well,
there's all these low-level people in the past
who did this crummy stuff.
And now, we've got the good stuff.
But now, whenever you try that method and let 20 years pass,
there's going to be some other people saying, now, I've
got the really good stuff.
And your stuff is now down the memory hole
of stuff from the past.
It was really, can't be taken very seriously any longer.
But yeah.
All right.
So anyway, so do people update their beliefs
as if they knew these formulas?
So I can say is to some degree, at least.
So for example, people generally run away
when they appear to see a large fire.
You might say, well, why do they not
if there really is a large fire, given that there
appears to be a large fire?
It could just be a projected fire on a video screen
or something like that.
Could be just all kinds of possible ways
that people can try to confuse you.
You've been in some amusement parks
where they have fake fire and scary.
All right.
But still, normally, if there appears to be a large fire,
you do run in terror, as we predict.
How about when you hear that 10% of Americans
claim they've been abducted by aliens?
All right.
So I'm trying to remember if I ever actually double-checked
that the survey was even reasonable.
But suppose that you checked it out,
and it turned out to be true.
So first of all, would you get a little more confident
that alien abductions are happening?
Like you showed, about 10%.
That's quite a bit.
On the other hand, though, how skeptical
should you be about alien abductions in the first place?
There's a lot of pretty obvious questions about them.
Or you might have seen a cartoon.
I'm trying to remember if it was Zach Beener-Smith,
showing as smartphones came along,
the number of times they increased
the amount of alien abductions that had been videotaped
seems to have not really increased.
Whereas, there's other things that people
heard about where we have a lot more video of it
than we used to.
So there's that.
But in any case, it's the kind of thing where you say,
well, there's many arguments against alien abduction.
Like one of my favorite ones is, how come
each country has a different kind of alien that abducts it?
So if you listen to the testimony of alien abductions,
like the Swedes get abducted by a very different kind of alien
than the Americans get abducted by.
And it's like, all right, well, maybe
there's some kind of United Nations of aliens
where they said, OK, you guys get the Swedes.
OK, you get all them, and the Americans get the aliens.
But it does start to sound like a pretty crazy story.
I have no clear disproof that there's not
some kind of property rights assigned
to which humans get abducted by which species of alien.
But it does start to sound like a pretty silly theory.
Then when you read about shocking disaster stories
in the New York Times, you almost instantly believe them,
no matter how weird they are.
Whereas if it's the weekly world news,
anyone ever seen this newspaper?
It's the original and most awesome of all fake news.
Bat Boy.
And well, I think my favorite one
would be Bat Boy Elected Pope.
All right, so the New York Times did Bat Boy's Elected Pope.
I might check.
It was just really the New York Times.
But I don't think they would say that.
Bat Boy Elected Pope.
I remember so long.
September 11, 2001, I told Robin Hanson
that the World Trade Center has been destroyed.
And he looked at a watch to see if it was April 1.
It's like, hmm, it's not April 1.
So maybe I should believe this.
And then similarly, also, we generally
don't change our minds about the minimum wage
when astronomers discover a new galaxy,
because our view about the effects of minimum wage
are the same whether or not that galaxy exists.
So view of the minimum wage will raise unemployment given
if the galaxy does exist is equal to the probability
the minimum wage will raise unemployment if that galaxy
does not exist.
So we don't change our minds when something irrelevant pops
up.
Now, we update our beliefs in at least the general ballpark
of this equation, as fortunate, because we're
going to see is that game theory and information economics all
rely heavily upon this equation.
Now, after the midterm, we're going
to look at a lot of evidence that the equation's not
perfect and there's a bunch of problems.
And we're also going to talk a bit about people's priors
and how weird people's priors can be.
So of course, that's one where if you just
share the weird priors, then you say it's not weird.
It's weird that you doubt it.
It's weird that you don't believe the alien abduction
reports.
So I don't have any definitive answer there
other than the just incredulous look of, really?
You really believe the aliens?
Don't think of anything that you probably
would have thought of before yourself.
But anyway.
Now, one last application.
Suppose that you think you witness a zero probability
event.
What should you conclude according to Bayes' rule?
It's still a zero probability event.
What's that?
It's still a zero probability event.
Well, think about this.
Is there any chance at all that you have wrongly
thought that you wrongly concluded something
was a zero probability event?
There's even a one in a million chance
that you're wrong about that and you think you see one.
You say, oh my god, well, maybe I
was wrong to think it was a zero probability event.
If you work through the math, then you realize,
wow, given that I would update it all,
given that it occurs, it means that I was wrong
to assign a zero probability.
Because remember, if there's a 99% chance that something
is a zero probability, does it have a zero probability?
No, it doesn't have a zero probability.
It has a 99% chance that it's zero.
Because if there's a 1% chance that it's not zero,
and it's 1% chance that it's not zero,
what is 0.99 times 0 plus 0.01 times its other probability?
Must be, what is that?
Let's put it this way.
We got it.
Zero, and then less than, equal to, or greater than,
less than, or equal to 0.99 times 0, times 0,
plus 0.01 times some other probability.
So what do we know just based upon the nature of probability?
Is zero less than, equal to, or greater than, less than,
greater than, equal to, or less than that?
Yes, it must be.
So it must be less than that, strictly,
because if that is even one in a million,
then that thing is greater than zero.
And then you have no business assigning a zero probability
to it.
Now, after the midterm, we'll talk
about how human beings have a weird tendency
to actually assign zero probabilities in the real world.
And then, in fact, if you go and make
a graph of probabilities people assign,
and then the actual observed frequencies,
when people assign a 0% chance to something,
generally it has about a 20% chance of actually happening.
And similarly, if they assign 100% chance,
that means that that's like 80.
So there does seem to be a human tendency
to be overly free with the extreme probabilities, which
the simple interpretation is human beings are just wrong.
There's also just the one that human beings speak loosely
and enjoy hyperbole, and they're not serious.
So when people say it's certain, they
don't really mean it's certain.
So we'll talk about that more after the midterm.
All right, so questions about probability before we move on?
Do you want to pass in our homework?
Please do it during the break.
So I left a big margin of error, but apparently there's
a lot more people in this class than we're supposed to.
Does that explain why you have errors?
Yeah, I have the printed out.
Oh, you already have.
So anyone else who still need it?
Or I guess you can have your second copy after all.
Oh, one link.
Yeah, I printed it out.
Oh, OK.
So someone, let's see.
OK, all right.
All right, now we move into a subject
that I was forced to spend six weeks in graduate school on,
and we're going to do it in one week.
But we're only going to learn the part that you might
actually want to know, rather than the additional five
weeks' work, which I don't think we're worth,
which I think almost nobody wants to know.
So you see, this is a historically very important
area, but the amount of actual new research being done
in this area is so thin, there's hardly anyone does it.
It's what we call a mature research area,
or you would also think of it as just a dead research area,
where almost everything that people can think of
has been done, and some people have moved on.
But hundreds of people made their careers on this,
received very nice upper middle class incomes,
and dream jobs for life.
So we're doing minor tweaks on what we're going to do today.
All right, but we can't do that, nor would you want to,
I don't think.
But not to dissuade you, but afterwards at the end,
you may say this is the best thing you've ever
read in economics.
But anyway, you do need to know it, whether or not
you find it very interesting.
So I try to make it as interesting as it possibly
can be.
General equilibrium.
All right, so to start it.
So as you know, economists usually think about actors
as maximizing something, maximizing utility,
maximizing profits, maximizing.
analyzing votes, right?
But only very rarely do we analyze individuals
in isolation because it's pretty boring
to analyze one person in isolation.
Instead, social scientists usually want to think
about questions that involve more than one person.
So usually social scientists try to look at problems
where more than one person is involved.
Some theorists will just go and do,
spend their whole lives doing individual utility
maximization for Robinson Crusoe by himself,
but that's rare.
All right, now the problem is once you bring in
more than one person, the questions become
analytically challenging, which means it's really hard
to get a definite answer, especially to the satisfaction
of a very finicky mathematician.
All right, now think about this.
When one person plays against nature,
then the action's one-sided, right?
So you're not worried that nature is gonna start doing
different and weird things because you have
changed your behavior.
So we often think about once when I was,
I was 18 years old and I went with some friends
to Yosemite National Park and we saw some crawfish
or something like crawfish in the water
and we're trying to go and fish them in order to eat them
and then you would go and put a net
and the crawfish would just flip their claws back
and they could easily get rid of a net.
And then they, would this work for about five minutes
for the crawfish?
And then we said, what if we go and put the net behind them?
And then they flip when you scare them
and they flip right into the net.
And we did this and we caught them all.
All right, and they didn't start communicating.
See, wait, wait, no, no, reverse the flipping
or don't use the standard evolved tactic
because they're too smart.
We got to change what we're doing.
What if none of them said, right, look,
let's coordinate and just attack them.
Like I bet if we would just go and injure the small toe
of one of them, they would run away and never come back.
Instead, we just kept doing the same strategy
and they all died.
All right, and that's how nature usually works.
Once you figure out what's going on with nature,
you just take advantage of it.
Nature usually just keeps doing the same old thing.
All right, now, this is oversimplified to some extent.
So if you remember the first Jurassic Park movie
where the velociraptors figure out
how to open up a door handle and they're like, ah.
All right, all right, so you have seen animals
figuring stuff out at some point, right?
But still, there's a pretty narrow range
of what the animals are gonna start doing.
Like no one thinks maybe wolves and rabbits
will join forces against man or something like that.
Like that sounds ridiculous, and it is.
That's not going to happen.
All right, that is man versus nature.
But man versus man, man versus other rational actors,
that's where things become much more complicated
because there we see all kinds of evidence
that you change your behavior
and then they change their behavior
and you change your behavior back and so on, right?
Like if you know anything about the history of World War I,
they're very surprised by what happens at first
when machine guns go and completely change the strategy.
So you're like, wow, one guy with a machine gun
can kill a hundred guys who come charging him.
So why don't we go and try and just get around that guy,
but then have both sides start trying
to get around each other and then the trenches
just stretch, stretch hundreds of miles.
And then they're like, huh, well,
now we're in this new situation
and they sit there trying to figure it out.
How about we build a tank?
And then tanks wind up becoming important at the end.
And then World War II, everything changes all over again.
The tanks have gotten way better
and then you have a complete reversal.
There's hardly any trench warfare in World War II
and then instead you've got Glitz Creek, so on.
So there is these constant changes
as one side adapts to a strategy,
which then spurs a further adaptation
of that strategy and so on.
Well, have you ever heard about a professor
going to try to stop cheating?
So students change the way that they're cheating
and then the professor tries to stop that in another way.
George Mason policy bizarrely says
that I'm supposed to tell you
how I plan to detect cheating.
That's the official policy.
And wow, all right.
So why did someone make that as a policy?
And it seems like they basically want,
everyone would want to maintain the facade
that cheating is discouraged
while also coming with a system
that ensures that cheating is never detected.
Just like my junior high had a policy
where if there's a fight, all participants are suspended.
Even if you were simply beaten up,
you would show up there and like all of you
would have been beaten up and they say,
well, sorry, we suspend all parties to a fight.
Right, and I say, well, that's a really dumb rule.
No, it's super clever.
If your goal is to be always be able to say,
I had no idea there's any violence in my school.
To the best of my knowledge, there's no violence of any kind
which is a great thing for a principal to be able to say.
To the best of my knowledge,
there have been no violent incidents the entire year
because we have a rule that punishes
anyone who tells us about them.
All right.
All right.
So anyway, so given the complexity
of these strategic actions,
economists have focused a tremendous amount,
you know, hundreds of careers on one very easy case.
What is this case?
Well, the idea is to say,
let's say not only do we have more than one agent,
let's assume that we have lots of agents,
lots and lots of agents.
So many agents that no one worries
that their behavior will change anyone else's behavior.
All right, and there are many examples
of this kind of thinking that use the real world.
Has anyone ever gone to buy a can of corn
at the grocery store and then you get one can,
you're about ready to get another can,
and say, wait a second, if I buy a second can,
that might raise the price of corn on the first can.
So I better change my behavior now.
All right, have you ever worried
that you might change the price
of the grocery store with your purchase?
This is not the kind of thing that people generally consider.
How about if you ever bought stock
and you say, well, I better not buy that much
or else the price might go up.
All right, again, not the usual thing
that people have in mind.
Of course, there are some people,
if you were a big player in these markets,
you might have these ideas,
but generally you don't think about that.
Or here's another one.
If you've ever been on the freeway,
it's like, well, if I cut off that other guy
through aggressive driving,
this might, through a chain reaction,
lead to a general degradation of driving quality,
and then I'll be suffering as a result of my rude driving.
Has anyone ever been worried that you cut one person off
and this will lead to any kind of observable change
in your life ever again?
I have had a few people who believe this story
and they've said, well, I always drive
in the same place at the same time,
so I think there's a cluster of us
and it's not like a macro driving culture,
it's a tiny little micro culture of driving,
so I could be messing up the driving noticeably
in my little area of the world.
All right, I guess that could be true,
but it still seems very far-fetched.
All right, or you could sit around thinking,
if I'm a bad breaker-upper when I date,
could this lead to a general decline
in the quality of breakups
and eventually someone will break my heart
as I broke this person's heart?
All right, so these are all cases
where you probably have simply disregarded
any strategic impact,
and it's not because there isn't any strategy going on,
because you're such a small player in all of these situations
that you are not going to be changing
what other people are doing in any noticeable way.
All right, now, an interesting result
out of this kind of reasoning,
I'm thinking there's so many players
that I'm not gonna go there,
no one is gonna bother responding
to me personally strategically.
That's the key assumption,
that though, sure, we're all strategizing,
but I'm not gonna go and change the strategies of the world.
Just one person here.
Yeah, sure, the world's strategies depend upon
the world overall and the world's strategies,
but it doesn't depend upon little old me.
All right, now, the interesting results
that we're going to see is once you make the problem
easy in this way, by imposing the assumption
that everyone thinks that they have no effect
on the aggregate outcome,
then you can add on tons of other complexity
and still get a definite answer.
So you have this one clarifying,
simplifying, cleanup assumption
that every person knows that they are irrelevant.
And once you add on that,
you can make it complex in so many other ways
and you can still get a definite answer.
So when you analyze complex economies
or in general any kind of complex
strategic interaction this way,
we call it general equilibrium theory.
And whatever the result that comes out of our assumptions,
we call that a general equilibrium.
We call that a general equilibrium.
All right, so we're gonna start
with a really simple example.
And it's so simple that you're gonna feel
like you've done it before.
And then I'm gonna say, but wait,
yes, you almost did it before,
but there's one thing you didn't do
and that's the last thing that we're gonna do
that turns our simple, boring partial equilibrium theory
into an incredible, sophisticated general equilibrium theory.
All right, so suppose that we have a number of consumers,
I, and again, just to make everything nice
and simple at first, we're going to see
how complicated you can make it,
and the answer is very.
Awesome, suppose we got I consumers,
they got identical preferences
and identical endowments,
and there's only two goods in the economy.
So the two goods are X and Y,
everyone has the same utility function,
which is gonna be equal to A times the log of X
plus B times the log of Y,
and A plus B, my assumption equals one.
All right, and then these actors make exchanges,
they make exchanges in markets
where every single person knows
that they personally have no effect on prices.
So everyone knows that they personally
have no effect on prices.
So what's going to happen?
Well, since everyone is identical,
everyone has identical preferences,
identical endowments,
the only stable equilibrium is gonna be one
where the prices are just at the point
that lead people to not wanna buy or sell anything.
But you're thinking about this,
if the price of X were really low,
everyone would wanna go and buy a lot of X,
and there wouldn't be enough X to go around.
And if the price of Y were really low,
then everyone would wanna go and buy a lot of Y,
and there wouldn't be enough Y to go around.
So the only equilibrium that makes the world stable
is one where the amount of X that people start with
is the amount that they want to end up with.
All right, so is that obvious?
It's not obvious because how much X you want
depends on what prices.
A low price of X, you want a lot of X.
A high price of X, you wanna have less X.
So if there's a low price of X, you wanna buy it,
a high price of X, you wanna sell it.
All right, and what is it gonna take
to make this world stable?
We're gonna need to have the price of X
and the price of Y just right, just right
so that people are content with where they started.
And why do they have to be content with where they started?
Because we assumed everyone starts
with identical preferences and endowments.
So this is gonna be a world where nobody wants,
where nobody in the end wants to trade things.
You think that's kind of weird economy?
Yeah, it's a weird economy, of course.
We've decided it to be weird to prove a point,
and then we will complicate it to make it more reasonable.
All right, all right, so anyway,
so the situation is saying it will only, at price,
induce everyone to consume their initial endowments.
So a formula we can do is this.
So we can substitute out for Y by noting
that Y is gonna be equal to your total income
minus the price of X times the quantity of X that you buy,
all of it over the price of Y.
And this is just from the budget constraints.
So you see, we can go and multiply both sides by PY,
and we have PY times X is equal to income minus PX times X.
We can then put that over, we can say your income
is equal to the price of X times the amount of X
that you start out with plus the price of Y
times the amount of Y that you start out with.
Okay, all right, so, and then in a commodity economy,
your income is just going to be equal to
price of X times X bar.
So whenever we put a bar over something,
it indicates an initial endowment.
Yes, the amount that you start with.
So we have PX times X bar plus BY times Y bar.
Oh yeah, so this here is,
it needs to have an equilibrium,
and this is just what your income's going to be.
All right, okay, so we can go and plug all of this in
to here, right, and then we're gonna see
the agents are gonna maximize A times the log of X
plus B times the log of,
and then we substitute out for everything.
So we can substitute income into there,
and then put Y into there,
and then we get this equation here.
All right, and then we differentiate, right,
and when you differentiate,
we learn that the amount of X that you want
is gonna be equal to A over B times PY over PX times Y,
and then, since there's only two things
to do with your income,
there's never any reason not to spend this, right?
It's a very simple world, there's only two things to do.
So you might.
So it's not partial with respect to X, so.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, that's right.
All right, so agents are gonna consume all their income,
so you might remember working with this utility function
where you get the result that you're going to spend,
let's see, so that your consumption of X
will be equal to A times your income over the price of X,
and the amount of Y they consume
will be equal to B times their income over the price of Y.
So I remember with this kind of utility function,
this is the constant income fractions result.
You spend a constant fraction of your income on X,
a constant fraction of it on Y.
All right, now so far, this probably looks really simple,
but so far, all we're doing is individual optimization.
So far, all we've done is the usual,
maximize your own utility, give it some prices.
But the general equilibrium result comes
when we say, wait a second,
if the whole world is full of people who are doing this,
then what has to happen for all of these people
to be simultaneously satisfied with what they've got, right?
And the answer is, we need to just go
and set consumption of X equal to X bar,
consumption of Y is equal to Y bar,
and then we go and work it through,
and we get the market equilibrium,
which is that the price of X over the price of Y
will be equal to A over B times Y bar over X bar.
All right, and that is the general equilibrium result.
So notice, now we're no longer describing what one person does.
We're describing what the market outcome is.
So all we did is we started off with the assumption
everybody's got this utility function,
everyone's got the same endowments,
and then what is the only price
that is consistent with everyone maximizing?
How can we get everyone to be simultaneously content?
And yes?
So, the general equilibrium is maximize the total utility?
So, well, each individual is maximizing his own utility.
Each individual maximizes that function for himself.
And then each individual wants to go and do this,
but then, since everyone has the same preferences
and everyone has the same endowments,
in equilibrium, nobody wants to trade.
So that's how we know that,
that in equilibrium, everyone is going to consume
their initial endowments of X and Y,
and then this is the price that convinces people,
that persuades them that is just what I want to do.
I don't want to buy any X, I don't want to buy any Y,
I don't want to sell any X, I don't want to sell any Y,
I just want to stick with what I've got at that price.
And that is the price that just leaves me saying
everything was fine the way it started.
And any other price would make people say,
no, things are not fine the way they started,
I either want to sell X or I want to sell Y,
and if everyone's identical,
then everyone will want to do the same thing.
Can you have an equilibrium where everyone wants to sell X?
No.
Can you have one where everyone wants to sell Y?
No, that doesn't work.
That's not an equilibrium, because who would you sell it to?
Other people who also don't want it?
No, so this is the price vector that persuades people
to stick with what they started with, right?
And intuitively this makes a lot of sense.
Because intuitively this says that if people like X more,
remember this is the original utility function here?
So remember, high A means that you really like X.
High B means you really like Y.
So this says that if you have a high A,
that if people in your society have a high A,
then the price of X will be high.
If people have a high B, the price of X will be low.
Right, so if people care more about good Y,
as indicated by a high B,
then that means that X will be cheaper.
Similarly, this says if the initial endowment of Y
starts up high, what does that do to the price of X?
There's tons of Y going around.
Well, intuitively, first of all,
not even looking at the equation,
if you got an economy where there's two goods
and there's tons of one good,
will that good be cheap or expensive?
Cheap, right?
If there's tons of one good and not so much the other,
then the good where there's lots of,
the abundant good will be cheap.
Just like water, a penny a gallon
if you get it from the tap, roughly.
Not if you buy it from the store,
but if you buy it from the tap,
then you're like a penny a gallon.
Right, so there's lots of Y floating around
that the price of X will be high relative to Y.
And if there's lots of X floating around,
then the price of X will be low relative to Y.
So this equation does intuitively make sense.
Anyway, it comes out of this problem.
And again, what is the innovation
of general equilibrium theory?
The innovation is saying,
all right, now that we know what every individual will do,
what will society do?
And say, well, how can you make that leap
from what every individual will do
to something to what society will do?
The answer is, we make the leap by assuming
that no one considers the effect of their behavior
on anyone else's behavior.
And as long as you do that, then we get an answer.
All right, so questions about what we've done here?
So the general equilibrium theory
was built up on the assumption that we assume
the market already equated us.
Everybody start off, like, you know,
like maximize their utilities.
Yeah, well, certainly it assumes
everyone maximizes their utility, yes.
Right.
Although, of course, in a sense, you might say,
well, of course, everyone maximizes utility.
What else would they do?
Yeah.
Because you would do it like, you know,
so you can say, like, did Williams talk to you
about how all utility function does
is just state people's rankings of what they would do
if you had choices.
This is, it just summarizes all,
summarizes what you would do given every possible situation.
Yeah.
In the formulas on the top right corner of the board,
right, that is just like, you know,
we want to, like, we just want to find a relationship
between, like, price of X and price of Y,
in case, like, with the original income, right?
Well, but there's more going on,
namely, like, we've added on this assumption
that everyone optimizes ignoring what everybody else does.
And then we just go and look,
say, what has to happen if that's true?
And in this problem, that's the only thing that can happen
if that assumption is true.
Sure, sure.
All right.
Okay.
All right, now, what happens
when we make things more interesting
is this was a really boring market.
In fact, this is possibly the most boring market
of all time.
It's the market where no one buys or sells anything.
And you say, well, there's a lot of work
to set up this market, and then nothing happened.
Say, well, optimization happened.
Universal optimization occurred.
So, all right, you know, of course, you know,
if you started out with a world
where everyone had identical preferences and endowments,
you might say, yeah, I don't think
there's gonna be a lot of trade in any case, right?
You might think, you know, say,
in a more complex problem, you might think about
what would you need for there to be trade
in a world where everyone started off
with identical preferences and endowments, right?
And let's see, possibly we'll talk about that.
at some point, but we're not scheduled for here.
There was certain weird utility functions,
or if they were production, then it might be.
In any case, so let us now go and complicate
the problem in an obvious way, namely,
let's allow everybody to have their own taste
and their own endowments.
So now, every agent has his own utility function.
So now we're going to add on an i subscript indicating
that's agent i.
And he can have his own one, and he can have anything he wants.
So that's going to be equal to a sub i times log of x,
plus b sub i times log of y.
Notice everyone still has the same kind of utility function,
but they could be totally different utility functions.
One person could have an a of 0 and a b of 1.
Another could have an a of 1 and a b of 0.
We could have any distribution of these.
3% of people could have 0.3 and 0.7.
17% could have 0.67, 0.33 as the two numbers.
So it could be anything there.
Any of those numbers would be allowed.
And then everyone's got their own endowments, too.
So xi bar and yi bar.
So every person starts out with a different amount of x and y,
potentially.
Could be anything.
Could be any amount.
So what's going to happen now?
So now there's actually almost certain
to be trades in equilibrium prices.
Who's going to be generally?
Intuitively.
So what kinds of people are going to be selling x?
People with relatively?
Low a.
Yes, well, let's start with utility functions.
So what kinds of people are likely to be selling x?
People who have a relatively high value of what?
b.
So if your a is low and your b is high,
then you're going to be the kind of person who generally
wants to sell x.
And then similarly, suppose you start off
with a, so over here.
Which kinds of people are, relatively speaking,
are going to want to buy x?
High a's?
Yeah, so over here.
So there's xi bar and yi bar.
So which of these two things is going to make you
inclined to go and sell x?
Integrate quantity value.
Yeah, exactly.
So you start off with a giant pile of x.
Then you're the kind of person who's
probably going to want to dump some x in the market.
Who needs all this x?
On the other hand, if you're someone who, of course,
that's relative, because there's only two things you can have.
But if you have a relatively big pile of x,
relatively small pile of y, you're
going to tend to be the kind of person
that's going to want to sell your x in order to buy more y.
So that's the intuition.
So anyway, so people are actually
going to make trades directly from prices.
So we're no longer just looking for prices that
eliminate these end of trade.
What now we want to do is to find
prices that induce aggregate consumption to equal
aggregate endowments.
Furthermore, since there's general equilibrium,
we need to take full interaction between prices and consumption
into account.
So while no one person is considering
the effect of their behavior on anyone else,
still, if there's a high px, then people
who start off with a lot of this stuff are rich.
And that's going to affect their behavior.
And people who start off with a small amount of x
are going to be poor.
And that's going to affect their behavior.
But then that will affect the price, which
will affect their income, which will affect their behavior,
which will affect the price.
And all of that is perfectly allowed in general equilibrium.
Because all that we are ruling on in general equilibrium
is no one is saying, how will the others respond
if I change my conception?
That's the question that never gets asked in general
equilibrium.
But all the other questions do get asked.
Like, well, wait, how rich am I again?
Wait, the price changed?
Now how rich am I?
Right now, what do I want to do?
So it's perfectly fine for you to change your behavior
in response to what society does.
It's just not OK for you to think that society changes
in response to you.
Right?
But isn't there a contradiction there?
If you look closely, yes, there is a small contradiction.
But all of this.
And in fact, if you go and work through these results,
you will find that when we assume that even in models
where we assume that everyone thinks that they can't affect
the price, normally that turns out to be wrong.
And actually, everybody does have a little bit of influence
over the price.
And if we went and redid it to go and take
account of that small thing, that would ruin everything.
So if you were a very high level theorist,
normally solve this just by saying,
well, let's just assume everyone's infinitesimal,
so that doesn't come up anymore.
That is a solution.
Mathematically, it's a solution.
As to whether it is a very impressive solution
for an economist, I said, well, all right,
so you got rid of the small contradiction
by assuming something is never true.
I guess that's publishable.
But it definitely was publishable.
People made their careers on stuff like this, strangely.
But to me, but.
And again, these are not bad careers either.
These are some very prestigious careers full of money
and honors and all kinds of great stuff.
In any case, but to repeat, so in general equilibrium,
we are always allowing for people
to go and change their behavior because society is different.
That's fine.
And of course, so in this model, where does society speak?
Where do we even see the voice of society in this model?
Prices.
Prices, yes.
The prices are how society speaks.
Saying society heavily values x.
That's what you see when there's a high price of x.
That is the voice of society saying, society likes x a lot.
We need x.
Give us x.
And you simply blow price of y.
It's like, ah, society barely needs y.
It's all right.
But we don't really need it that badly.
But what is being ruled out in general equilibrium
is the opposite direction where individuals
think they're changing society with their actions.
Instead, everyone's just like, I'm just a little grain of sand.
A humble, lowly, irrelevant person.
So what do we need to do?
Well, what we need to do is we want
to add up all i equations for individual consumption of x
as a function of prices and initial balance.
So remember, for every single person,
we've got an equation like this one here where this one.
Yes, for every person here, we've
got an equation like this.
So for every point on x, what?
That's too soon.
Is that too soon?
No, that's not too soon.
Anyway, for everyone, we've got an equation like this.
And then we need to impose that constraint
that aggregate consumption equals aggregate endowments,
which everyone remember sigma notation?
It's a great kind of notation.
Sigma notation, summation of all the xi's
must be equal to the summation of all the xi bars.
And that mathematically says that the sum
of the consumption of all the x must
equal the sum of all the endowments of x.
Very simple point.
And so that's x sub i.
Yeah, so now we have sub i's because everyone's
different now.
And that would be that.
Yeah, before it was really easy because everyone's the same.
So we just say, well, then just multiply
the number of people times the amount
that any one person has.
And that's the total amount that exists.
But now we're not doing that anymore.
That's a pretty simple problem.
So we can go and work all this all through, sum everybody up.
And we get that equation on line h
where we have the price of x is equal to the summation of the xi
bar or the price of x times the summation of the xi bars
is equal to the price of x times the summation of the ai xi
bars plus the price of y times the summation of the ai yi bars.
And if you're wondering, wait, what happened to the b's?
That was just a little simplification here.
But that's perfectly fine.
Because remember how we've assumed all along a plus b
is 1.
So it's always easy to get rid of the b's.
We just go and say, well, for every b, we put in a 1 minus a.
And then we're fine.
And of course, for individuals, that
means for every individual, we put in a 1 minus ai.
1 minus ai.
All right.
And we solve this.
And now we get a new result, px over py.
Remember, px over py, that is the voice of society.
Society speaks.
This is how much society cares about x relative to y.
And that is going to be equal to the summation of ai times yi
bar all over summation of bi times xi bar.
And again, so that last step is after doing everything,
substituted back in to get the p back.
That's also cool.
Since weight plus b equals 1, we can do it either way
based on convenience.
All right.
And again, notice this looks almost exactly like this.
The only difference is we've added in heterogeneity.
And in fact, if you just go and say,
let's make all the a's the same, all the y's the same,
all the b's the same, all the x the same,
this equation here becomes that equation.
That's a special case of this one.
What this is saying is that to find the price of x
and the price of y, we need to look
at the summation of all the values, these value
parameters that each person puts on x,
times their initial down at y.
And we sum all those up.
So that's going to be like a1 y1 bar plus a2 y2 bar plus.
All right.
And then all of that over this thing here.
So this says, take the b parameter for the first person,
multiply that by his initial endowment of x.
Take the b parameter of the second person,
multiply that by his initial endowment of x, and so on.
And again, intuitively, this gives us
just the result you expect, where
if the a's in general go up, what does this do to prices?
First, you can look at the equation.
Prices go up.
Yes.
Yes, so if the a's in general go up, prices go up.
And that makes sense, because that's
the preference endowment or the preference parameter for x.
So if the a's goes up, that means
that people care more about x, and then x gets pricier.
Similarly, if the b's go up, then the price of x
goes down relative to y.
That means people care more about y.
So x is going to get cheaper as a result.
And similarly, if we increase the amount of y
that everybody has, if everybody starts off with more y,
what does that do to the price of x?
You can just look at the equation.
Everyone has more of this stuff.
What does it do to that?
Yes, everyone has more y, then the price of x
gets more expensive.
There's more y flooding the market, competing for x.
And then similarly over here, if there's more x running around,
then there's all this x that's bidding for the limited stock
of y, and then x becomes cheaper.
And of course, we get the same result.
We solve for y instead of x.
It's all the same.
Intuitively, we have a barter market.
So if you have a barter market, and one thing
is market clear, has market clearing,
what does the other thing have to have automatically?
Market clearing.
So if you're trading apples for oranges,
and you've got market clearing for apples,
you better have market clearing for oranges,
because otherwise it makes no sense.
Because what does it mean for there to be market clearing?
It means that you can buy or sell as many apples
as you want at the market price.
But if the only thing you can buy apples with is oranges,
that would also have to mean that you
can buy or sell as many oranges as you want at the market
price.
All right, now, just some implications of this.
So if you take a look at this log utility function,
which you've probably seen a bunch of times,
so what would happen to a person if they actually
had 0x, say, or 0y?
How bad would that be?
What's the log of 0 again?
1?
No.
The log of 1 is 0.
What's the log of 0?
Infinite.
Well, almost.
Negative infinite.
It's negative infinite to have the log of 0
is negative infinity.
So if any person ever were to have 0 of something,
that would mean it would be infinitely bad for them.
Be terrible.
All right, so now you're looking, all right, so fine.
So this utility function means everyone's
going to want to have at least a little of each good.
That's true.
All right.
All right, now, if that's true that it would be infinitely bad
to have none of one good, then now
imagine that some people started off with none of one good.
Why is it that the market doesn't make them give up
everything they have or almost everything they have just
to get a little bit of x so they don't
have negative infinity utility?
What's going on?
So why does that no way out?
So again, imagine that 90% of people start off with 0x.
Are the 10% of people who do have some of both,
are those people going to be able to extract almost
everything that 90% have in general equilibrium?
Remember the whole idea of general equilibrium,
the fundamental assumption is that no one individual
can change society.
All right.
So that means that if you go and try to offer someone
a really crummy deal, are you going
to be able to get them to go along with your crummy deal?
No.
If you make up a crummy deal, hey,
here's a really terrible deal.
Who wants it?
In general equilibrium, will anyone accept your crummy deal?
No.
People say, why should I go and pay
and accept your crummy deal when society offers me a better deal?
And of course, the society in this case is just another word
for competition.
So even though it's true that if someone
were to quarter the market for x,
they would then have a stranglehold over all society.
But if one person is trying to get
as any way of getting a quarter of the market for x,
that's not general equilibrium anymore.
That is clearly a case of one individual
trying to strategically plan against society.
And that's not what general equilibrium is all about.
So again, that doesn't mean that that thing couldn't happen,
but it can't happen in a general equilibrium model.
So general equilibrium models have competition.
And so the fact that someone desperately needs something
doesn't mean they actually are going to pay a lot for it.
That all just depends upon supply and demand.
All right, and let's see.
I think you might actually have a homework problem.
But it's fun enough that I will mention it right now.
All right, so there is a passage from the integral communist
Foucault in the 19th century, but who
expressed a view that actually a lot of people
have had where they say, look, here's
the problem being a worker.
Workers have no other way of getting income,
and so they'll settle for anything.
So if someone will work the same amount regardless of the wage,
then what does their labor supply curve look like?
Yes, vertical, exactly.
So we've got a vertical supply curve.
And if you were the only buyer of labor,
and suppose this is the starvation level,
and that's starvation.
So if you were the only buyer of labor,
then you very well might want to go and offer that amount.
But then Macooning leaves the inference
that this is what workers actually will get.
And again, there's the whole problem here.
Well, if there's a demand curve here,
and you try offering them that amount,
then you are below the intersection of supply and demand.
And when you're below that intersection, which of the two
things do you get?
It's either a shortage or a surplus.
But I can never remember which one you get.
Which one is it when the price is too low?
Shortage.
Shortage, right.
Well, minimum wage causes surpluses,
as we know from Karger Kruger.
Minimum wage causes surpluses.
So another day, wage that is held above the intersection
causes surpluses.
A wage that is below will cause a shortage.
And with competition, when there's a shortage,
what do people do?
They bid at the price.
So this is saying that even if Macooning is perfectly
correct about the supply curve, still he
is drawing the wrong inference.
As long as there's competition between employers,
as long as they are competing with each other,
as long as they are not acting like an executive committee
of the bourgeoisie, but instead are independent business
people trying to make money for themselves,
then if the wage is down there, there's
no other way to get it.
If the wage is down there, employers
are going to be thinking, well, if I can get more workers,
I can make more money.
But at this wage, I can't get more.
So why don't I raise the wage and then steal workers
from some other employers?
And again, if you start saying, well, if you do that,
then they'll get mad at you.
They'll retaliate.
Again, is that general equilibrium thinking
that I'll go and steal some workers,
and then the other employers will retaliate?
That's not general equilibrium thinking.
Again, it's conceivable that's true.
But if you have thought that, it is not general equilibrium.
But it is only general equilibrium
if that has not been thought.
If this has not been considered, if this is just off the table,
that kind of thing would happen.
OK, so questions.
Questions here.
So these are two simple examples of general equilibrium.
And now we're going to go and generalize it further.
Now, I could go and really torture you with this for weeks.
But I don't want to.
And I don't know anyone who's ever,
well, I guess people who do it for a living,
I guess they've profited from me torturing with it for weeks.
Because then they go and extend the models and so on.
But out of everyone else, I've never
known anyone to actually get any kind of intellectual profit
out of drawing it out.
So instead, I'm just going to hit the high points
and try to help you understand exactly how these models work.
So that when economists around you are talking about them,
you can say, oh, I understand what's going on here,
even though I didn't bother going
into all the details, which, of course, almost everybody
forgets anyway.
So better to go and teach you a small amount
and then expect you to remember it,
rather than a large amount that can be quickly forgotten.
This is a very big result in educational psychology,
is just how much material people forget.
So in this class, I do try to teach you some math.
But my general policy is I only teach you
a math I would actually test you on, conceivably.
So I won't deal with anything in addition to that.
So I'll teach you the stuff that I think is worthwhile actually
learning.
And then the other stuff, if you're curious about it,
you can, of course, do more.
So now I just want to give you a taste of a very general general
equilibrium model.
So let's now go and assume that we've got i consumers.
We already did that.
And now let's say we got k commodities.
So no longer do we just have two commodities.
Now we can have any number of commodities.
And now we start adding on some assumptions
that sound a bit weird.
In general, any time there's an economic model,
a mathematical model with some weird assumptions,
there's a reason for the weird assumption.
If you don't have that assumption,
you either can't solve the model,
or the results of the model seem crazy to the theorists.
All right, so here's their assumption.
Commodity consumption must be non-negative.
Well, of course, commodity consumption is non-negative.
Of course.
Why are people bothering to make a big deal out
of the consumption must be non-negative?
Because there are some theorems that they're
going to invoke that require non-negativity.
So they want to explicitly state that that commodity
consumption is non-negative.
So then no one can mathematically complain.
They're not entitled to use the theorem.
All right, now for the assumption,
we'll assume that utility is strictly increasing
in all commodities.
So again, this u sub i of x, this
is saying that every individual has strictly increased
utility in every commodity.
So that x is a vector.
of all the commodities that exist.
So all, what is it, all K of those commodities,
I believe, all K commodities.
So it's saying that utility goes up
for consumption of every single item.
This is actually stronger than you need.
If you've had another class in this,
they might have mentioned a very obscure assumption
called local non-satiation.
If you've never heard of that, don't worry about it.
You'll never need to know it.
Not for me.
And so unless you decide to switch to another PhD program,
you might think this means you'll never need to know it.
But anyway, if you're curious,
you can Google local non-satiation
and receive the very fine points.
But anyway, easier to do this.
Then consumers start with endowment of commodities
and we will just define the endowment of consumer I
as E superscript I.
And then six, there's a continuous market price vector, P,
which is a vector of all the prices
that agents read as exogenous.
Okay.
So now, why is it a vector P?
So this is saying that for every commodity,
there is one, for every commodity has a price.
That's all I'll say.
Okay.
Right, and again, that's agents treated exogenous.
What does that agents treated exogenous mean?
It means that we're doing
our usual general likelihood assumption.
Every person is saying,
that is the price that is given by society to me.
I do not affect that price.
That price is handed down from society.
And all I can do is optimize with respect to that price.
I can't go and buy or sell things
in order to change that price.
That price is just there like the sun.
All right.
It's outside of my control.
All right.
Then we can define general equilibrium,
situation in which every consumer
matches the maximize utility,
subjecting the strength that he is not,
that he does not consume a,
that he's not consume a bundle that is more expensive
than the value of what he started with.
So again, so if you're wondering,
so like PX, remember, so now these are vectors.
So what does PX mean?
PX means,
PX means the price of good one
times your consumption of good one,
plus the price of good two,
times your consumption of good two,
plus the price of good three,
times your consumption of good three.
So until you get up to the price of good K,
times your consumption of good K.
All right.
And if that equation seems weird, it shouldn't.
This is exactly the same equation
that the cash register uses
to figure out how much money you owe
when you buy groceries.
Right?
That's all that the cash register does.
Is all right, so he has,
the price of broccoli is three per bushel.
He has two bushels.
That's P1 times X1.
Then he has three bags of cookies,
and each bag of cookie costs $1.79.
So now three times $1.79.
Then he has four steaks.
So that's going to be a quantity of four,
and then 6.98 per steak, and so on.
So that formula is just the same formula
that the cash register uses.
If you've ever been a cashier of any kind,
that's the formula you apply
to figure out how much money they owe you.
It's all that's going on.
Okay.
And you say, well, isn't that trivial?
It's not totally trivial,
because of course sometimes you have formulas
where say if you buy three,
you know, if you buy three tents,
then you get seven tent poles for free
or something like that.
And then actually, it is more complicated than that formula.
But anyway, that's the normal formula
for figuring out how much money somebody owes you, right?
Everyone's familiar?
Everyone has bought something,
and that formula's been applied at some point?
Okay, good.
All right.
So we've got that.
So that's the X.
And then P E I.
So this would be the amount of money that you would get
if you brought all your stuff
and tried to sell it, say, and tried to sell it.
So then it would be, well,
here's the price of good X times the amount of X,
the price of good one,
times the amount of good one that I started with,
plus the price of good two,
times the amount of good two that I started with,
and so on.
So if you've ever gone to a pawn shop
with a giant box of junk,
and then how much money do they give you?
Well, generally, they'll give you the price of the first good
times the amount of the first good that you offer to sell,
plus the price of the second good,
times the amount of the second good
that you offer to sell them, and so on.
Right, especially if these are standardized items.
This is not like, I don't know,
what's the show my dad was watching?
You were there, right?
Oh, it was like the Pawn Lords or Pawn Kings?
Pawn Stars.
Pawn Stars, yes.
So anyway, that show was actually not like that formula
because there's a lot of bargaining,
and there wasn't any fixed price for Remington revolver,
and so on.
But anyway, if you're going into selling
totally standard items, then it's like that.
Okay, so first assumption just says
that the value of the total cost of the stuff you buy
must be less than or equal to the total value
of the stuff that you have to sell.
Which again, makes perfect sense.
You can't buy more than the stuff you buy
can't be more expensive than the stuff you've got.
Remember, this is a one period model,
so there's no bargaining or anything,
or rather, there's no borrowing.
Anything like that.
There's no, I will gladly pay you Tuesday
for a hamburger today.
This is the only day that exists,
and you just get your hamburgers right now.
And that's it, and there's nothing more.
It's the end of the world.
All right, so.
And so that's one condition.
So first of all, everybody, every single individual
is maximizing his own utility,
subject to that equation for himself personally.
But secondly, it also needs to be true
that aggregate consumption
can never exceed aggregate endowments.
So that means that the summation
from person one to capital I,
of all of the X vectors,
must be less than or equal to the summation
from person one to capital I,
of all the endowment vectors.
So again, and all this is saying
is that the total amount of stuff that people consume
must be less than or equal to the total amount that exists.
Remember, X and E are now vectors,
so X is a whole list of the amount of good one
and the amount of good two,
the amount of good three, the amount of good four,
all those.
And similarly, E is,
so one of the Xs, that's the amount you're consuming,
and then E is the amount of good one you start with,
the amount of good two you start with,
the amount of good three you start with.
The summation means we're summing everybody's consumption
and summing everyone's endowments.
This is perfectly fine, of course,
for some people to consume more good three
than they started with.
That's the whole point of moving the market
is that some people can go and consume more
of something than they started with,
and other people will, of course,
consume less of that thing than they started with.
Yes?
Why does it have to be just like inequalities
because we assume there's no?
Yes, so remember what I said,
any time you see in mathematical economics
you see a complexity, there's always a reason,
and here the reason why there's inequalities
rather than equalities is that mathematical economists
like proving things at a more general level,
and they don't like making assumptions.
So if they can begin by saying,
let's assume it's less than or equal,
and then they can prove that it must be equal,
they feel much better about themselves
than if they just assume it was equal to begin with.
And even if a non-mathematical economist says,
well, it's obvious.
Not obvious to me, nothing is obvious.
Everything must be proven, nothing is obvious.
That is the way, that is the creed of the true,
pure mathematical economist.
Yes, and in fact, one thing that people
have been known to get publications for
in mathematical economics is saying,
you know there's a theorem that we all believe?
I've shown a way that we can weaken an assumption
and still prove the theorem.
And other people may say,
look, I'm fine with the theorem the way it is.
But they have to say, no, no, no, no,
I've weakened the assumption
from strictly increasing utility
to a local non-association,
which is a weaker assumption logically,
and still get the very same result.
Isn't that fantastic?
And you're like, I guess it's okay, but.
Anyway, because with that,
I mean with that if the answer is that
you don't need to assume equality,
and so mathematical economists would rather
go and say less than or equal to,
and then in the process of applying the assumptions,
assumptions prove that it must be equal,
which in their minds is better
than just assuming it is equal.
And even if it may seem, well of course,
there's only, there's nothing else to do
with your money but buy goods,
then of course you're gonna spend your money on that,
really, you're gonna spend all your money.
Who wouldn't, why wouldn't you?
There, that kind of reasoning is sloppy,
and low, there's no, low status, don't do it.
Okay, if you wanna be a mathematical economist.
If you just wanna be a good economist
who gets results, then you may say,
oh, whatever, I'm too busy for that.
But in any case, so part of what we're doing here
is I'm just giving you a small taste
of what it would be like to be a mathematical economist
to see whether that's what, what is the life for you.
All right, so maybe you'll say,
my God, that sounds fantastic.
You know, assuming that things are less than or equal,
and then proving they must be exactly equal.
Is there anything more amazing than that?
I don't, I can't think of anything.
Anyway, all right.
So, now move on to sufficient conditions
for existence of intermultiplibrium.
Now, all of you guys remember the difference
between necessary and sufficient conditions?
Yes, yes.
So, necessary conditions are ones
where if you're missing any of them,
then you don't get the result.
Sufficient ones are ones where you got all of them,
you do get the result.
All right, so, these are, of course, very different things.
So, you know, sometimes, you know,
someone says something like,
if you give a present to your mom, she'll be happy.
All right, so is that a necessary or sufficient condition
for your mom to be happy?
Sufficient, right?
So, you do this one thing, and she'll be happy.
All right, how about if someone says,
if you don't give her a present, she won't be happy?
Yes, then that's necessary, right?
Saying, look, you've got to do this,
but that doesn't in any way say she'll be happy.
Maybe there's a million things you have to do
in addition to that, or she'll be unhappy, possibly.
That leaves it open, right?
So, that, so anyway, so necessary
versus sufficient conditions, very important,
and important to know what you're actually doing
when you see an error.
So, what we're going to do in this class,
and we're going to go over the sufficient conditions
for the existence of intermultiplibrium.
So, these are not necessary conditions,
and in fact, we're going to take some time
to see they're not necessary.
There are other ways to get general equilibrium
without the assumptions we're making,
but if we've got the assumptions we're making,
we've got a general equilibrium, guaranteed.
All right, and that's what we are going to do.
All right, so why don't we go
and take our 10-minute break right now, and then.
All right, so continue with general equilibrium.
All right, now, standard economic assumption, right?
So, in economic models, do we normally
have people's preferences changing?
No, all right, so people's preference,
people want what they want.
The heart wants what it wants, so that's not going to change,
and then in an endowment economy, do endowments change?
Yeah, we start off with a certain amount,
and we assume the way production,
and we also have a certain fixed amount.
So, if we've got fixed preferences and fixed endowments,
well, what is it that people are going to,
what is left to vary?
Well, so in terms of individual behavior,
consumption is left to vary,
and what is it that changes consumption?
Prices, it's prices, the prices,
and because of the price vector P,
so now we have a vector of prices,
which may sound scary, but all that it means
is it's a list of every single item with its price,
price of every single item, so if it's K items,
then it is a vector of K prices,
the price of the first good, the price of the second good,
the price of the third good, and so on.
So, now we are going to find sufficient conditions
for the existence of general equilibrium.
General equilibrium might still exist,
even if some of these conditions are not satisfied,
but as long as they're satisfied,
we definitely have a general equilibrium.
All right, so the first thing, per question
was asking towards the end,
we can get rid of all those inequalities
and replace them with equalities,
because utility functions are strictly increasing.
All right, so that's, we have proven it.
Ah, this is very exciting, okay.
All right, now secondly, all right,
so this is endowment economy,
so if we multiply all the prices through by a scalar,
lambda, if we multiply everything through by.7,
or a million, or whatever,
this isn't going to change anything,
so if P is an equilibrium price vector,
then going, just rescaling the whole thing
by multiplying every price through by the same amount
is still going to be equilibrium price vector,
which means that it is perfectly okay
to focus on price vectors that sum to one, right,
and again, why are they, why is that such a big point?
The answer is, there are a bunch of theorems
that work when the vector sums to one,
and so there we are now, we are now buying the right
to use those theorems for ourselves.
Okay, so we're good there, all right.
All right, then, the following remaining assumptions
guarantee the existence of equilibrium.
So first assumption, so we need to assume
that there is a unique utility maximizing thing,
given the prices, for everybody to do,
for every person and for every price, right,
so in other words, this means that there isn't
a single person in the world who looks at the price vector
and says, hey, there's two different things
I don't want to do, that I don't think
are any different between those two things.
Instead, for every individual, there's one exact thing
they want to do, given the prices, all right.
So, you might remember back when in like,
eighth grade algebra, when you're hearing
about functions versus relations, right,
remember a function means that for any given x,
there's exactly one y, and a relation,
there could be more than one y for an x, right,
so this is basically saying that there is a function,
that there is a utility function,
although there's consumption function
as a function of what the prices are,
so you give me the prices, and there's one thing
that I do, and one thing alone, and that's true for every.
All right, so second assumption,
a total demand for good k must exceed
the total endowment for a low enough price,
and must fall short of total endowment
for a large enough price, so again,
all this is saying is that for every good,
there's a price so high that people will actually
not want to consume all that exists,
and there's a price so low that people
want to consume more than exists,
and again, that price could be.999999999999,
that's fine, that could be the really high price,
price could be.000000001, it'd be really low price,
but it needs to be the case that eventually
you get the price high or low enough
so that people actually will want to consume
either more than exists or less than exists.
All right, and then last assumption.
Yeah.
What's the assumption in addition?
What's that?
What's this assumption in addition,
I mean assumption two, what's the intention of this?
Ah, well again, so the answer is that there are theorems
that require this assumption, and so we are making it,
although again, it's not such a good assumption,
again, if you just think about it graphically,
this is saying that, let's see here, so,
let's see, so like this is good k,
right, and here is the price, good k,
and then here is the amount of good k,
or then here's the demand for good k,
so there's the main curve, so this is saying
that there's a price so high, then let's see,
what do we need here, so, let's see, so,
so let's see here, and then I have this quantity here,
so if there is a really large quantity over here,
then this is saying that, what, let's see here,
so, now like so, actually, actually, hold on,
just one thing, yeah, that's right,
I don't wanna actually have an intersect,
or else I'm gonna fix it, so,
if we have something, a demand curve like that,
so this is saying that eventually,
the price will get so low, that they'll wanna consume
more than exists, right, so like if this is the amount
that exists here, of course that's the amount that exists,
eventually, the price will get so low
that we wanna consume more than that amount,
and then on the other hand, suppose that there is a
low amount of it, saying eventually the price gets so high,
that we actually wanna consume less than exists,
so that's the amount, and there's the price so high
that we wanna consume less than exists,
yeah, so that's the idea, so it's ruling out
extreme corner solutions, things like that,
and again, there are complex theorems that require that.
Okay, and then last, so, the last thing is that
the total demand function for K is continuous in the price,
for all prices that range from zero to one,
so in other words, it's saying that you can't have
demand curves that look like, say, this.
So you're not allowed to have discontinuous demand curves
where the price changes a little bit,
and then your behavior has a continuous change,
again, why would that be?
Well, so you can imagine a society where, say,
the number 13 is unlucky, and so, when the price gets down,
so the price is falling, falls from 15, 14,
and it gets to 13, oh my God, I don't wanna buy anything
at price 13, that's very dangerous,
and then there could be a discontinuous response,
so it's ruling out things like that.
All right, so we have all these assumptions,
and now I am not going to prove anything to you,
I'm just gonna tell you what can be proven
by people who want to prove things.
All right, so part of the reason why I spent six weeks
on this is the rest of us that I had
had some of the money involved in the proofs,
and so they had a more hands-on attitude about proofs.
If they were more like this right now,
I'd be going copying my notes
on all the boards around the room,
going through every detail of my wonderful proof.
I actually did have an undergraduate class
with Gerard Dubrow, so the gentleman who got
the Nobel Prize for some of his early work,
so I did get to see him go and do his own proof,
and let me tell you, it was no more entertaining
what he did than if anyone else did it.
He seemed very entertained by it.
And he was like, in a way, it was touching
to see a mathematician so in love with his own math.
I'm saying, we have proven it,
and it is so elegant and wonderful,
and they're like, but isn't it really obvious?
No, it is not obvious, no, it is wonderful and original.
And he had a huge signal.
Now that is just a trivial result.
I said, well, aren't all these things trivial?
No, they're not all trivial, no.
The trivial ones were not proven by me at all.
They are very, the opposite of trivial.
They are deep.
He clearly did not feel like he needed to impress anyone.
He, like, I have my Nobel Prize for this.
Anyone who does not like it.
He was mad early, but still.
There was a subtext, if you did not appreciate it,
then I cannot help you.
You are basically a barbarian.
I meant it's a barbarian, a dumb barbarian.
But that was what I got from it.
There were some other people who loved it.
I think.
All right, in any case.
So we have all these assumptions,
and then you can go and prove the general eclectic results.
All right, so how can you do them?
All right, well, if we just go to the too good world,
but it's too good, you know, two commodities,
but everything else is totally general.
Then there's a theorem that you've probably heard of.
Ever remember the intermediate value theorem?
Ever heard of that theorem?
All right, so that one is generally taught
in a good high school math class.
And essentially it says that if it's a continuous function
and the function can be too high and it can be too low,
then there must be a point that's exactly right.
That is the intermediate value theorem.
All right, so similarly if the market clear,
so it says if one market clears, the other has to clear.
So if demand is continuous and it can be too high
or too low, then at some point it must be just right.
Very simple point.
All right, so over here, so as long as it's continuous
and at some point, well, at some point we want,
at some point over here we want more than exists
and some point over here we want less than exists,
then there must be a point where we want to consume
exactly what exists.
All right, so that is a theorem that you likely
are familiar with.
And again, remember if there were discontinuity,
would this still hold?
No.
So if there's a discontinuity, then the fact
that it starts off too high, ends up too low,
and then you move between them, it doesn't matter
because if there's a discontinuity,
then you might just skip the intersection.
So no, the intermediate value theorem rules that out.
Okay, now, all right, so that's something that's,
we're like, I'm not doing the proof,
but I think it's pretty easy to see
what the proof would look like in this two good world.
All right, so that's the intermediate value theorem.
On down the K commodity world,
there is a much fancier theorem
that Gerard Girard originally used,
and this is the Brouwer's fixed point theorem.
All right, so Brouwer's a very high level mathematician,
don't remember who he is.
There's another one for some other proofs,
Kakatani's fixed point theorem.
All right, so anyway, if you're curious,
you can go and track down the theorems.
Once you read the theorems, then you will,
then at least if you're anything like me,
you'll get a sense of, wait a second,
you just assume that economies would have
exactly the traits they need for this theorem
to solve the problem, didn't you?
Of course, of course that's what they did.
So they just reasoned backwards and say,
well, if I can make an economy like this,
fit the assumption of the theorem,
the theorem could prove what I want.
So why don't I just go and make,
assume the economies are like this,
and then apply the theorem and reason backwards.
What does the economy have to be like
for me to be able to use the theorem?
And again, sound really smart,
because like, he's using Brouwer's fixed point theorem
to prove it, but it's not nearly,
at least to me, not nearly as impressive
when you see it was reverse engineered.
I think I did actually not so subtly accuse
De Broglie of just reverse engineering the result,
and you, no, I did not, sure you did, no.
So, anyhow, you only hear my version of the story,
but I stayed by my Philistine version of this.
All right, in any case, intuitively,
what is going on with these fixed point theorems?
So the basic idea is you want to find conditions
under which there must be an f of x that is equal to x.
Now, what does that mean?
Well, so here is the way that it was explained to me
by someone who actually could explain math well
to non-mathematicians.
So suppose that we have a globe here,
and I go in and the globe contains,
and we look at the globe, and we say,
so are we on this globe?
Yes.
Well, given we're on the globe, where?
There must be a place on that globe where we are.
And you could even say, where on the globe is the globe?
Right, and you take the pen, it's right there.
See where Virginia is, and we move a little bit out,
and we get out the microscope,
the globe is right there on the globe.
That's where f of x equals x.
We go and we map the world into the globe
to the point where the globe itself is on the globe.
Can you see that?
No.
Okay, right, so well.
So imagine I bring a globe to this room,
and I say, show me on this globe where this globe is.
Where it is on the map.
Yes, yes.
You know, like, of course, it'd be the same thing
on a map, so I take out a map here of Virginia,
and I say, show me on the map where we are, right?
And then the map is in our hands, so the map is with us,
so that pen, we can put a pen into that map
and say that's where the map is on itself.
Right, and the same thing with the globe.
Now, of course, if we had a globe of Mars,
and we said, where on this globe of Mars is the globe?
And the answer is, it's not.
The globe of Mars is on Earth.
So it's the globe of Mars is not on Mars.
That's a case where there isn't a fixed point.
There is no place on the globe of Mars
where our globe of Mars is.
Because we're not on Mars, and neither is our globe.
Right, bots?
So, if you're saying, so what does it mean
for there to be fixed point theorem?
Is there something like that?
Can you say the globe is right here on the globe,
or this is where the map is on this map?
And on the other hand, if you can't say that,
if actually you say it's not on the globe,
it's not on the map, then that, you know,
that mathematical term, that means a fixed point
does not exist.
There is no fixed point here.
All right, so that's the best explanation I've ever heard.
So, and again, just imagine, you know,
does anyone have, I guess we don't have a globe,
if we had a globe here, I mean, actually,
you could go and call Google Earth,
and then, all right, show me where on Google Earth,
like, we, like, this screen is,
and again, if you get it down to the fine enough grain,
you can actually say it's right there, right?
I mean, imagine actually, it's like,
you have a really big globe,
and you're looking at Google Earth,
so, and you keep it in the same location,
so it actually can be photographed from space.
Then you could actually really go to Google Earth,
and say, see, the globe is right there on Google Earth.
Right there.
Right, so then you'll like, this thing here,
on like, on Google Earth,
that'll let you like, which shows where we are,
is there, in Google Earth itself.
All right, whoa.
All right.
All right.
All right, so anyway, so like I said,
the basic idea of fixed point theorems
is we find conditions for functions
such that there must be an f of x that's equal to x,
and all of our assumptions have been
very carefully reverse engineered
to fix Brouwer's fixed point theorem,
so QED, we got our proof.
All right, again, if you're saying,
well, what is the proof exactly?
Well, I'm not gonna teach it, I'm not gonna test it,
but you can, if you want, go and Google it,
and you can say, okay, that's what would have improved
if we wanted to spend a lot of time on this,
but very few economists remember the proof,
so I don't see where anybody went,
but what I will say is very few actually understand
even the intuition either,
so I'd rather teach the intuition,
which I think you might remember,
than accept the proof, which I'm almost sure
no one will remember.
All right, now, how do you get to these fixed points?
Well, in G theory, there's usually an assumption
about a Walrasian auctioneer.
You ever heard about the Walrasian auctioneer?
So, Leon Walras, another mathematical French economist,
who essentially proposed a mathematical model
where there is an auctioneer
who adjusts all the prices in society just by himself.
He's just like one guy running around,
fixing all the prices for everything.
As you can imagine, there's a giant auction house,
and he goes and adjusts all the prices
until all the markets clear.
All right, so, and in G theory,
there's usually an assumption like that built in.
So, Austrian economists tend to hate this
because it's very unrealistic.
There are, of course, auctioneers in stock markets
for limited numbers of goods,
but there's no economy in the world
where someone meets together and fixes it,
and we go and figure out the price of everything,
and we go and hold an auction for everything.
All right, are there alternatives
to the Walrasian auctioneer?
Of course, fortunately,
because the Walrasian auctioneer
is ridiculously unrealistic.
There's other alternatives that we will talk about later on
about where prices come from.
If you look at the real world,
most prices come from the seller saying,
here's what my price is gonna be.
So, in general, when you go and look at websites for prices,
where did that price come from?
The seller said, that's my price.
So, that's very normal, but not all.
So, on eBay, there are some things that are still like that
when you have the buy it now option,
but then there are other ones
where there's an auction between buyers,
and sometimes there's an auction
between buyers with a reserve, right?
And then there's other markets
where they're more complicated than that.
But in any case, so there's lots of,
the real story is there's lots of different ways
that prices get set,
and if you want to come up with a better model,
you probably need to look at some more facts.
But anyway, later we'll talk about some alternatives,
mostly after the midterm.
So, questions about general equilibrium?
All right, now we're gonna do something
that I'm pretty sure I was not taught,
but should have been.
All right, so this is counter example.
So, when would general equilibrium not exist
or might not exist?
So, I said, each of the assumptions was made for a reason.
All right, and these are some of the more notable reasons
why general equilibrium might not exist.
So, what could prevent you from getting
a general equilibrium?
All right, so let's just go over to some of the candidates.
All right, so how many of you guys
have ever heard of lexicographic preferences?
All right, good, all right, so most of you.
So, the idea of lexicographic preferences
is that you like, say, two goods, X and Y,
but you like one of them infinitely more.
So, if you lexicographically prefer X to Y,
this means that when you're deciding between two bundles,
the first question you ask is, which has more X?
If they're unequal, you always choose the one with more X.
If the amount of X is equal, however,
then you choose the one that has more Y.
That would be an example of lexic,
that is the case of lexicographic preferences.
Why lexicographic?
Because it's like the dictionary, right?
So, suppose there's a word like,
like in the dictionary, like your first word is,
say, aardvark, right?
And then, why does that word come first?
Well, the way that you arrange things in dictionaries,
you first look at the first letter,
and the one that's earliest in the alphabet,
that goes first.
And there's two words that have the same first letter,
then what do you do?
Then you look at the second letter.
And if the second letter's the same,
you look at the third letter.
And so, in other words,
so suppose there were a word like,
azaa, it was A, Z, and then it had like 20 A's at the end.
Would that move it up in the dictionary
so it could possibly be before apple?
Something like that?
Well, it's got so many A's in it,
shouldn't it get to go,
shouldn't all those A's cancel out that Z,
and it could go before apple?
No, it does not,
because the dictionary is organized lexicographically.
First we only look at the first thing,
then we only look at the second letter,
then we only look at the third letter.
All right, so that,
with lexicographic preferences similarly,
is where, first of all,
you look at which one has more of the first thing.
If that's the same,
then you look at which has more of the second thing.
That's the same,
then you look at which has more of the third thing.
And so, okay.
Now, if you have lexicographic preferences,
there is no utility function, all right?
And this is,
there is a theorem proving
that with lexicographic preferences,
you cannot express them in any normal utility function.
But why, but intuitively, what does this mean?
It means that there is no price
that is sufficient to induce people
to give up their lexicographically preferred commodity.
Okay, so for example,
suppose that you lexicographically prefer X to Y,
and then the price is,
and then the,
so we'll say X is lexicographically preferred to Y,
and then suppose the price of X over the price of Y
is say equal to one million.
Right, so the price of X is like a million times
what the price of Y.
Where do you still spend all your money if possible?
X, that's right.
Right, and what if it were like 10 to the 60?
Right, yes, you'd still want to spend everything on X.
The only, so,
the saying that no matter how high the price is,
there's no price that would actually get people
to ever sell any X.
All right, and then say,
huh, well, maybe the price of X,
so what if the price of X were just one,
and the price of Y were just zero?
Well, then there's still a problem there,
because if we lexicographically prefer X to Y,
so if we have like a price of X equals one,
price of Y equals zero,
so there we might say, well, maybe that'll work,
but no, that doesn't work either,
because if the price of Y is zero,
and you like Y,
just infinitely less than X,
what will you want to do
if the price of Y ever falls down to zero?
Buy Y, and then sell it.
Yes, buy, well, you don't have to,
well, you buy it for zero.
So you don't have to sell anything to buy free stuff.
Right, so, the problem is,
if the price of Y,
if the price of X is anything less than one,
then no one will,
then people will sell all the Y they have to get more X,
and if the price of X ever becomes one,
then people want to consume an infinite amount of Y.
Right, and as you can see,
that is not a stable situation.
There's no situation where,
if people had this preference,
where the price factor would actually make sense.
Okay, right, and this is probably, in a way,
a special case of a more general problem of discontinuity.
So suppose that total demand for X
is 90% of the endowment at a price of.7,
and 110% of the endowment at price seven minus an epsilon,
minus a very small amount.
So if there's a leap in consumption at.7.
Well, in that case, again,
there's a problem where the price is either too high
or too low, but because of that discontinuity,
it's never exactly right,
and then there's no general equilibrium.
Right, and as I said,
there could be a superstition saying
that number is a bad number,
so we don't want to ever buy that amount,
or it could be a lucky number.
All right, so there's a third one,
what if demand is just not well-behaved at extreme prices?
This could mean zero prices,
but there's some technical problems that I won't go into.
Another possibility,
what if prices themselves are discontinuous?
So let's see, in the real world,
are prices continuous or discontinuous?
Discontinuous.
Discontinuous, yes.
So has anyone ever paid a continuous price for something?
So has anyone ever paid like pi dollars for something?
Like anywhere like radical $2?
No, so in general.
So in general, what we see is the prices will go up
by at least a penny.
So the price may be $1.03,
and then it goes up to at least $1.04.
Like the only well-known price that actually varies
by less than one penny increments is gas,
where there's usually a.9 at the end,
.9 pennies at the end.
Okay, so in general,
if prices are discontinuous,
so they have to be in discrete one penny units,
then it's possible that there will be excess supply
at a price of say $1.10,
and excess demand at a price of $1.09.
And then market clearing,
you need to be somewhere in the middle.
And if you have a monetary system
that doesn't allow for this,
then again, there might be no general equilibrium.
All right.
So questions about any of these?
All right, and then remember that standard theorems
give you sufficient additions.
So I can't repeat that enough times.
I'm only giving you sufficient additions
for general equilibrium.
It might still exist despite
the failure of the assumptions.
So here is the utility function
that almost all intermediate micro students want to use,
which is utility equals x plus y.
And you're gonna say,
you remember being an intermediate micro,
and then like, why can't it just be that?
Why can't we do all of economics with that?
What's wrong with this one?
And there is actually a problem with this utility function.
It implies something very weird.
If that's your utility function,
then what do you do?
Well, let's put it this way.
Suppose the price of x is greater than the price of y.
Then what do you do?
Buy, what's that?
Buy all y.
You only want y.
And suppose the price of x is less than the price of y.
Then what do you want to do?
Buy only x.
So this doesn't give you a normal utility function
where you're making trade-offs.
All that it means is that as you transition
from the price being greater than x,
less than, your behavior completely reverses.
You go at like a very infinitesimal change.
You flip from doing all one thing
to doing all the other thing.
All right.
So now which assumption does this violate?
So like, this utility function,
which assumption does it violate?
So we got discontinuous demand function.
Discontinuous demand function, so it violates that.
Now, is it still possible to get a general equilibrium
without utility function?
Yeah, what do you have to do?
You just, whatever the price is lower.
Buy all that.
No, no, but we'll say, well, here's the thing.
So suppose everybody has that demand function.
Then what do you do?
Then what do you do?
Can you get general equilibrium
if everyone has that demand function?
Or rather, utility function, rather?
Well, let's see.
I wrote two cases on the board already.
I might be leading the witness here to the answer.
Yes.
All right, suppose price of X equals the price of Y.
Could that be an equilibrium?
That could be.
Everyone, if everyone had a utility function
with the price of X equal to the price of Y,
that everyone is at least,
does not, that people do not want to dump all their X
or all their Y,
it still doesn't guarantee that people will want
to consume exactly as much X that exists
and exactly as much Y that exists,
but it's possible.
That could happen.
Okay, so that's a case where it violates the assumption,
but everything we're just right.
And now, think about this.
I mean, this one is pretty obvious.
Suppose that in the giant world,
one guy has a utility function
and everybody else has normal ones.
Can you get general equilibrium then?
One weird person, everyone else is normal.
What do you think's gonna happen?
Does normal mean like log utility?
Yeah, yeah, like any utility function
that isn't this work bit
where your demand functions are continuous.
Didn't you say earlier,
like one person can't affect the whole thing?
Ah, yeah.
So that's in terms of behavioral assumption,
but this is mathematically, can it actually?
Like, does it meet the assumptions?
Right, and the general answer is,
if it's just one weird person,
you can have any weird utility function,
and that's fine.
You can still have general equilibrium
as long as other people have continuous responses.
The fact that one person
or even 10 or 50% of the population
has discontinuous responses,
probably wouldn't matter at all.
So again, just imagine that one person
has lexicographic preferences,
but nobody else does.
Then what is likely to happen in general equilibrium?
Now, this person lexicographically prefers X to Y.
In general equilibrium, what does he do?
Buy, sell.
He just sells all of his Y, right?
And other people buy it
because they don't have lexicographic preferences,
and then the price of X is going to be,
well, below one, but he's got all that he can get.
And that's the end.
There's nothing more to do.
It sounds still behavior.
What's that?
I cannot see the behavior explanation.
I cannot see the difference
between behavior and mathematical difference.
Ah, well, let's see.
How would I explain it?
So, one is saying,
do we have the mathematical assumptions
to guarantee that a general equilibrium exists?
And then another one is saying,
let's see,
and another one is,
let's see, what's the right way of thinking about it?
So, let's see.
So, let's see.
So, what did I say exactly?
Just to say, if there's one weird person in the group,
we will have GE, right?
Yes.
His answer is kind of saying it's because it doesn't matter for the society.
You explain that as behavioral explanation.
How about the mathematical explanation for that?
Right. So, there are two totally different concepts.
One of them is mathematically, can we prove with certainty that something will happen given the assumptions?
And then the other one is saying, can one person change the world?
And there's totally, totally different concepts.
I'm not sure how else to explain it.
Weren't you saying that GE, behaviorally, is there's no strategy?
Yes, that's correct. And here, there's no strategy.
The person with lexicographic preferences, he isn't thinking, I'm going to change anything.
He's just saying, well, those are the prices, and what I'm going to do is maximize my utility by selling all my Y.
And other people who don't have lexicographic preferences, they're going and saying, well, given that price, I'm happy.
So, that's the idea.
So, linear utility possibly is consistent with general equilibrium.
And so, here's another way it could work.
So, suppose that some people had a lexicographic preference for X over Y, and others had a lexicographic preference for Y over X.
Again, possibly, so possibly, so that could possibly work. Let's see.
I'm just trying to remember, does that one work?
So, let's see.
So, yeah, that one could actually be fine.
So, again, suppose that half the population lexicographically prefers X to Y, half lexicographically prefers Y to X,
and the price of X equals the price of Y, so they're both.5.
Then all the people lexicographically prefer X to Y sell all their Y.
All the people lexicographically prefer Y to X sell all their X.
And then, once you've done that, you no longer want to change your behavior anymore.
So, you just wind up swapping, so that everybody has the stuff that they value more than everything else.
Okay, so, again, possible.
So, questions about that?
Questions?
All right.
And while we're doing this, here is one other fun one.
So, suppose you had something like utilities equal to X squared plus Y squared.
So, again, where there's two goods.
So, do you remember what people want to do here?
Remember this one?
So, this is actually very similar.
So, this is, let's see, let's see here.
So, yeah, so this is actually very similar in that,
so, let's see, let's see, so, that's not quite,
I mean, this one is actually pretty trivial because, again, here what you want to do is just go and X is cheaper by all X and Y is cheaper by all Y.
Let's see, there's one other one I remember.
So, don't worry, yeah, so, we'll possibly come to that later on.
All right.
So, let's see.
Ah, now we see, yeah, so, oh, now I remember what's special about this one.
Let's see, where is it, is it special?
Let's see.
Oh, yeah, yeah, this is the seven.
Ah, yes, all right, this one is fine.
All right, so, here's the thing.
So, with this one, suppose that the price of X were equal to the price of Y.
Then you would be indifferent between any combination of X and Y, right?
You could have all X, you could have all Y, you could have half and half, you wouldn't care.
But suppose your function were that, then would you, and the price is equal, would you then be indifferent between half X and half Y?
No.
No.
What would you want to do in that case?
Specialize.
Yes, specialize.
You want to have either all X or all Y.
You wouldn't even care which one as long as you only have one.
So, that's how that utility function is different.
Right, and again, you could have a general, you could, could have a general there,
but the key thing is that you can no longer use the, use the theorem that I was telling you to guarantee it.
Right, and again, so what's so important about the guarantee?
Well, mathematicians are intellectually very risk-averse folk.
They love it when they can have an absolute guarantee of something.
And anything short of that really keeps them up at night.
Right, and someone's saying, yeah, it's good enough, probably.
No, they do not like that.
So, mathematicians generally have a mindset, from mathematicians I know,
but you can also sort of see it in the work of either no one, either no one knows and no one can say,
or it's absolutely certain.
So, either it's been proven, proven with absolute, proven with mathematical precision,
and that case is truly and perfectly known, or you just can't say.
Right, now, of course, in the real world, you may say, what about probability and like,
any kind of common sense which says that there is a continuum?
They don't like that.
The stuff that they really like are the absolutely proven truths,
and there is, I would say, a phobia of everything else.
And like, so I think it's sort of a tendency to say, look, everything short of perfection is like all scum.
It's all conjecture and opinion, and you know, so, who cares about that stuff?
Okay.
All right, so, questions, questions.
All right.
Okay.
All right, so now we're going to go over two welfare theorems.
And I wish we could be doing this earlier in the night when people's mathematical faculties are at their higher level,
but, and I do actually plan my lectures to try to front load the math, but I can't always accomplish that, so, here we are.
All right, so now you guys all remember going and proving that markets are coverage sufficient
and you're just doing one supply and demand model, right?
So, you may have even gone and taught this for a class.
You've got Q, you've got P, you've got supply, or you've got demand, you've got supply,
and then in this market equilibrium, we've maximized our coverage sufficiency, right?
Everyone remember seeing a diagram like this?
All right.
Now, so, standard results with the intersection of supply and demand, total surplus maximized,
allocation must be Pareto efficient, right?
And remember I was talking last week about how in a highly stylized theoretical model,
things might not be Pareto efficient?
Well, how stylized does that look to you?
Pretty stylized, all right?
So, yes, so it might not be Pareto efficient.
Okay.
But can that diagram that we draw for undergraduates all the time actually be honestly generalized to multiple markets?
Right? Is it okay to say, well, that's how it is for one market, all markets,
so if all markets do that, then it's true for all markets moving on?
Across markets?
Yes.
Equilibrium among markets?
Well, no, no, no, basically you're saying, well, that's how one market works.
So, this is how the corn market works.
Yes, that's how, yeah, one market works.
So, is it intellectually okay to draw that diagram and then generalize it to a world with 100 markets
and say all the, like, the same thing, the same thing works no matter how many markets there are?
So, that's a serious question.
All right.
And general equilibrium theory has an answer, which is yes, you can do that.
It is okay.
All right.
So, you can generalize those easy textbook results for supply and demand to a complex general equilibrium model
with any number of goods and actors.
All right.
So, there are actually two famous welfare theorems associated with this.
The first one I'm actually going to walk you through the proof,
and the second one I'm just going to tell you the answer.
All right.
So, the first welfare theorem says that under all the preceding assumptions that I've given you,
the general equilibrium allocation is Brayton efficient, and actually, like, there's also Calgary,
you know, also Calgary is efficient, but since it's a highly stylized theoretical setting,
it's actually an interesting issue as to whether it's Brayton efficient.
It's not just a trivial thing.
All right.
So, how do you prove this?
All right.
Well, there's a standard proof by contradiction.
So, you've never heard of proof by contradiction?
Now, the way proof by contradiction works is you want to prove A.
So, what you do is say, well, let's just assume not A, and then let's work a reason through that,
and then eventually, you know, if proof by contradiction works, assuming not A, you come to a contradiction,
and if you reason correctly in all those steps, that must mean that not A was false.
And if not A is false, what must be true?
A.
A. All right.
So, that's how proof by contradiction works.
All right.
So, standard proof by contradiction, suppose that X is an equilibrium allocation, but X prime is Pareto superior to X.
All right.
So, these are the steps.
All right.
So, X prime must be feasible, so that means that the summation of all of the consumption vectors must still be less than
or equal to the endowment vector, and remember, this is the summation of the new alternative consumption vectors, right,
and your new, allegedly, Pareto superior equilibrium must actually still be feasible, and then price or non-negative.
So, price or non-negative, when we go and multiply through the prices of all the consumption vectors,
that must still be less than or equal to the prices times the endowment vectors, and again, remember, that,
remember, what does that mean?
This is just saying that the value of the stuff that you buy at the supermarket must be less than the value of the stuff
that you sold at the supermarket, right, because it's a commodity economy, so the only place to get money is by
selling stuff at the supermarket, right, and then we assume utility is strictly increasing consumption,
so people always consume an amount equal to their total income, all right, and this implies that the market,
the value of your new market basket must be less than or equal to the value of the original market basket.
Okay.
Great.
But, by the definition of Pareto improvements, all consumers must weakly prefer X prime to X,
and one must strictly prefer X prime to X.
That's what it means for there to be a Pareto improvement.
One person must actually like the new endowment better, and no one can like it less.
Okay.
So, weak preference means that X prime cannot be more affordable than X,
so that means that PXI prime must be less than or equal to PX,
and then strict preference requires that X prime be not affordable for at least one person,
so for at least one person, the value of the new endowment must be greater than the value of,
or excuse me, the value of the new consumption basket must be greater than the value of the old consumption basket, right,
and now, if we sum these weak and strong inequalities, we get this result, which contradicts the original assumption.
You're wondering, so what's going on here?
The last step is the key step.
So, suppose that X is exactly equal to 3 and Y is greater than 4.
Alright, what can we say about X plus Y?
Can we say that X plus Y is greater than or equal to 7?
What can we say?
It is strictly greater than 7, yes,
because we're taking something that is equal to 3 and adding something on more than 4,
so the sum of that must be more than 7.
Okay, and that's what's going on in the last step,
is we're adding up one thing that must exactly equal the regular thing,
and another thing must be strictly greater than it,
and that's how we actually wind up contradicting that original assumption for that the market value of,
or let's see, the market value of the new consumption basket must be less than or equal to the market value of the old consumption basket.
Because now we've got a result that the new consumption basket must have a market value greater than the old one,
and it is a contradiction to say that it is less than or equal and that it is greater.
So, there it is.
Alright, so, again, if you want to work through it, you can,
but this late hour probably isn't going to be that helpful to get all over in more great detail.
So, this is the very famous first welfare theorem,
which some people have actually looked at and said,
see, this is a great vindication of markets,
and other people, of course, have looked at it and said,
no, if you understand what you need to make the theorem true,
it is a great condemnation of markets.
And then, after all the dust has settled, there's people saying,
look, even if all these assumptions were true, it's not really that impressive,
because an allocation where one person owns everything, is that proto-efficient?
Sure. Alright.
So, markets are proto-efficient.
If you remember last week's lecture, it's even more impressive,
because you have learned to believe that everything is proto-efficient, hopefully.
So, then, wow, it's a theorem saying that markets are proto-efficient, just like everything.
Wow, that's really great.
It is not as dumb as that, because remember,
this is actually a result of a highly stylized theoretical setting,
where we could actually get a different result.
And actually, you can go and prove things, like,
if there are externalities, then the result would generally not be proto-efficient.
You're saying, like, well, why would it not be proto-efficient?
How in the real world could you go and solve an externality without hurting somebody?
In the real world, you can't, right?
Because, like, suppose everyone is polluting,
and you go and impose a pollution tax, and that cleans up the air,
and people's health is better.
Still, who is almost certainly going to be harmed by that pollution tax?
Yeah, polluters, or how about someone who pollutes a lot,
doesn't like going outside, and is on the verge of death anyway, right?
Or, like, they already have emphysema, so they don't care what the air quality is like.
All right, so, in the real world, you're like,
there's going to be someone who doesn't gain, right?
But on a homework problem, you could easily come up with a situation where everybody gained.
Right, so, let's suppose a homework problem where
every single person places the same value,
owns equal amounts of polluting,
every single person has the same health function,
everyone cares about the health to some degree,
there's continuity, and that setting, then,
is going to be really easy, actually, to say we go and impose a modest pollution tax,
and then we go and we redistribute the tax in lump sum,
and then everyone will be better off.
So, that's a case where if we go and make the world,
and we create a weird enough hypothetical,
and again, we reverse engineer the hypothetical to make it work,
then it's fine.
Because remember, I didn't offer you any kind of a theorem
that the world is always Pareto efficient last week.
I offered you common sense observations about
how it's really hard to compensate everybody,
really hard to know how much to compensate people,
and how there's really weird and sick and twisted people in the world.
Which are all true, but that's not a theorem.
It's just saying, look at the world with your eyes, people,
and see what the world is really like,
and realize you're not going to be able to get a Pareto improvement in the real world.
All right.
In any case, the fact that you can show that
an economy with any number of markets that satisfies these assumptions is Pareto efficient
is not completely trivial,
because the problem is set up to be so clean
that actually it might not be Pareto efficient.
Did you have a question over there?
I was just going to ask if anyone's ever made an effort
to come up with a theorem of some sort,
or if that's been like a raging debate that's been going on.
A theorem about?
About a Pareto efficiency, whether it's in the real world.
I mean, I would say, I've never seen anyone go and do a theorem
incorporating the stuff I'm talking about,
because in the stuff I'm talking about, it's empirical.
Yeah.
So, I get it.
You could go imagine saying, well, this is like the non-psychopath theorem,
saying, assume no psychopaths, which are defined in the following way,
and then assume that, or, you know, like,
I suppose probably the thing that's most likely to be out there
is a theorem saying that as the number of people increases,
the odds that you can get a Pareto improvement go down.
So, you know, like that.
And that's one that would lend itself to a more mathematical treatment
where you say, suppose everyone's preferences are normally distributed,
and then we start off with one person.
One person you can get Pareto improvements, two people,
as long as their preferences are not so different, then maybe you can,
and then if we increase the number, then, like,
you might have a limit theorem saying as the number of people goes to infinity,
the probability that there will be any viable Pareto improvement goes to zero.
So, there might be something like that out there.
But, again, my experience is mathematical economists are generally bored
by common sense observations that invalidate big claims.
Like, they're much more interested in very technical refinements
within a very narrow context.
And if you were to say, look, you know,
you're just rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic.
That's really good.
You've made an enemy.
You've made a very powerful enemy.
But you start saying stuff like that.
So, you know, so.
The good news is there's just not many people who do that kind of work anymore.
So, they're a dying breed.
Of course, if you think this work is great, then this is bad for you.
But, otherwise, more room for other better work.
Okay.
All right.
In any case, the first Weyler theorem has been much discussed.
You know, one complaint is to say the assumptions are wrong.
To say, look, there's externalities.
There's all the other problems.
But, anyway, the ultimate complaint is to say, look, even if all these assumptions are right,
still it might just be a really super unfair Pareto fission result.
And what's so great about that?
All right.
Now, there's a lot of economists who then find hope in the second Weyler theorem, right,
which requires some additional assumptions about utility functions, which I'm going to omit.
Again, if you're curious, you can go and Google second Weyler theorem and see every single gory detail.
All right.
Well, what the second Weyler theorem says is this.
Any Pareto fission allocation can be a general equilibrium given some initial endowments.
So, whatever general equilibrium you want, all you have to do is have an initial redistribution phase
at the beginning of time, and then you can allow free markets, and things will be fine.
So, whatever result you want can be achieved through markets if you just do redistribution first.
All right.
Now, you say, well, what's so surprising about that?
Well, the interpretation that many people attach to it is to say, like, you know all those Marxist
and socialist complaints about markets and how markets are terrible?
They're all wrong.
It's not the markets that are terrible.
It's the initial endowments that are terrible.
And if we would have fixed the initial endowments, markets could give us any result you want.
Markets could give us the most egalitarian society we can imagine.
All we need to do is just to redistribute the endowments when we start, and then you can have the
freest market you ever wanted, freer market that ever existed, and it'll still end up with whatever result you wanted to get.
Okay.
That's presuming you know how to make the distribution.
Yeah.
Well, again, it's just saying that that distribution, that for any endowment, for any result you want,
there exists a redistribution that you could do that would get it for you.
There is a way.
It doesn't tell you what the way is, but there is a way.
Right?
And you can say, what's so great about that?
Again, to a mathematician, proving existence is really important, even if they can't actually find out what it is.
To know a solution exists.
What is a solution?
Well, I could never tell you that.
That can't be calculated.
It's like, well, then what good is it to know?
It's good because now I can sleep at night knowing that there is a solution.
Right?
So, and again, just to get inside this mentality, if you're not there already,
like to a mathematician, proving that chess has a solution is a big accomplishment,
even though they can't tell you what the solution is.
They say, look, it has a solution.
The solution is either white always wins, black always wins, or there's always a stalemate.
I don't know which of those three it is.
But I have a theorem proving there is an answer.
All right, so now give me time.
I don't know if I was able to off button any of you like I said, but there's a forum that we have.
And if you'd like to sign up for that, we do have a forum that everybody can go to.
Yeah, yeah,, and it's free.
Qualify to sign up and then it will have this beautiful blue signal on it on the forum.
It's one of those things that you do on the forum.
Like I said I am on my home clock these days.
I think that there will be hope to find a solution.
And I'll turn around.
So a mathematician, a friend of mine,
once told me a joke along the lines of,
a mathematician is stuck in a bank vault
with a raging out of control fire.
He's on the verge of being burned alive.
And then he lights a match, turns on the sink,
throws the match in, and says,
I've proven a solution exists.
Yes, so, but that sink isn't enough to go and put out
the fire, so what difference does it make?
It made a difference to him before he was burned alive.
I died knowing it could be solved.
So, now, if you're wondering, so why is this theorem so great?
So the philosophical perspective to think about
is, imagine you're in the 1950s, where
the main philosophical debate would be between a normal Paul
Samuelson Keynesian liberal and a Marxist.
This would be the main range of intellectual opinion
that you'd be getting during that time.
And so both of them agree that the distribution of resources
under capitalism is terrible and something ought to be done.
But the Marxist says, look, the problem
is inherent in the market itself.
We need to have communist revolution and markets
for all time, and then have the government go and ensure
a fair distribution forever.
And then, if you are a Keynesian liberal economist,
you whip out the second welfare theorem and say, wrong Marxist.
The real story is that markets are perfectly fine.
We just need to have massive redistribution once,
and then the free market is actually
going to give us just as egalitarian result as you want.
So within that framework of those
being the two sides that are arguing,
it's easier to see what the second welfare theorem is
doing.
It's shifting the blame from the market mechanism
to the endowment problem.
And just saying the problem is that endowments
were sufficiently equal, or actually, if they all
are, to some extent, they must be unequal in the right way.
So in particular, so if there are some people, for example,
who are, if there's someone who, I don't know what it could be,
someone who is just super low skilled.
Well, in that case, just equalizing
the regular physical commodities is not actually
going to equalize his life prospects, right?
Because suppose there's Bill Gates,
and then there's a guy who has $1 million for Bill Gates'
guilt.
So will it suffice just to go and take Bill Gates'
current possessions and then equalize them,
and then make sure that Bill Gates will
have no more than this guy?
Will that do it?
What's going to happen?
Imagine you take all of Bill Gates' stuff
and give it to the guy who's not very skilled.
Does that mean, what is almost certainly going
to happen within a few hours?
Bill Gates is going to earn some income, which
will very quickly allow him to start gaining.
And if he works hard enough, he'll be able to regain.
So actually, what you really need
is not even just to equalize the initial endowments.
You need to equalize the ownership of labor and skill,
which means you would, like strictly speaking,
the second buffer theorem with production
would require that low-skilled people would
get to own Bill Gates, that Bill Gates would not
automatically get 100% ownership of Bill Gates,
but rather other people would get to own shares in him.
And then similarly, he could have said, well,
we'll compensate you by giving you some shares
and some janitors.
So can't I just be a free man?
No, because that's inconsistent with getting
equal life prospects for everybody,
because you are of super high skills,
and other people don't.
So the second buffer theorem, though people often
think of it as just a matter of we just sort of equalize
the physical stuff once.
But it goes way beyond that, because it
requires an equalization of really everything
in order to get that result.
All right.
So it sounds like Marxism has the win.
Yes.
Right, that did.
Well, if you think about it, Marxism is saying, look,
we need to also equalize labor, by saying that some people,
by saying that, no, you don't just get to go and own
your own labor.
We all are part of a community, and you
have to labor for the community.
Yeah.
All right.
Now, if you're wondering, so what does it really show?
Well, there are institutions that would actually
be self-reversing in a way that the second welfare theorem
shows markets are not.
So think about democracy, where we
have two wolves and a sheep voting over lunch.
Classic case.
All right, so you might say, well, look,
here's what we'll do.
So we don't like the democratic outcome.
Let's just go and take most of the wolves' assets
and just give them to the sheep, and that'll solve the problem,
right?
So every time there's an election,
and the wolves keep voting to say
the sheep has to do whatever we say,
and the sheep gets outvoted again and again and again,
and says the problem is democracy,
you say, no, let's just go and take most of the wolves' stuff
and give it to the sheep, and then that'll be fine, right?
And the answer is, no, that won't be fine.
Suppose you expropriate the wolves,
give everything they own to the sheep,
and then you have another election.
What are the wolves going to immediately vote to do?
Take all their stuff back.
Give back what you just took.
So that is a case where the institution of democracy
actually is not amenable to simply changing
the endowments of assets, unless, of course,
you count the votes themselves as assets.
You'd have to go to the pipes.
To most people, that is, by definition, not democracy
anymore, if you can actually say the wolves have
to give up some of their votes to the sheep,
or parts of their votes.
So that's a case where the institution of democracy itself
will reverse what you try to do in order to fix it.
And what the second law of the theorem says
is that markets are not that way.
If you do a sufficiently extreme redistribution once,
it won't reverse itself.
Now, of course, in the real world,
the idea of people who like the second law of the theorem
imagine there's going to be something
like monthly redistribution, monthly transfer payments,
and redistributive taxes, and stuff like that.
But the theorem itself is really just a once and for all thing.
If you're wondering, why in the real world
don't we just do once and for all?
Again, probably four reasons.
We'll tell you the kind of reasons
we'll talk about after the midterm, namely,
some of the people realize that a lot of people who are poor,
if you did give them one giant lump sum,
they would go and immediately blow
it all on the lottery, or racetrack, or alcohol.
And then, once again, you'd be back to a very unequal world.
In general, I hate documentaries.
I find them very boring, and the plots are bad.
But one of my very favorite documentaries,
which violates this, there's actually
a documentary where they just gave $100,000 cash
to a homeless guy, and then followed him around
to see what he did.
And he blew through that money in a matter of maybe two months.
And he spent essentially none of it
on any of his long-term plans.
Like he said, well, my teeth are rotting out of my mouth,
and they were.
And he said, so what I'm going to do
is I know if I just go down to Mexico for $2,000,
I can get all my teeth fixed, and this is really
a horrible problem.
He blew through all that money before he got even
thought about buying a bus ticket to get to Mexico.
None of that happened.
And actually, a lot of what he spent the money on
was on gifts, and not just to poor other homeless people.
He would just go and just see someone on the street who
was clearly doing fine.
He said, I want to buy that guy a car,
and all kinds of weird stuff.
But anyway, I looked at that and said, wow,
that's a pretty interesting movie anyway.
I get to say, well, on the one hand,
you might say, well, if you'd spent it prudently,
that wouldn't be a movie.
You can still get a movie out of that.
That'd still be interesting.
In any case, how many times do you
think that they ran this experiment?
How many $100,000 in cash did they give to homeless people
do you think the guys had before they finally
came up with a story that was worth filming?
I bet they only did it once.
So I don't think they were just going and trying it
over and over until finally they found a train wreck.
I think they found a train wreck the first time.
Do you remember the night that doctor did it?
I did blog it.
So if you just go to Econlog and just
Google homeless and lined by cash or something like that.
Yeah, I just Googled it.
Reversal of fortune?
Is that how I'm familiar?
Yeah, that's it.
Yep, reversal of fortune.
Reversal of reversal.
All right.
So the second law of the theorem,
very important if it is a debate between the liberal
comments of the 1950s and the Marxist economists.
Of course, if you're someone that is just
sympathetic to market distribution of income anyway,
then you may say, well, I don't see what the big deal is.
Or if you're also someone who knows anything
about the history of inequality and says,
look, the main inequalities are caused by governments going
and looting and enslaving the rest of the population.
Get rid of that, and the objectionable inequality is
gone.
Or if you are familiar with the current global distribution
income, the single main determinant
of your income in the modern world
is which country you happen to be born in.
And why is that?
Because of immigration restrictions, of course.
Because all you really need to do in this world,
if you are an able-bodied adult, is
to go and get steers passes to rich country
and get a job shedding shoes.
And you are no longer anywhere near absolute poverty
as it's globally defined.
Why doesn't this happen?
Because it's illegal.
How can this be with all the illegal immigration?
The amount of illegal immigration
is a pittance compared to the amount that
would happen if it were legal.
So if you say there's like 11 million illegal immigrants
currently in the US, so anyone can come,
how many do you think would be here if anybody could come?
Well, there's a lot of estimates,
but generally in the hundreds of millions,
saying that the laws that exist, whatever you think about them,
are way over 90% effective in preventing immigration.
OK, so questions, questions.
All right, so that's the first and second level of theorems.
All right, now moving on to something more fun stuff.
All right, so Aaron DeBrow contingent claims markets.
So general equilibrium seems pretty general
because you've got a model that fits
the economy with any number of people, any number of goods.
So that sounds like a big deal.
But Aaron DeBrow noticed that it's actually way more general
than it seems on the surface because general equilibrium
can handle intertemporal exchange.
It can handle a trade of dollars today for dollars
and 20 years ago, for bananas today,
for squashes in three minutes.
All of these intertemporal trades can be handled.
All you need to do is take the model
and then say let's define good k at time t
as being a different good than good k at time t plus 1.
So let's just go and multiply all the physical goods
by all the possible times in which those goods could exist
and then rescale the model so that no longer
is the number of goods k.
It's equal to k times the number of possible time periods.
So in other words, instead of trading current goods,
you'd be trading slips of paper with promises
to deliver any good at any time period.
And now we've got intertemporal markets covered.
So I could go and see actually I wrote these earlier.
So I could give you a piece of paper
that is good for a bundle of bananas in 2018
and I could sell this to you.
Now obviously, I can't sell you 2018 bananas right now
in a physical sense.
I can't go and say here are some 2018 bananas.
If I handed you some bananas, right now
they wouldn't be 2018 bananas.
They'd be 2017 bananas.
But I could give you a piece of paper, which is good for a bushel
of bananas in 2018.
And there's a certain amount of money
if you're willing to pay me for that.
Furthermore, general equilibrium can
handle an arbitrary amount of uncertainty.
So think about good k if x happens
as being a different good than if not x happens.
And actually, we can go and list every possible event,
every possible good, multiply those two things together,
and then we have a new number of goods.
And we could do it number of physical goods
times number of time periods times number
of states of the world.
And then that could come up to some enormous number
when you multiply those three variables together and say
that's the number of goods.
And then plug that into Arrow to Brow.
So I can have an endowment of bananas in 2018
if average temperatures exceed 80 degrees.
And then I can have another piece of paper
that's good for those bananas if average temperatures
are less than 80 degrees.
And then we could go and sell all these little slips
of paper, good under certain conditions,
otherwise non-joy.
When you have a coupon saying only good on these dates,
only good with the purchase of a hamburger,
so you've seen coupons like that.
So again, you can imagine going and auctioning off
all kinds of slips of paper, good for different commodities
at different times under different circumstances.
And in fact, if a piece of paper represents
an unconditional good, then I could
go and separate the piece of paper
into 1,000 different regions, cut them all up
with a pair of scissors, and then I
could sell each one for, of course,
much less than the value of the good under all conditions.
So anyway, the idea is that in both cases,
the complex problem is isomorphic
to the standard problem.
It's mathematically identical.
So on the surface, it looks different.
But when you really think about it,
there's no fundamental difference
between the complex problem and the simple problem.
And therefore, all the standard results go through.
All right, now, I would say that none of this
would impress me if it weren't for an incredible application
of this idea, which is the idea of the betting market.
Right here at George Mason, we have
one of the world's most prominent scholars
on betting markets.
That's Robin Hanson.
So he really was one of the earliest people
to talk about the ideas of betting markets.
He's been involved in some of the key experiments
with betting markets.
The idea of a betting market is that I could actually
go and say, look, here is a asset which
will pay $1 if Donald Trump wins re-election.
And then we can go and sell it.
And we can look at that market price.
And we can then go and use that market price
to estimate what is the actual market
estimate of the probability of this event happening.
And we can do this for anything.
We could go and have all kinds of submarkets.
There is, so what is it?
There's the price of this asset.
So it says this pays $1 if Donald Trump wins,
if he goes and kills more than 1,000 people in wars.
And there's another asset.
This is the price of $1 if he gets re-elected,
if he kills less than or equal to 1,000 people.
And we could have both these assets circulating.
We could have thousands of assets circulating.
All with very precise conditions of a payoff.
And we can go and do a little bit of math
to use all this to get a market estimate of what people
actually think.
Now, of course, the fact that you get a market estimate
doesn't mean the market estimate is good.
Could be the markets are run by idiots.
But if you talk to Robin or read some of his research,
there is a big literature to try to see
how good are betting markets as actual predictors
of future events.
And the answer is, I guess there's two answers.
One is, they're not that great.
Second of all, they're better than anything else.
So they are the least bad method of predicting future events.
And how good are they?
There's all kinds of weird results out there.
Like, so betting markets for, well actually,
so this is actually, like, commodities markets
for oranges, which are essentially a betting
market on the price of oranges.
These predict the weather in Florida
above and beyond all meteorological forecasts.
So you could know everything meteorologists
have to say about the weather in Florida.
And then you go and you get a prediction of the weather.
And then you go and you look at the market price.
And of course, with good weather,
you expect there to be low prices of oranges.
With bad prices, you expect there
to be high prices of oranges in Florida.
Bad Florida weather, that is.
And it gives you additional predictive value there.
So looking at that commodity market,
that tells you more than all the meteorologists know.
Weird.
And many other experiments along these lines,
all coming down to if you are limited to information
that you actually possess, that human beings have,
and you want to go and make a prediction,
you can only have one piece of information,
betting markets are the best thing you can get.
Now, broadband is very famously associated with not just
betting markets, but the terrorism betting market.
Right, yes, there was.
It was not, of course, called the terrorism betting market.
And the betting market was not only about terrorism.
But it was about terrorism.
Now, if you talk to Robin, he will dispute that last claim
and with the following argument.
He said, look, a terrorism betting market
would mean that we were betting on specific terrorist attacks.
But we weren't doing that.
We were only betting on things like overall terrorist
fatalities in a year.
That's not a terrorism betting market, is it?
This is the case where I tell Robin, you are a genius,
but you don't understand any normal human being.
To any normal human being, of course, your distinction
makes no difference at all if human lives are being bet on,
and whether it's a specific event or an aggregate
or whatever, it doesn't matter.
That's a terrorism betting market,
and it's offensive to them.
Sometimes Robin goes, OK.
And sometimes he's like, I don't see that.
Well, I don't know.
Do you have to go and find some normal people
and talk to them to see what they'll say?
Because they will say this.
You can bet on it.
But anyway, so he was part of some betting markets
where you bet on the total number of fatalities
from terrorism in a year.
Now, what's the point of this supposed to be?
Well, first of all, to get an estimate
of how bad terrorism is going to be,
and then furthermore, as I was suggesting,
you can go and create submarkets to try to find out,
is a government policy going to make terrorism better or worse?
So you could say terrorism fatalities,
if we invade Iraq in 2003, terrorism fatalities
if we don't invade Iraq in 2003, and do a little bit of math,
and then you could actually come up with a market estimate
about whether a given course of action
is actually going to be an effective way of dealing
with the problem or counterproductive or have no
effect.
I get it.
It's like if you were actually a terrorist,
it would make a lot of sense to get on this market.
Absolutely.
So that was one of the main reasons
why this was shut down in two days.
However, as you might guess, there
were very smart people involved who
thought of that and 1,000 other objections,
and they worked it all into the market in order to deal with it.
There were many things they did in order to avoid this problem.
First of all, to participate in the terrorism betting market,
you had to be registered with the CIA under your real name,
or you could never collect any money.
All right.
So what this meant is if you bet on terrorism
and you made a ton of money, while you would be paid,
there would be a very thorough investigation of you
to see whether you would possibly
have anything to do with it.
Interestingly enough, after the 9-11 attacks,
part of what the 9-11 Commission did
was to look into whether any investment strategies appeared
to be based on prior knowledge of the event.
and in all the world they found no evidence of this.
They did find one company that had bought a lot,
that had shorted United stock very suspiciously,
but they had also bought American Airlines stock
at the same time.
So if they knew about the plot,
they only knew half the plot and they really botched it.
It was like, man, what were the odds
that I would have inside information
about only half the plot and then I would go
and just the other half of the plot
would turn around to exactly upset
my brilliant betting strategy.
Man, I'm already terrible.
So anyway, that's one thing is that
in order to participate in the market,
you had to expose yourself to very clear scrutiny.
So I mean, actually, once you start thinking about that way,
if you really wanted to go and make money off of terrorism,
what would be some much better investments to make
than going and registering with this obscure CIA market
where they know exactly who you are?
It would be a much more anonymous way
of profiting from terrorism.
Don't do this.
You won't get away with it either,
but what would be a less stupid way of trying to do it?
Yes.
Yes, how about like the regular old style?
And like what are some ways,
so like what are some of the,
what investments you might want to do?
Like you just said, shorting.
Yeah, short the companies that are gonna be hurt
or be better yet do a really leveraged one
like short reinsurance companies,
short the companies that sell insurance
to the insurance companies that are gonna be ruined
by this stuff, would otherwise be ruined by this stuff.
Yeah, that kind of thing.
So you know, you just want to go and decide,
I'm just a normal guy, short reinsurance companies.
Is it a crime to think that reinsurance companies
are gonna go down the drain?
So I remember in the movie, The Big Short,
did they actually short reinsurance companies?
I can't remember anymore.
I mean, I saw it like two months ago,
but I don't remember exactly what they did.
So yeah, I mean, I think they actually,
I think they actually went to places like Lloyd's of London
and just made new assets.
All right, so yeah, that would be kind of suspicious.
I just want a bed on this building getting blown up.
I mean, what are the odds it would be tomorrow?
It's suspicious.
So then there was, so that was only one
of the obvious things.
Now another check was that there's a maximum bed
of about $100.
All right, so in order for you to think
this is incentivizing terrorism,
you really would have to imagine a terrorist saying,
well, I wasn't gonna do it,
but if I can make 100 bucks off it,
that changes everything.
So it does seem like you need to have
a pretty extreme elasticity,
especially with a suicide bomber.
So well, if I can leave another 100 bucks to my family,
then it's worth it, otherwise for that.
So that would seem to be pretty hard to believe.
Now that does raise a better question,
which is, do the markets still work well
when the stakes are so limited?
And there's a lot of experimental work on this,
finding that while they don't work quite as well,
they still work quite well.
Just having even modest cash sums
seems to make a difference
and to give you much more accurate predictions
of what's going on.
All right, and the betting markets have applied
to lots of different cases.
So they've been used for internal markets,
things like, I think Hewlett Packard for a while
had an internal market where their employees could bet
on which products were gonna be successful.
So which divisions would be profitable, things like this.
So Robin has two really big ideas,
one huge and one ginormous
for how to leverage betting markets.
So he has one piece, I think in Forbes called,
we should set up a fire the CEO market.
And what this says is when you write the corporate charter
for your business, you set up a betting market
in two things.
First of all, the value of the company stock
if the current CEO does not get fired,
and then the value of the company stock
if he does get fired.
And the corporate charter says,
if that second value ever exceeds the first,
he is automatically fired.
It just is a matter of rule.
Is there a way to corner the betting markets?
Well, in theory, of course, there always is.
So yes, the CEO could just try and go and try to buy it,
but remember, anytime that there is an eventual realization
of what happens in the world,
then you can just go,
especially as long as they're short selling,
you can just go and sell it short
and you can make a ton of money off of that,
or in principle, you can make an infinite amount.
So if the CEO is just trying to go
and artificially inflate his price,
but you're allowed to go and sell that stock short,
you can just go and create a billion dollars worth of that
and say either buy the billion dollars of it, CEO,
or the price is going to become realistic again.
All right, so anyway, that was the idea,
was to go and leverage betting markets
to go and tell companies when it's time
to fire the CEO and try again.
So that is a huge idea.
He also has a proposal called Futurarchy
to turn the citizen into a new system of government,
which if you take my public choice class,
you can learn more about,
or of course you can talk about it, talk about it with him.
He actually has an entire piece
in the journal Political Philosophy,
which is a great piece for this journal.
It's a very unusual piece,
just says, here's my proposal for a new system of government,
here are 40 objections, and here's why all 40 are wrong.
For each one, objection, answer, objection, answer,
just go on and on, 40 of these,
and there's no good argument against my bold plan
for a new system of government.
All right, I think it's also fair to say
that Futurarchy is the only new idea
for a system of government for many decades,
possibly centuries, actually.
So what other new forms of government
have been proposed in the last 100 years?
I mean, I'm kind of tempted to say,
like Marxist dictatorship is new,
but it's not that new, really.
I mean, it's very similar to a lot of other things
that exist earlier, does have some differences,
but it's new enough to really count.
Whereas, whatever you say about
having betting markets rule the world, it's new, right?
There's nothing like it out there,
nothing even remotely like this, it's so weird.
All right, okay, so, in any case,
we'll finish up with this next week,
but if you find this idea fascinating,
it does come right out of Erich Dobroff,
Erich Dobroff and Indian Claim Markets.
So this is a legitimate case of a seemingly
totally irrelevant piece of mathematical reasoning
yielding some very great fruit.
And I will say that whenever I actually want news
about anything, my policy is I don't read headlines,
which I find very unaffordable,
I'll look at betting markets.
And betting markets say whether something is really news
or whether it's actually just a continuation
of expected trends.
Cool, all right, so we'll continue next week.
