1.  You and a friend both read the same article in the AER  finding that the 
minimum wage does not increase unemployment .  You both agree that P(article 
finds minimum wage raises unemployment | the minimum wage r eally does raise 
unemployment)=.75, and P(article finds minimum wage raises unemployment | 
the minimum wage really does not raise unemployment)=.25.  But the two of you 
DISAGREE in your final estimates: your P(minimum wage raises unemployment| 
article's fi ndings)=.9, while your friend sets the same probability at .45.  
True, False, and Explain:  Your prior probability that the minimum wage increases 
unemployment must be exactly double your friend's prior probability that the 
minimum wage increases unemployme nt. 
FALSE.  Let A be "minimum wage raises unemployment" and B be "AER article finds that 
minimum wage does not raise unemployment."  We want to solve for P(A) knowing P(A|B), 
P(~B|A), and P(~B|~A).  P(~B|A)=1 -P(B|A), so using Bayes' Law, we can calculate P(A) for me 
and my friend:  
For me:  
))( 1(75.)( 25.)( 25.9.AP APAP
 , implying my P(A)=.964  
For my friend: 
))( 1(75.)( 25.)( 25.45.AP APAP
 , implying my friend's P(A)=.771  
By inspection, .964<2*.771.  
Most answers treated .75 as P(B|A) instead of P(~B|A).  But the text gives you P(article finds 
minimum wage RAISES unemployment) conditional on various things, but the article in fact facts 
that the minimum wage does NOT raise unemployment!  One sign that this answer is wrong is 
that it implies that we get more  confident th at the minimum wage causes unemployment after we 
see conflicting evidence!  


---

60% of all agents in an economy have U=ln x + ln y, and the other 40% have
U=2 ln x + ln y.  All agents start with 1 unit of x and 1 unit of y.

2. True, False, and Explain:  
.4.1
yx
pp  
TRUE.  Using the formula from the homework, and adjusting the ratios of agents from 50/50 to 
60/40:  
.4.1 31.11*3/1*40 1*5.*601*3/2*40 1*5.*60
yx
pp  


3. True, False, and Explain:  Agents of the first type wi ll buy approximately .155 
units of x.  
FALSE.  Each agent has total income of 1*1.31+1*1=2.31.  Agents of type 1 spend half of their 
income on x.  Their consumption of x therefore equals their total spending divided by the price: 


2.31/2/1.31=.882.  


---


4.  The re are two players in the "Big Brother/Little Brother" game.  The players 
simultaneously decide whether to Read or Play Sports.  Player 1 earns a payoff 
of 10 if he does the SAME thing Player 2 does, and 0 otherwise; Player 2 earns 
a payoff of 10 if he doe s the something DIFFERENT than what Player 1 does, 
and 0 otherwise.  
True, False, and Explain:   The following normal form accurately represents this 
game.  
                           Player 2  
Player 1   Read  Play Sports  
Read  10,0  0,10  
Play Sports  0,10  10,0  
TRUE.  The left payoff goes to Player 1, the right to Player 2.  When they both Read or both Play 
Sports, the payoffs are therefore 10 to Player 1 and 0 to Player 2.  In the two other boxes, the 
payoffs are reversed.  


---


5.  True, False, and Explain:  In a game of complete and perfect information, 
every Nash equilibrium is subgame perfect, and MSNE can never  exist.  
FALSE.  Kreps Figure 12.11(a) shows a game of complete and perfect information with two NE, 
only one of which is subgame perfect.  Every gam e of complete and perfect information has a 
SGPNE, but that does NOT mean that every NE is SGP.  
MSNE can exist in a game of complete and perfect information if there are tied payoffs.  


---


6.  Suppose the Ultimatum Game is played simultaneously  rather th an 
sequentially.  One player writes down an offer, and the other player writes down  3 
a minimum acceptable offer.  Both notes are then opened; if Player 1's offer is 
greater than or equal to Player 2's minimum acceptable offer, they get Player 1's 
allocation .  Otherwise both players get nothing.  
True, False, and Explain:   There is only one weakly dominant strategy in this 
game and one subgame perfection equilibrium, but (assuming players' offers do 
not have to be whole numbers) an infinity of Nash equilibria . 
FALSE.  It is indeed weakly dominant for Player 2 to write a minimum acceptable offer of 0, 
making it strictly dominant for Player 1 to offer 0.  
Moreover, it is indeed that case that there are an infinity of NE.  If Player 1's offer plus Player 2's 
min imum acceptable offer add up to the total payoff, you have a NE.  
HOWEVER, in a simultaneous game, all of these infinite number of NE are subgame perfect!  In a 
simultaneous move game, there is only one subgame, so all NE are SGP.  Intuitively, in the 
simu ltaneous game, Player 2 is in just as strong a bargaining position as Player 1.  Player 1 can 
threaten to give a low offer, but Player 2 can just as easily threaten to reject such an offer.  In 
contrast, in the sequential game, Player 1 does not just threa ten to give a low offer.  He makes  the 
offer irrevocably, which then leaves Player 2 with a definite choice between something and 
nothing.  


---


7.  Suppose two bargainers infinitely repeat the following game.  Their strategy is 
to always play Soft as long as b oth players have always played Soft in the past.  
If one player ever plays Hard, both of them play the MSNE of the game forever 
afterwards.  
  Player 2  Player 
1  Hard  Soft  
Hard  0,0  5,1  
Soft  1,5  4,4  
True, False, and Explain:   The smallest value of  able to sustain cooperation is 
.5. 
FALSE.  To answer this problem, we first need to solve for the MSNE.  Let  be P2's probability of 
playing Hard.  Then P1 is indifferent if 0 +5(1 -)=1+4(1 -), implying =.5.  Since payoffs are 
symmetric, both players p lay Hard 50% of the time.  Thus, players are equally likely to get the 
(Hard,Hard) payoff of 0, the (Hard,Soft) payoff of 5, the (Soft,Hard) payoff of 1, or the (Soft,Soft) 
payoff of 4.  The expected payoff is thus .25*0+.25*5+.25*1+.25*4=2.5.  
Once we kno w this, we simply solve for the critical : 
 


1 05.2 5 4
tt
tt 
.  Thus: 

  15.2514 , implying that 


4. . 


---


8.  N firms are trying to form a stable cartel.  One of them makes the following 
suggestion: "Let's set our cartel price somewhat below  the monopoly level.  That 
way, we'll make lower profits every turn, but the incentive to cheat will also be a 
lot smaller.  Moderate collusion will be easier to sustain than full collusion."   4 
True, False, and Explain:   Assuming firms p lay trigger strategies, this reduces 
the critical value of  under both  Bertrand and Cournot competition.  
FALSE.  Under Bertrand collusion, it makes no difference.  If the cartel price and profits fall, a 
defecting Bertrand firm slightly undercuts the red uced  cartel price and thereby steals only the 
reduced  cartel profits.  The cooperation condition becomes:  
r
trt
N
01
, so the profits still cancel out, leaving the requirement that 
NN 1 . 
Under Cournot collusion, however, th is strategy could work.  If the cartel expands output, the 
market price falls, and the optimal defection quantity accordingly falls (and falls even more relative 
to the higher level of output the cartel allows).  So defection profits fall relative to a 1/N  share of 
cartel profits, making cooperation more sustainable.  


---


9.  Suppose there is costless entry and exit in the lobbying/rent -seeking 
"industry."   
True, False, and Explain:   Repeated interaction between lobbyists will neither 
increase nor reduce the  total social cost of rent -seeking.  
TRUE.  Without entry and exit, repeated interaction could either increase or reduce the total social 
cost of rent -seeking.  However, with costless entry and exit, the rate of return in the lobbying 
industry has to exact ly equal the overall market rate of return.  Thus, if lobbyists collude to raise 
the return to lobbying, they attract new entry until the return falls back to normal.  Similarly, if 
lobbyists push returns below the normal level in an effort to build up a " tough" reputation, firms 
exist until the return rises back to normal.  


---


1.  Democratic governments are often lobbied to extend mo nopoly protection to 
various firms.  Carefully analyze and diagram  the full Kaldor -Hicks efficiency 
consequences (allocative, productive, lobbying) of this practice if (a) productive 
efficiency and lobbying ability are perfectly correlated (i.e., the lowes t-cost firm 
always defeats higher -cost rivals in political battles if they spend the same 
amount), and (b) productive efficiency and lobbying abilities are imperfectly 
correlated.  
In case (a), there will be allocative and lobbying inefficiency, but no pro ductive inefficiency.  That is 
because the most productively efficient firms wins every time.  In contrast, in case (b), there is a 
probability of productive inefficiency in addition to allocative and lobbying inefficiency, because the 
higher -cost firm mig ht win the lobbying contest.  It is also worth noting that a more productively 
efficient firm will always be willing to pay more to get a monopoly privilege because the lower your 
costs, the greater the monopoly profits the privilege enables you to earn.  With unequal costs, you 
will not necessarily see full rent dissipation, especially in case (a).  There, the most productively 
efficient firm only needs to spend an amount greater than the monopoly profits the second most -
efficient firm could earn if it won  the privilege.  


---


2.  Why does Landsburg say that "prices are good"?  Carefully explain 
Landsburg's position.  What role do the Welfare Theorems and game theory play 
in his argument?  
Landsburg explains that competition by itself cou ld be good or bad.  In general, there is no 
guarantee that competition leads to socially desirable outcomes.  However, when you combine 
competition, rationality, and market prices, you do have a (limited) guarantee of social optimality.  
The First Welfare Theorem in particular shows that if rational agents compete subject to market 
prices, you normally get an efficient outcome.  Landsburg uses some game theory examples to 
illustrate cases where competition and rationality lead to socially suboptimal outcome s. 


---


3.  In some graduate economics programs, like the University of Chicago's, the 
students rarely study cooperatively.  In other programs, practically every student 
belongs to a study group.  Some observers attribute this to Chicago's high failure 
rate a nd the conditionality of funding on passing first -year exams.  Others 
attribute this to a Chicago "culture."  Use game theory to model both of these 
competing hypotheses.  To what extent do your two accounts rely on repeated 
game considerations?   
To mode l the first hypothesis, I would suggest modeling study group participation as a repeated 
PD game.  Because of the high failure rate, the probability that the game continues is smaller than 
at other schools.  Moreover, because funding depends on passing exa ms, the temptation payoff if 
you defect at the last minute (taking your friends' notes right before the big exam and then 
refusing to share yours) is greater than in other programs.  Both of these factors require greater 
patience to sustain cooperation.  
The model the second hypothesis, I would suggest modeling study group participation as a 
coordination game.  If other students join groups, you'd better too.  But if no one else is joining, 
you look like an idiot if you go around trying to form one.  Thus, equilibria with and without study 
groups both exist.   7 


---


1.  Agents live for two periods.  They are endowed with 1 unit of a consumption 
good in period 1 and 2 units in period 2.  The period 1 good spoils if not 
consumed in period 1.  There are two types of agents:  
Type A:  25% of the agents have U=ln c 1.   
Type B:  The other 75% have U=ln c 1 + ln c 2 
True, False, and Explain:  The general equilibrium interest rate will exceed 200%.  
TRUE.  This is just the standard two -good  general equilibrium model applied to intertemporal 
trade.  Thus, we can use the equation from the notes: 

i ii i
yx
xbya
pp .  Specifically:  
3/101*5.*75 1*0*252*5.*75 2*1*25
21pp
.  In other words, if you want one more unit of consumption 
in period 1, you have to g ive up 10/3 of a unit in period 2.  That means that the interest rate is 
233%>200%.  

2. True, False, and Explain:  If the two types of agents did not interact (i.e., there 
is one island for all of the A's and a different island for all of the B's), the inte rest 
rate on A would be positive but the interest rate on B would be negative.  
FALSE.  The interest rate would be positive on both islands.  You do not need to re -do the 
calculations to answer.  The interest rate on A would obviously be infinite because t he agents put 
zero value on period 2 consumption but have positive endowments in that period.  But the interest 
rate on B would also be positive, because the B's value both goods equally but have bigger 
endowments in period 2.  Therefore they would seek to  borrow in period 1 until the interest rate 
got high enough to make them content to consume 1 unit in period 1 and 2 units in period 2.  


---


3. True, False, and Explain:  The Ultimatum Game can be solved using strict 
dominance.  
FALSE.  It can be solved using  weak  dominance.  Always accepting is a weakly dominant strategy 
for the recipient.  But it is not strictly dominant because accepting 0 and rejecting 0 yields the 
same outcome.  


---


4.  Two players play a Prisoners' Dilemma game followed by a Hawk -Dove 
game.   Consider the following candidate equilibrium:  Both players Cooperate in 
the first game.  Then in the second game:  
 If both players Cooperated in the first game, both play Dove.  
 If one player Cooperated in game 1 and the other didn't, the Cooperator 
play s Hawk in game 2 and the other player plays Dove.   
 If neither Cooperated in turn 1, both players play the MSNE in turn 2.  
True, False, and Explain:   You need to know the exact payoffs to determine 
whether this is a subgame perfect NE.  
FALSE.  It is defi nitely not a SGPNE.  Why not?  Both players playing Dove on turn 2 is not a NE.  
One player would want to switch to Hawk.  This might however be a SGPNE if (Coop, Coop) in 
turn 1 led to the MSNE in turn 2.  Then it would depend on the exact payoffs.  


---

Suppose that a store decides whether to cheat or not cheat, and a consumer
decides whether to investigate the store's reputation, buy without investigating,
or not buy without investigating.  Intuitively, i f the customer investigates, he is
never swindled, but always wastes some time.  The cost of investigation is a>0.
 Investigate  Buy  Don't Buy
Cheat  0, -a 5,-5 0,0
Don't Cheat  3, 3 -a 3,3  0,0

5.  True, False, and Explain:  If a MSNE does not  exist, th ere are two PSNE.  
FALSE.  If a MSNE does not exist, there is only ONE PSNE: (Cheat, Don't Buy).  A MSNE does 
not exist if Investigate is strictly dominated; i.e., if a>5.  Once you are left with the two rightmost 
columns, it is clear that (Cheat, Buy) is not an equilibrium (the customer would switch to Don't 
Buy); (Don't Cheat, Buy) is not an equilibrium (the store would switch to Cheat); and (Don't Buy, 
Don't Cheat) is not an equilibrium (the customer would switch to Buy).  

6.  True, False, and Explain : If the game is infinitely repeated, the equilibrium 
(Don't Cheat, Buy) may be sustainable even if a>5.  
TRUE.  If a>5, it never pays to Investigate.  But the customer can still find out about the store's 
honesty by buying without investigating and seeing  what happens.  He could then induce honest 
behavior with trigger strategies, for example.  Trigger strategies would work as long as 3/(1 -)5, 
where  is the store's discount factor.  


---


7.  True, False, and Explain:   If firms have heterogeneous costs, the e quilibrium 
in a one -shot Bertrand game will definitely be more allocatively efficient but may 
be less productively efficient than a one -shot Cournot game.   
FALSE.  The one -shot Bertrand game is always perfectly productively efficient, because the 
lowest -cost producer(s) take over the whole market.  In Cournot, in contrast, productively 
inefficient firms may survive.  Bertrand games have no allocative inefficiency if the two most 
efficient firms are equally efficient, but if there is a big gap in costs it is possible that allocative 
inefficiency will be more severe than in Cournot.  


---


8.  True, False, and Explain:   Landsburg ( Fair Play ) argues that leaving 
childbearing decisions to individuals creates a special kind of Prisoners' 
Dilemma.  
TRUE.  But unlike anti -population thinkers, Landsburg argues that selfishness leads to too FEW 
children rather than too many.  Families fail to consider the positive externalities their children will 
have on the world, and those positive externalities almost certainly outwe igh any negative 
externalities.  


---


9.  True, False, and Explain:   Repeated game theory provides a solid theoretical 
explanation for the widely -accepted view that collusion is more common than 
predation.  
FALSE.  Repeated game theory merely shows that in inf initely -repeated games, both collusion 
and predation MAY be sustainable.  It gives no particular reason to think that one is more 
sustainable than the other.  You need more details to understand why predation is less common 
than collusion.  


---


1.  " Journalists seem to think that the costs of foreign competition can be measured by the 
number of Americans who leave their jobs as a result.   That's pretty much the opposite of the 
truth." (Landsburg, Fair Play ) 
Use cost -benefit analysis to defend the journalists'  position.  
The most obvious possibility Landsburg overlooks is that labor markets don't clear due to 
downwardly rigid wages.  If so, workers may be randomly rationed out of their jobs, and unable to 
find new ones.  The workers who stay will be worse off than those who switch to a new job, but 
better off than the laid -off.  
The journalists might also appeal to positive externalities of work, most obviously those created by 
the safety net.  


---


2.  Explain why the free -entry equilibrium with fixed costs is inefficient in a 
Cournot game.  Is this a realistic prediction?  Why or why not?  Explain how you 
would try to break out of this equil ibrium if you ran one of the firms.  
Take the simplest case where there is a fixed cost and zero MC.  Then obviously the cheapest 
way to make a quantity Q is to have one firm make it all.  The social cost is K, versus N*K for the 
free -entry equilibrium.  A ssuming a homogenous good, however, this prediction is highly 
unrealistic.  One firm could loudly announce that it is selling for one penny below the price 
reached by the Cournot auctioneer and steal the whole market.  Cournot oligopoly would then 
break do wn into contestable monopoly.  


---


3.  In any long -term friendship, there are multiple equilibria, of which only a small 
fraction are ever played .  Give a good example to illustrate this principle.  
Building on Kreps' discussion of "Why Might There Be an Obvio us Way to Play a 
Game?"  analyze what makes the observed equilibria "special."  
There are many ways that friends could pay for joint restaurant meals: even split, Dutch treat, 
alternating full payment, {you pay for one meal, then I pay for two, then you pa y for three...}, and 
so on ad infinitum.  If your friends expected you to go along with any of these practices, you 
probably would.  But in practice, the even split and the Dutch treat are far more common than any 
other technique.  What makes these equilib ria "special"?  Kreps talks about preplay negotiation, 
convention, learned behavior, and focal points.  Friends rarely negotiate their bill -splitting system 
in advance.  But convention, learned behavior, and focal points all probably play a role.  I would 
guess that focal points are the most crucial: If I ate lunch with a member of an unfamiliar culture, I 
would still expect him to expect that we would either split the bill or each pay our own ways.   11 


---


1.  Suppose a million new immigrants enter the U.S., driving down the wages of 
low -skilled Americans by $1/hour.  
True, False, and Explain:  According to Landsburg ( Fair Play ), this change 
usually increases Kaldor -Hicks ef ficien cy, because the positive effect of 
population growth on innovation tends to outweigh the negative externality 
of falling wages.  
FALSE.  While Landsburg does discuss the R&D externalities of population growth, he explains 
that falling wages are not a n externality at all.  It is at worst a transfer from workers to employers, 
and if there is any demand elasticity the fall leads to additional surplus.  
Several students also mentioned that immigration does not necessarily increase world R&D 
because one co untry's population must fall for another's to rise.  These answers received a 
couple extra points.  


---


2.  Two types of agents consume guns (g) and butter (b).  The Type A agents 
have U=.5 ln g + .5 ln b, and initially own 1 unit of guns and 1 unit of butter.   The 
Type B agents have U=.3 ln g + .7 ln b, and initially own .5 units of guns and .5 
units of butter.  10% of the agents are Type A; the other 90% are Type B.  
True, False, and Explain:  The price of guns will not equal the price of butter.  
Plugging int o the formula 

i ii i
yx
xbya
pp  from the notes:  
1 507. 5.36/5.185.*7.*90 1*5.*105.*3.*90 1*5.*10 
yx
pp
. 


---


3. True, False, and Explain:  If everyone has lexicographic preferences for x 
over y, the conclusion of the First Welfare Theorem holds even though its 
assumptions do not.  
TRUE.  With lexicographic preferences, no equilibrium price vector exists, since if p y>0 everyone 
will want to sell all they have, and if p y=0, everyone will want an infinite amount.  However, any  12 
distribution of resources will be Pareto efficient, because r eallocating y or x between people 
always leaves one person better off and another person worse off.  


---


4.  Consider the following 2 -player game:  
 Up Down  
Left  0,0  0,0  
Right  0,0  0,0  
True, False, and Explain:   This game has 4 PSNE but no MSNE.  
FALSE.  Th ere are 4 PSNE, but there is also an infinite number of MSNE.  Any probability mix 
leaves your opponent indifferent.  (Several students said that there was no reason  to randomize, 
but that misses the whole point of MSNE.  If neither play can do strictly do  better by changing, you  
have an equilibrium ). 


---

Suppose that two players repeatedly play the following game.
 Hawk  Dove
Hawk  -10, -10 5,0
Dove  0,5  3,3

5.  True, False, and Explain:  If the game is repeated infinitely , trigger 
strategies can sustain the socially optimal outcome as long as β>.6  
FALSE.  The socially optimal outcome (social payoffs are maximized) occurs at Dove, Dove.  The 
trigger strategy would be: If you ever play Hawk, I will play Hawk forever afterwards to punish you, 
and you will play Dove.  It is therefore in a player's  interest to play Dove if:  
513
, which holds as long as ≥.4. 
Many students assumed that the cheater would lose 10 every turn, but that would require the 
cheater to play Hawk, which he would definitely not do if he expected his opponen t to play Hawk.  
(Remember – hold all other player's behavior fixed and see if you can do better solely by changing 
your own behavior!)  Student who correctly reasoned from this assumption got 6 points.  
A few other students assumed that the MSNE would be the trigger strategy, but punishing by 
playing Hawk forever is obviously a tougher punishment .  If you worked through this approach 
correctly, you also got 6 points.  

6.  True, False, and Explain:  If the game is repeated  twice , β=1,  and players 
get to flip a coin after turn 1, there is no NE where players play (Dove, 
Dove) in turn 1.  
FALSE.  I propose the following NE.  We both play Dove in turn 1.  If we keep this agreement, 
then in turn 2 we play (Dove, Hawk) if the coin said Heads, and (Hawk, Dove) if the coin said 
Tails.  But if player 1 plays Hawk in turn 1, then in turn 2 we play (Dove, Hawk) reg ardless of the 
coin toss, and if  player 2 plays Hawk in turn 1, then in turn 2 we play (Hawk, Dove) regardless of 
the coin toss.  The payoff from playing this strategy is 3+.5*5=5.5, which exceeds the payoff from 
cheating, which would be 5+0=5.  
Incidentally, you could sustain cooperation even without a coin flip.  Just do the MSNE in turn two 
if both players played Dove in turn 1.  But if player 1 plays Hawk in turn 1, then in turn 2 we play 
(Dove, Hawk), and if player 2 plays Hawk in turn 1, then in turn 2 we play (Hawk, Dove).  Since 
both players play Hawk with p=1/6 in the MSNE, the expected MSNE payoff is once again:  
1/36* -10+5/ 36*5+5/36*0+25/36*3=2.5.  


---


7.  Suppose there is a Cournot industry with the demand function Q=a -bP, 8 
firms, 0 MC, and no fixed cost . 
True, False, and Explain:   A firm would want to split into two firms because it 
would earn 62 % more profit as a result.  
TRUE.  From the hw, we know that p rofits as a function of N equals 
b Na
22
)1 ( .  So profits for 
one firm in a industry with 8 firms are 
ba
812 , while profits for two firms in a industry with 9 firms are 
ba
10022
.  The latter is 62% greater than the former.  


---


8.  True, False, and Explain:   Kreps argues that in the "noisy" real world, 
trigger strategies are not a practical way to sustain collusion.  Instead, 
colluding firms would only punish if prices were significan tly below the 
agreed level . 
FALSE.  Kreps specifically states that "you cannot go too far in lessening the severity of 
punishment, making it of shorter duration, say, or only triggering punishment when prices fall very 
far.  This would encourage each side  to chisel somewhat..." (p.526)  Intuition: If no small 
deviations get punished, then everyone will always engage in a small deviation.   


---


9.  Suppose firms in an industry have fixed costs and increasing  marginal costs.  
The industry demand curve lies stri ctly above firms' AC curves.  
True, False, and Explain:   Bertrand competition will allow only one firm to 
survive in this market, implying no productive inefficiency but some 
allocative inefficiency.  
FALSE.  With increasing MC, the AC curve eventually tur ns up – it will have a U -shape.  So if 
demand is high, multiple firms can definitely survive.  Ignoring divisibility problems, it is possible 
for multiple firms to survive in such an industry, setting P=AC=MC.  


---


1.  " The assumptions of the Arrow -Debreu model are sufficient but not necessary conditions for 
the efficiency of laissez -faire."  
Discuss this statement, using two specific examples from game theory to 
illustrate your point.   
Arrow -Debreu  assumes that firms have no control over prices.  But in the Bertrand oligopoly 
game, firms set prices, but can still reach the first -best outcome where P=MC.  Similarly, in the 
Ultimatum game, there  are no enforceable trades at all, and yet the game theoretic prediction 
($.01 for you, rest for me) is perfectly efficient.   In both cases, then, laissez -faire is fully efficient 
even though the A -D assumptions do not hold.  
Other good examples some stude nts used: repeated play (including reputation), coordination 
games.  


---


2.  Use Tullock's insights on rent -seeking to analyze students' allocation of effort 
between studying and cheating.  What changes if students can bribe professors 
for better grades?  
Tull ock would predict that students would keep cheating until the rate of return from studying 
equals the rate of return from cheating.  In equilibrium, both methods of earning grades would 
have to be equally effective.  If students can bribe professors, this leads students to cut back on 
both studying and cheating in favor of cash bribes.  On the surface, this seems clearly more 
efficient.  But there is an externality on the value of the diploma.  More interestingly, if professors 
can extract bribes from their  students, this will lead to additional competition for academic jobs  
(like getting a second Ph.D.) , presumably with little social benefit.  


---


3.  Suppose you have a 2 -player version of the voluntary donation game from the 
notes, with one difference: Each ag ent cares somewhat about the other, so 
player one maximizes U 1=c 1D+.5*c 2D, and player two maximizes U 2=c 2D+.5*c 1D. 
Carefully set up each player's maximization problem.  Then solve for the 
symmetric Nash equilibrium.  
Note that D=d 1+d 2=2-c1-c2.  So player 1 maximizes:  
 U1=c 1(2-c1-c2)+.5*c 2(2-c1-c2)=2c 1-c12-1.5c 1c2+c 2-.5c 22 
And player 2 maximizes:  U2= 2c 2-c22-1.5c 1c2+c 1-.5c 12 
Differentiating U 1 wrt c 1: 2-2c 1-1.5c 2=0 
Differentiating U 2 wrt c 2: 2-2c 2-1.5c 1=0 
Solving 2 equations in two unknowns implies c 1=c 2=4/7.  Each player keeps 4/7 for himself and 
donates 3/7 to the common fund, whereas in the simple model without altruism, each agent keeps 
2/3 for himself and donates only 1/3.  Altruism partially solves the public goods problem.  


---


1.  A special medical test always  detects the presence of a disease if a person 
has it; however, 5% of perfectly healthy people will test positive as well (there is 
a 5% "false positive" rate). Suppose that .1% of people actually  have the 
disease, and that members of the population are tested at random . 
True, False, and Explain:  The approximate conditional probability of having the 
disease given the fact that you test positive is 95%.  (Hint: Remember Bayes 
Rule!)  
FALSE.  A pplying Bayes' Rule, the P(have disease| you tested positive)=  
%96.1999.*05. 001.*1001.*1
. 


---


2.  Two types of agents consume guns (g) and butter (b).  The Type A agents 
have U=.5 g + .5 b.  The Type B agents have U=.3 g + .7 b.  All agents initially 
own 1 uni t of guns and 1 unit of butter.  50% of the agents are type A; 50% are 
type B.  
True, False, and Explain:  General equilibrium does not exist because the 
agents' demand functions are discontinuous  in price . 
FALSE.  Since these are linear utility functions,  they DO generate demand functions that are 
discontinuous in price.  (E.g., the Type A agents want only guns if p g<p b, and only butter if p b<p g).  
However, this continuity is not a necessary  condition for GE to exist (rather it is one item on a list 
of suf ficient conditions).  In fact, GE exists in this economy if p g=p b.  Then the type Bs sell all of 
their guns, and the type As are not unwilling to sell all of their butter.  In equilibrium, then, the Type 
As have all the guns and the Type Bs have all of the  butter.  
Many students used the price formula ratio from the notes, but that only works for log utility!  


---


3. True, False, and Explain:  In a Coordination game, Pareto -inferior equilibria 
are not subgame perfect.  
FALSE.  In the simultaneous Coordination ga me that we analyzed in class, there is only one 
subgame, so both of the equilibria are subgame perfect.   
It is however true that in a sequential  version of the Coordination game, the Pareto -inferior 
equil ibria are not subgame perfect.  I gave partial cre dit for students who answered TRUE on this 
ground.  


---


4.  True, False, and Explain:   Landsburg's "Indifference Principle" ( The 
Armchair Economist ) is inconsistent with the concept of the MSNE.  
FALSE.  MSNE is actually a special case of Landsburg's Indiffere nce Principle.  The Indifference 
Principle states that in equilibrium, people will be indifferent between all of their choices.  If one 
were better than the other, everyone would do it.  And this is precisely what happens in a MSNE: 
ever agent is indiffere nt between every choice.  


---


5.  Consider the following 2 -player game:  
 Up Down  
Left  10,0  10,0  
Right  0,10  0,10 
True, False, and Explain:   This game has no  PSNE and one  MSNE.  
FALSE.  Since Left is strictly dominant for Player 1, and Up and Down have equa l payoffs for 
Player 2 , there are two PSNE: (Left, Up), and (Left, Down).  But there are also infinitely many 
MSNE, where Player 1 plays L with p=1, and Player 2 plays Up with any  probability.  


---


Suppose  that two players play an Ultimatum game where Player 1 divides a
payoff of 10 between himself and Player 2.  Then the players play the following
Hawk -Dove game ONCE.  Players do not discount the future ( β=1).
 Hawk  Dove
Hawk  -10, -10 5,0
Dove  0,5  3,3


6.  True, False, and Explain:  An even split (5/5) in the Ultimatum game is a 
focal point but cannot  be a SGP NE.  
FALSE.  It would be a SGPNE given the following strategies: If Player 1 offers an even spl it or 
better in turn 1, then in turn 2 they play (Hawk, Dove); otherwise, they play (Dove, Hawk).  If 
Player 1 follows this strategy, he gets 5+5=10.  If he deviates and keeps all 10, then he still is not 
strictly better off , because he gets 0 in turn 2 .  Player 2 would not want to deviate either; refusing 
his offer in the Ultimatum game obviously makes him worse off, and deviating from his proposed 
strategy  in turn 2 – holding constant Player 1's action – also makes him worse off.  If he plays 
Dove when he 's expected to play Hawk, he loses 2; if he plays Hawk when he's expected to play 
Dove, he loses 10!  
How is this possible?  It is possible because the last game (Hawk -Dove)  has two equilibria.  So 
you can punish deviation in turn 1 in a self -enforcing way  even in the last turn.  


7.  True, False, and Explain:  If the players play the Hawk -Dove game first , 
and the Ultimatum game second, exactly two SGPPSNE exist.  
TRUE.  In the last turn, it is only subgame perfect for  Player 1 to offer 0 and keep 10 for him self, 
and Player 2 to accept.  But there are two PSNE in the first turn: (Dove, Hawk) and (Hawk, Dove).  
So for the whole game, there are two SGPPSNE: (Dove, Hawk, 0, Accept) and (Hawk, Dove, 0, 
Accept).   


---


8.  True, False, and Explain:   According to Kreps , game theory rules out the 
possibility that "cheap -talk" can affect games' outcomes.  
FALSE.  While Kreps says that "[I]t is typical in the analysis of non -cooperative games to omit 
such communication from formal models," he immediately adds that "This d oesn't mean that 
these possibilities won't affect the outcome of games; they do so in some important ways in 
various situations."  Most o bviously: in Coordination games with Pareto -inferior equilibria.  


---


9.  Suppose the demand curve for a contestable monopo ly crosses the AC curve 
at more than one point.  
True, False, and Explain:   There are multiple equilibria.  
FALSE.  Under contestable monopoly, P=AC, but only the higher quantity/lower price intersection 
is an equilibrium.  At the higher intersection, even  a monopolist that DID NOT face potential 
competition would want to cut price somewhat to earn additional profits.  If you do face potential 
competition, you would have to cut your price all the way down to the lowest intersection  of 
demand and AC  to preve nt entry.  


---


1.  Suppose:  
 40% of all agents (the Type As) in an economy have U=ln x + ln y, and 
the other 60% (the Type Bs) have U=3 ln x + ln y.  
 All agents start with one unit of x and one unit of y.   
How will redistribution of x from As to Bs affect the general equilibrium 
yx
pp ?  
Write down the formula for 
yx
pp , using 
x  to indica te the quantity of x you let the 
Type As keep.  (Hint: Remember hw#2, problem 4!)  
In hw#2, problem 4, 
.
47
2*3/1*50 *5.*501*3/2*50 1*5.*50

 
x x x pp
yx  
The current problem is different in a few ways:  


1.  The utility function of the Type Bs normalizes to U=.75 ln x + .25 ln y, not  U=2/3 ln x + 1/3 ln y.
2.  There are 40% As and 60% Bs, not 50/50.
3.  As a corollary of 2, taking 1 unit of x from each A does NOT give 1 unit of x to each B!  Instead, 
if the As have 
x  each, then the Bs have 
60/) 40 100( x =
3/)2 5( x  each .  Five points off if 
you did not figure this out.  
So the correct formula for 
.
5 213
3/ 2 5*25.*60 *5.*401*75.*60 1*5.*40

 
x x x pp
yx  


---


2.  What kind of a bargainer are you?  Why?  Explain your typical strategies in 
game theoretic terms.  Are there any foc al points that you frequently rely on?  
I am usually a soft bargainer, probably because I have greater disutility of conflict than most 
people.  I value my tranquility.  But it depends greatly on the bargaining partner.  I am an 
extremely soft bargainer wi th my kids, because I put a lot of weight on their welfare.  I am a hard 
bargainer with my parents, because I know they put a lot of weight on my welfare.  I generally am 
a hard bargainer with students, in part to maintain a reputation that discourages ren t-seeking.  
One focal point that I often rely on is accepting the other party's FIRST offer without negotiation as 
long as it's "reasonable."  This cuts down on transactions costs, and if people expect me to follow 
it, they make their first offer a reasona ble one.  


---


3.  Suppose an Incumbent infinitely repeats the following entry deterrence game.   
Suppose that in order to have a reputation for Fighting, an Incumbent must be 
willing  to accept the (In, Fight) result for one  turn.  (After that turn, he earns the  
(Out, Fight) payoff forever).  Write down the inequality the Incumbent must 
satisfy to have this reputation.  Then solve for the critical value of .     
The Incumbent can have this reputation as long as:  
 

 
1 04 10 5
t tt t 
 
14
1105

6.


---


1.  Situation A is a Kaldor -Hicks improvement over Situation B.  Situation A is 
Pareto efficient.  
True, False, and Explain:  Situation A must also be Kaldor -Hicks efficient.  
FALSE.  Just because A is a Kaldor -Hicks improvement over  B does not imply that there isn't 
another situation that would be a Kaldor -Hicks improvement over A.  The additional information 
that A is Pareto efficient is irrelevant, because virtually all situations are Pareto efficient.  


---


2.  Sup pose 50% of all agents are certain (p=1) that occupation of Iraq will 
reduce terrorism, and 50% of all agents are certain (p=1) that occupation of Iraq 
will increase terrorism.  A betting market exists where agents can bet on their 
beliefs . 
True, False, a nd Explain:  A general equilibrium can  only exist if the prices of 
the two bets are equal.  
FALSE.  Assuming agents cannot sell short, the price ratio will depend upon the amount that 
people are willing to bet , which in turn depends upon wealth.  If the peo ple who believe that the 
invasion will reduce terrorism  are willing on average to bet twice as much as the people who 
believe the opposite, for example, the betting market will clear when the "reduce" bet pays half as 
much as the "increase" bet.  
In agents  can sell short (or, equivalently, jus t issue notes offering to pay $1  if X happens), there is 
no equilibrium.  Due to their certainty, both sides would happily offer offer  an infinite amount of 
notes that pay off if the other side turns  out to be right, so the price ratio would be undefined.  


---


3. True, False, and Explain:  According to Kreps, economic experiments 
confirm that general equilibrium analysis has little predictive value.  
FALSE.  On p.198, Kreps says exactly the opposite: "The results obtained ar e usually 
striking in their support of Walrasian equilibrium."  


---

 Left  Right
Left  2,1 0,0
Right  0,0  1,2  20

4.  This game has a MSNE with expected payoffs  equal to (1.5, 1.5).  
FALSE.  To make Player 2 indif ferent, Player 1 plays L with probability σ: 
1σ+0=0+2(1 -σ), so σ=2/3  
To make Player 1 indifferent, Player 2 plays L with probability φ:  
2φ + 0=0 + (1 -φ), so φ=1/3  
To find expected pay -offs, simply plug the probabilities back into the above equalities: the 
expected payoffs in equilibrium are (2 /3, 2/3).  Alternately, you could note that (L,L) happens 2/9 
of the time, (R,R ) happens 2/9 of the time, and something else happens 5/9 of the time, so 
expected payoffs for Player 1 are 2/9*2+2/9*1+5/9*0=2/3, and expected payoffs for Player 2 are 
2/9*1+2/ 9*2+5/9*0=2/3.  


5.  True, False, and Explain:   Played simultaneously, this  game has two 
SGPPSNE.  Played sequentially (with Player 1 moving first), this  game has 
two PSNE, but only one is SGP.  
TRUE.  The simultaneous game only has one subgame, so both (L, L) and (R,R) are SGPNE.  
The sequential gam e still has two PSNE: Player 1 will play L if he believes Player 2 will play L, and 
R if he believes Player 2 will play R.  However, once Player 1 plays L, Player 2 would definitely 
want to play L too, so by backw ards induction, only (L,L) is SGP.  


---


6.  Suppose there are two firms able to produce a good.  Firm #1 has TC=$1000  
+ $0Q ;  Firm #2 has TC= $0 + $10Q.  
True, False, and Explain:  If demand goes up high enough, Firm #1 will drop 
out of the market and Firm #2 wi ll set its price just below Firm #1's AC.  
FALSE.  The opposite holds: Firm #2 has lower AC at low quantities, but Firm #1 has lower AC at 
high quantities.  If quantity>100, Firm #1 can charge just below $10 and take the whole market at 
a profit.  


---


7.  True , False, and Explain:  If firms set prices (as opposed to quantities), 
firms would never  want to split into additional firms, even if the game were 
infinitely repeated and β=1.  
FALSE.  If β=1, Bertrand collusion is definitely sustainable, and if each firm gets an equal share of 
the monopoly profit, then splitting could increase your profits from a 1/N share of the monopoly 
profit to a 2/(N+1)  share, which is greater for N> 1. 
Firms might also want to split if there are diseconomies of scale, though I gave less credit for this 
answer since it didn't use the information about repeated play and the discount rate.  


---


8.  N players  are  deciding whether to contribute to a public  good.   The public 
good is discrete: it is produced at the optimal level so long as 1 person 
contributes.   Contributing costs the individual who contributes C, and 0 
otherwise.   If the public good is produced, everyone gets a benefit of B; 
otherwise they g et a benefit of 0.   B>C.    
True, False, and Explain:   There are two  PSNE, only one of which is Kaldor -
Hicks efficient.  
FALSE.  There are N PSNE, and all of them are Kaldor -Hicks efficient.  If no one is contributing, 
then any one player would want to dev iate to contribute; if more than one player is contributing, 
then any one player would want to deviate to not contribute.  The only stable equilibria are those 
where exactly one player contributes.  Since B>C, but 1 contribution is all that is necessary, e ach 
of these equilibria  is Kaldor -Hicks efficient.  


---


9.  In Leviathan , Hobbes argues that, in the absence of government, individuals 
always prefer war to peace, leading to a "war of all against all" equilibrium.  
True, False, and Explain:   This precisely wh at the Hawk/Dove game predicts.  
FALSE.  For PSNE, the Hawk -Dove game predicts that you will never  see universal war; instead, 
you'll see one aggressor and one appeaser.  In the MSNE of the Hawk -Dove game, (War, War) 
can occur, but it is an unlucky coincid ence, not a typical result.  


---


1.  Give an example of lexicographic preferences.  How can lexicographic 
preferences preclude the existenc e of a general equilibrium?  Is it possible for a 
general equilibrium to exist given the existence of lexicographic preferences?  
Explain.  
I lexicographic ally  preference my sons' lives to money – I wouldn't part with them for any amount 
of money.  Lexicog raphic preferences can preclude the existence of general equilibrium because 
if everyone shares the same preferences, they won't sell the lexicographically preferred good to 
buy more of other goods at any p>0 – but if the price of other goods falls to 0, t hey want more of 
these other goods than exist.  There are many ways that general equilibrium could co-exist with 
lexicographic preferences:  (1)  Some people have these preferences, others don't, and the former 
buy all of the lexicographically preferred goo d from the latter; (2) People have different 
lexicographic preferences; (3) People only have lexicographic preferences up to a certain quantity 
(e.g. everyone might have a lexicographic preference for one kidney, but not two).  


---


2.  Coordination equilib ria are often persistent, but they also change.  Give a 
real -world example.  Then use game theory to explain how this change 
happened, paying particularly close attention to the incentives of the "first -
movers."  
My example: It used to be almost impossible  to publish survey research in economics, and as 
long as no one would publish it, no economist wanted to do it.  This is no longer true.  The reason 
is probably that there were some economists who were burning  to do survey research, so they 
worked on it ev en when the chance of publication was low.  But once they published some work, 
this raised the payoff.  This led slightly less enthusiastic economists to try survey research, which 
raised the chance of publication, which led to more survey research...  Het erogeneous 
preferences were the lever that got the survey research ball rolling.  
Another class of good answer focused on the importance of market leaders.  A market leader 
thinks that other peopl e will change if he changes  too, so he feels safer doing som ething different.  
Continuing with my example, many of the economists who started doing survey research – like 
Alan Blinder – were already famous for other accomplishments.  So they could expect people to 
take them seriously even if they "broke the rules,"  which helped change the rules.  


---


3.  Landsburg ( The Armchair Economist ) argues that laws restricting cosmetic 
surgery are an inefficient restriction on competition.  Using the game theory you 
have learned so far, present and defend what you see as the stro ngest possible 
counter -argument  to Landsburg's claim.   (You don't have to agree with your 
argument; just present it as forcefully as possible).  
You can't just say that cosmetic surgery is a "Prisoners' Dilemma" for women, because efficiency 
calculations r equire us to count the value to both women AND men.  (Analogously, you can't just 
say that price supports  are efficient because they benefit sellers; you have to show that the gain to 
sellers outweighs the gain to buyers).  Similarly, you can't just say th at more cosmetic surgery 
reduces the supply of non -cosmetic surgery: That's true for all goods.  Better answers : 
Maybe men value relative beauty, not absolute beauty ; they want to marry a woma n who is better -
looking than other women, but don't particularly care how good -looking she is in absolute terms.  
If so, cosmetic surgery burns up resources without making the average woman OR the average 
man better off.  
Maybe people directly  disvalue the average level of cosmetic surgery in thei r society, on the 
grounds that it "commodifies" or "cheapens" life.  But since the average level of cosmetic surgery 
is non -excludable, no one factors it into his/her  decisions, leading to too much cosmetic surgery.   
This is a common objection to e.g. huma n cloning.  


---


1.  True, False, and Explain:   One benefit  of the war on drugs that 
Landsburg 's efficiency analysis  overlooks is the salaries paid to the extra 
government employees required to enforce these laws.  
FALSE.  The salaries pa id are actually a social cost , because the government employees could 
have done something else instead with their time.  If the employees' opportunity cost equals their 
current wage, then their entire salaries are a social cost; if they are paid more than their 
opportunity cost, then the difference  between their actual wage and their alternative wage is a 
transfer, and the remainder is a social cost.  
Students who answered false on the grounds that the salaries are a transfer got a little credit, but 
not mu ch. 


---


2.  True, False, and Explain:   Contestable monopoly leads to "second -best" 
efficient outcomes, whereas  Bertrand competition leads to "first -best" 
efficient outcomes.  
FALSE.  If there  are  zero fixed costs and the most efficient firm faces an equally  efficient 
competitor, both  yield the first -best efficient outcome of P=MC.  If there are fixed costs and the 
most efficient firm faces an equally efficient competitor, both  yield the second -best efficient 
outcome of P=AC.  If the most efficient firm does not face an equally efficient competitor, then 
price can exceed both MC and AC.  


---


3.  There are two islands with equal numbers of agents.  All agents live for two 
periods and are endowed with 1 unit of a co nsumption good in period 1 and 1 
unit  in period 2.  The period 1 good spoils if not consumed in period 1.  On the 
Island #1, agents have U=ln c 1; on Island #2, agents have U=ln c 1 + ln c 2. 
True, False, and Explain:  If trade between islands is possible, the interest 
rate will exceed 50%.   If trade betwe en islands is not possible, the interest 
rate on Island #1 will exceed the interest rate on Island #2 by less than 100 
percentage -points.   
FALSE.  With trade, the interest rate will indeed exceed 50%.  Using the GE formula:  
31*5. 1*01*5. 1*1
21
cc
pp
, an i nterest rate of 200%.  However, with isolated islands, Island #1 will 
have an infinite interest rate (since no one values c 2), and Island #2 will have a 0% interest rate 
(since the two goods are equally abundant and equally valued).  Thus, Island #1's inte rest rate 
infinitely exceeds Island #2's. 

---
 Trust  Doubt
Truth  2,2  0,0
Lie 4,-2 -2,0


4.  This game has two PSNE, plus a MSNE  where players play (Truth, Trust) 
with probabilities (.5,.5).  
FALSE.  There a re zero  PSNE, but the MSNE given is correct.  For the PSNE, notice that at 
(Trust, Truth), Player 1 wants to switch; at (Truth, Doubt) Player 2 wants to switch; at (Trust, Lie) 
Player 2 wants to switch; and at (Lie, Doubt) Player 1 wants to switch.  For th e MSNE, similarly:  
Player 1 is indifferent when:  
2σ+0(1 -σ)=4σ -2(1 -σ), implying  σ=.5.  
Player 2 is indifferent when:  
2φ-2(1 -φ)=0, implying φ=.5.  


5.  Suppose both players have a discount rate, β=1, and play this game twice.  
True, False, and Explain:   There is a NE where players play (Truth, Trust) in 
the first turn, and the MSNE  of the one -shot game  in the second turn.  
FALSE.  Since this is a finitely -repeated game, and there is only one equilibrium in the second 
game, the only equilibrium is to play the MSNE each turn.  After all, if Player 1 switches to Lie in 
turn 1, how is Player 2 going to punish him?  


---


6.  Two players play an Ultimatum game, followed by a Coordination game.  
True, False, and Explain:   There are an infinite number of SGPPSNE, some  of 
which have a 50/50 split in the first turn.  
TRUE.  As long as one Coordination game has lower payoffs for Player 1, there is a viable threat.  
Suppose, for example , that:  
 β=1 
 in turn 1, the players are splitting 2   25 
 in turn 2  (Left, Left) yields a pay off of (5,5) and (Right, Right) yields a payoff of (3,3)  (and of 
course (Left, Right) and (Right, Left) yield (0,0)) .   
Then the following is an equilibrium: in turn 1, a 50/50 split; in turn 2, (Left, Left) if Player 1 offered 
at least 50/50 in turn 1, a nd (Right, Right) otherwise.  If player 1 offers 100/0 instead of 50/50, he 
gains 1 in  turn 1, but loses 2 in turn 2.  
Now notice that since payoffs are continuous, this is just one out of a n infinite number of equilibria .  
The above approach could also su stain 50.01/49.99, 50.02/49.98, etc.  


---


7.  Suppose there are two firms able to produ ce a good.  Firm #1 has TC=$50 + 
$0Q;  Firm #2 has TC= $0 + $10Q.   The demand curve is given by Q=20 -P. 
True, False, and Explain:  Firm #1 will drop out of the market and Fi rm #2 will 
charge the monopoly price . 
FALSE.  By producing 10.01 units and charging $9.99, Firm #1 can make a profit of 10.01*$9.99 -
$50, or approximately $50.  But Firm #2 loses money at this price, so it will drop out of the market.  
Intuitively, since F irm #1 has fixed costs but no marginal costs, and Firm #2 has marginal costs 
but no fixed costs, the thing to check is whether Firm #1 remains  profitable at a price just below 
Firm #2's MC.  


---


8.  Suppose two Bertrand competitors collude in an infinitely -repeated game, but 
the first firm insists on getting the "lion's share" of the profits.  The first firm gets  
90% of the monopoly profits .  The second firm gets the remaining  10%.  
True, False, and Explain:   This is a NE as long as β≥.1 for both firms.  
FALSE.  The first firm will not defect as long as 




09.
tm mt , so its β≥.1.  But the second 
firm will defect unless:  



01.
tm mt , so its β≥.9.  


---


9.  Satellite television has enormous fixed costs, but near -zero marginal costs.  
Suppose the current market structure, where two firms (Dish Network and Direct 
TV) supply satellite television, was the outcome of Cournot competition with free 
entry.  Suppose further that no additional  entry is legally allowed.  
True, Fa lse, and Explain:   A merger to monopoly will increase productive 
efficiency, hurt allocative efficiency, and decrease overall efficiency.  
FALSE.  The merger will increase productive efficiency by halving fixed costs.  (Students who 
explicitly claimed that  all costs were sunk got full credit, though that's got to be incorrect  – there 
are lots of alternative uses for satellites, and they eventually have to be replaced ).  And in the 
Cournot model, going from 2 firms to 1 reduces allocative efficiency.  Howeve r, the net efficiency 
effect is ambiguous, because we do not know the relative sizes of the two effects.   26 


---


1.  "As with other fundamentals  of action, doubts about probability are self -
refuting." (Caplan, "Probability, Common Sense, and Realism." )  Carefully 
explain Caplan's argument.  Is he right?  
Caplan claims that arguing against probability is self -refuting because (a) people argue again st it 
in order to change others' minds, even though (b) they know that arguing against probability does 
not always work.  As he states  in his article : 
One cannot even argue against probability theory without implicitly holding some 
belief about the probab ility that doing so will change listeners’ minds. Few 
Misesians would be naive enough to imagine that attacking probability theory has  
to reduce its number of adherents. Rather, they attack probability theory because, 
given their beliefs about the probabil ity of changing people’s minds, they see it as 
the most valuable way to use their time. Any attack on probability presupposes it.  
The best objection a student offered is that people might argue just for the fun of it, even though 
they don't believe that  they  have any chance of persuading anyone.  I would reply that, even in 
this case, they must assign some probability to the view "Arguing against probability will be fun."  


---


2.  N players are deciding whether to contribute to a public good.   The public 
good  is discrete: it is produced at the optimal level so l ong as one  person 
contributes.   If the public good is produced, everyone gets a benefit of 3  if they 
didn't contribute, and 2 if they did.  If no one contributes, everyone gets  0.  Find 
the MSNE.  When is the MSNE Kaldor -Hicks efficient?  
(Hint:  If p is the probability that one player contributes, the probability that no 
other player  contributes equals 
1) 1(Np , and the probability that at least one 
other player  contributes is 
1) 1( 1Np ). 
If you contribute, then you get (3 -1)=2 for sure.  If you don't contribute, you get 3 if at least one 
other player contributed, and 0 otherwise.  Therefore, by symmetry , each player is indifferent if:  
2=0*
1) 1(Np +3*(
1) 1( 1Np ) 
This implies indifference when 
3/1 ) 1(1 Np , implying that 
13/1 1Np . 
The MSNE is efficient in all cases where one a nd only one player contributes.  
Students who correctly solved the 2 -player version got substan tial partial credit.  


---


3.  Throughout history, the usual system has been for heads of state (such as 
kings) to serve for life.  In modern times, however, heads of state often leave 
office voluntarily long before their deaths.  Using all of the game the ory you have 
learned, provide the best possible explanation for  both  of these patterns.  Why 
has there been a transitio n from one pattern to the other?  
Here is one possible answer:  
Historically and today, the system of government succession is a Coordina tion game with 
culturally determined focal points.  When people expect leaders to serve for life, remaining in 
office provokes little negative reaction .  Stepping down , in contrast,  signals weakness and 
confusion - which invite attack .  However, when peopl e expect  leaders to step down after their 
term expires, a leader who refuses  to leave office  seems power -hungry or crazy, which typically 
provokes negative responses from other leaders and the population.  In contrast, stepping down 
when people expect it i s not a sign of weakness or confusion, so leaders aren't scared to do so.  
The bottom line is that it is usual safest for leaders to do what people expect, and dangerous to do 
the opposite.  
Why did this transition occur?  My short answer is that revolutions and elite ideological change in 
favor of democracy gradually changed cultural expectations.  If you built a skyscraper  in NYC that 
was twice the size of the Empire State Building, the foca l meeting place in NYC might change.  
Similarly, after a democratic revolution, or after decades intellectual activism for democracy, the 
focal political system in a society might change.  


---


1.  Suppose your P(more abortions cause less crime)=. 4, P(Levitt’s research  
results | more abortions cause less crime)=.6, and P(more abortions cause less 
crime | Levitt’s research results)=.8 .   
True, False, and Explain :  If you satisfy Bayes’ Rule, your P(Levitt’s research  
results | more abortions don’t  cause less crime) must be .1. 
TRUE.  Let A=more abortions cause less crime, and B=Levitt’s research results, then apply 
Bayes’ Rule and solve for P(B|~A):   
.8=.6*.4/( .6*.4+P(B|~A)*.6)  
.8=.24/(.24+P(B|~A)*.6)  
so P(B|~A)=.1.  


---


2.  True, False, and Explain:   If a state of affairs is Pareto efficient, then 
deadweight costs must  be zero.  
FALSE.  If a state of affairs is K -H efficient, then deadweight costs must be zero.  But Pareto 
efficiency does not imply K -H efficiency; in fact, most Pareto efficient situations are not K-H 
efficient.  Monopoly is a classic example: There are deadweight costs, but there is no feasible way 
to get rid of the deadweight costs without makin g the monopolist worse off.  


---


3.  Suppose you have a betting market where half the participants are certain 
that Clinton will win the Democratic nomination, and the other half are certain 
that Obama will win.  
True, False, and Explain:  A general equilibriu m will not exist.  
TRUE.  If both sides are certain, they are willing to bet an infinite amount, and put zero value on 
claims that pay off if the other side is right.  (This is basically a problem of lexicographic 
preferences).  However , if short sales are  not allowed, then the most each side can bet is their 
total assets.  If so, a general equilibrium will exist equal to the ratio of the amount each side bets.   
(I gave full credit for FALSE if they discussed both possibilities).  


---


4. Suppose a pirate robs ten people and puts all of their money inside a treasure 
chest.  When the police recover the chest  (and before the pirate can spend a 
penny) , they ask each of the ten victims to state how much money he lost.  To 
discourage lying, the police announce that i f the total  losses claimed  by the 
victims exceeds the total amount of money in the chest, none of the victims will 
get any  money back.  
True, False, and Explain:   There is a unique NE in which every victim says 
the truth.  
FALSE.  Truth -telling is one  NE, and probably a focal NE.  But there are infinitely many NE: Any 
set of claims that sums to the total amount of money qualifies . 


---


5. S uppose that two players play this PD game, followed by this Coordination 
game.  
 Don’t  Defect    L R 
Don’t  3,3  0,4   L 5,5  0,0  
Defect  4,0  2,2   R 0,0  5,5  
True, False, and Explain:  If ß=.5 , the only SGPNE are (Defect, Defect), (L,L) 
and (Defect, Defect), (R, R).  
FALSE.  Since both (L,L) and (R,R) pay the same, it might seem like punishment is impossible in 
turn 2.  However,  this ignores the MSNE, which has an expected payoffs of (2.5, 2.5).  If players 
threaten to play the MSNE in turn 2 if someone  plays Defect in turn 1, we have a NE as long as:  
3+5 β≥4+2.5β.  So if  β=.5, we have 5.5 ≥5.25, implying a NE.  


---


6.  “If your riva l(s) suspect that you are not rational, or even if they suspect that you suspect that 
they suspect that you aren’t rational, then the ‘rational ’ actions for you can be quite different than if 
you ignore this possibility. ” (Kreps, A Course in Microeconomic Theory ) 
True, False, and Explain:   This point explains why threatening to fail 
students for leaving early does not work in the real world.  
FALSE.  Kreps ’ point explains why threatening to fail students could  work!  If everyone knows 
everyone is fully rat ional, there is no point threatening to fail students because no one believes 
you will do it.  But if you suspect that someone is irrational, or suspect that someone suspects that 
you are irrational, a “crazy” threat just might work.  


---


7.  Suppose that two  firms flip a coin, then play a contestable monopoly game 
with sunk  costs.  
True, False, and Explain:  The coin flip allows the firms to raise their 
expected profits, even though the set of equilibria in the contestable 
monopoly game does not change.  
TRUE.   With or without the coin flip, this game has a MSNE where expected profits are zero, and 
two PSNE where one firm earns monopoly profits and the other earns nothing.  However, if firms 
play simultaneously, neither of the PSNE is focal.  Flipping the coin creates a focal point: If the 
coin says heads, then firm 1 plays In and firm 2 plays out; if the coin says tails, the reverse 
happens.  This doesn’t change the set of equilibria, but it does make it easier for firms to reach 
the profitable equilibria.  


---


8.  True, False, and Explain:   In a market with perfectly selfish consumers 
and producers, the existence of a public good implies both allocative and 
productive inefficiency.  
FALSE.  A public good implies that market output is roughly zero, so there will be  no productive 
inefficiency.  However, there will be massive allocative efficiency – all the area between the SB 
curve and the cost curve disappears.  When a good is not produced at all, the effective price is 
infinite, so P>>MC.  


---


9.  Suppose that two fir ms compete in a market with linear demand and zero 
costs.  
True, False, and Explain:   Collusion is easier to sustain in the Cournot model 
than it is in the Bertrand model.  
FALSE.  From the notes, Bertrand collusion is feasible as long as β≥.5, but Cournot  collusion is 
feasible as long as β≥.53.  This means that greater patience is necessary to sustain Cournot 
collusion.  


---


1.  Suppose count ry A has 1000 skilled workers and 1000 unskilled workers, and 
country B has 0 skilled workers and 10,000 unskilled workers.  Both countries 
initially prohibit all immigration.  Build on the Second Welfare Theorem to 
propose a Pareto -improv ing policy reform . 
The K -H efficient outcome requires free migration, so skilled workers can move to country B, and 
unskilled workers can move to country A.  However, unskilled workers in country A are likely to 
suffer massive wage declines as a result of this move.  Fort unately, this is a very simply economy, 
so it is not difficult to create  Pareto improvements using redistribution as the Second Welfare 
Theorem suggests.  The simplest solution would be to charge unskilled workers from B an entry 
fee and skilled workers fr om A an exit fee, and give the revenue to unskilled workers from A.  


---


2.  Why does popcorn cost more at movies – and how is this possible in a 
market with free entry?  If you give an answer that Landsburg rejects, you must 
explain why he is wrong to reject  your answer.  
Landsburg ignores a simple possibility: Popcorn prices are high due to price discrimination, which 
is entirely possible because the market for movie theaters – like most retail! – is imperfectly 
competitive.   There are only a few movie thea ters in a given area, and even these are imperfect 
substitutes.  They can charge P>MC and/or price discriminate because – due to fixed costs – 
existing firms are just breaking even, and new entrants are likely to actually lose money.  


---


3.  Suppose two stra ngers meet on a desert island.  Is mutual warfare a NE?  A 
likely NE?  A unique NE?   Use all of the game theory you have learned – and 
common sense – to answer the question.   
Since the question says “common sense,” I’m going to tell you what I think is really going on – not 
just repeat a model from class.  Here goes: Unless there are big differences in fighting ability 
between the two people, or only enough food for one person, mutual peace  is probably the unique 
NE.  I f both people play peace, they probably more than double their total output, and gain a friend 
as well.  If either person plays war, both  lose these benefits, and risk severe injury even if they win 
the fight.  Realistically, if one person is stuck on an i sland, and another washes up on shore, the 
first person doesn’t start sharpening his spear.  Instead, he rushes to help out the new arrival, 
because he reasonably expects him to become a great ally.   


---


1.  True, False, and Explain:   In practice, ex ante  Pareto efficiency is 
equivalent to Kaldor -Hicks efficiency, because in the long -run, the benefits 
of allowing uncompensated  Kaldor -Hicks improvements more than cancel 
out the losses.  
FALSE.  While many, perhaps most, people will be ex ante better off if you allow uncompensated 
K-H improvements, in the real world it is still extremely unlikely that everyone  will be better off.  As 
I said in the notes, “someone somewhere i s sure to slip through the cracks.”   As a result, the ex 
ante Pareto efficiency standard, unlike the K aldor -Hicks efficiency standard , ends up approving of 
every status quo.  


---


2.  Agents live for two per iods.  They are endowed with 1 unit of a consumption 
good in period 1 and 2 units in period 2.  The period 1 good spoils if not 
consumed in period 1.  There are two types of agents:  
Type A:  10% of the agents have U=ln c 2.   
Type B:  The other 90% have U =ln c 1 + ln c 2 
True, False, and Explain:  The general equilibrium interest rate will exceed 
200%.  
FALSE.  Normalize the two utility functions, then apply the formula from the notes to get 


64.1 55/901*5.*90 1*1*102*5.*90 2*0*10  
i ii i
yx
xbya
pp
, implying a 64% interest rate.  

3. True, Fa lse, and Explain:  If the two types of agents do  not interact (i.e., 
there is one island for all of the A's and a different island for all of the B's), 
the interest rate on A will  be positive but the interest rate on B will  be 
negative.  
FALSE.  Applying th e formula from the notes, we see that on the type A’s island:   33 
01*12*0  
i ii i
yx
xbya
pp
, implying a -100% interest rate  (not, as many people said, negative 
infinity!) .  Intuitively, on the island where no one values consumption in period 1, lending in period  
1 consumption buys you nothing in period 2.  
Similarly, on the  type  B’s island:  
21*5.2*5.  
i ii i
yx
xbya
pp
, implying a 100% interest rate.  Intui tively, the type B’s value both 
kinds of consumption equally, but have a larger endowment in period 2, so they t ry to borrow 
against their higher future  earnings.  


---


4.  Consider the following normal form:  
 Left  Right  
Left  2,2  0,0  
Right  0,0  0,0  
True, False, and Explain:   This game has one PSNE and one MSNE, but it 
can be solved through weak dominance.  
FALSE.  Th e game has two PSNE: (Left, Left), and (Right, Right).  It has no MSNE – if you try to 
solve for one, you just get “play Right ” with 100% probability for both players.  The game can 
however be solved through weak dominance: Left is sometimes better the Rig ht, and never 
worse.  


---

Kreps imagines a monopolist’s monologue:
Out there are many people who would enter this industry and take away my
profits if they thought they that they could themselves make a p rofit... My choice
of an output level of 5 may look silly in the short run, but if it keeps you (and other
potential entrants) out of my market, it is a good strategy to employ.

5.  True, False, and Explain:  Kreps’  monopolist engages in “limit pricing.”  
FALSE.  The notes explain that “limit pricing” is when the lowest -cost firm sets its price just below 
the costs of the second -lowest -cost firm.  In Kreps’ example, in contrast, firms have equal costs.  
What Kreps’ monopolist is trying to do is take advanta ge of its first -mover advantage  to make 
output so high that an entrant would be unable to cover its costs.  


6.  Kreps adds, “Now rather a lot is wrong with the story just told...”  
True, False, and Explain:   The monopolist’s story might be OK in a repeate d 
game IF there are also sunk costs.   34 
FALSE.  The monopolist’s story can work  with repeated play OR sunk costs; either one is enough.  
With repeated play, a monopolist might endure losses in the hope of deterring future entry.  With 
sunk costs, the monopol ist’s first -mover advantage would be stronger – once it locks in its 
quantity, the entrant would know for sure that it would lose money (rather than convincing the 
monopolist to reduce its output to accommodate the entrant ). 


---


7.  Suppose two players play t he following normal form N times.  N is finite and 
known by both players.  
 Left  Right  
Left  5,1  0,0  
Right  0,0  1,5  
True, False, and Explain:  Alternating back and forth between (L,L) and (R,R) 
is an equilibrium as long as N is even  and β≥5/6.  
FALSE.  This is an equilibrium for all N  and all β.  Whenever a firm defects from it, it gets 0 
instead of 1 or 5, so there’s never any point in deviating.  


---


8.  Consider a Cournot model with two firms.  P=10 -Q, and MC=0.  
True, False, and Explain:   If one firm moves first, the unique SGPNE has a 
higher Q than it does with simultaneous play.  
TRUE.  Applying subgame perfection, let’s start with the second mover.  It maximizes:  
2 2 1 2 ) 10( qq q Pq 
, implying:  
0 2 102 1  q q
, so 
2101
2qq  
In a SGPNE, the first mover takes the second -mover’s reaction function into account.  This means 
that it substitute’s firm 2’s reaction function into it’s own profit function before  taking the derivative:  
11
1 1 )21010( qqq Pq

.  This sim plifies to:  
11)210( qq
.  Maximizing wrt 
1q  gives us:  
0 51q
, so 
51q .  Now plug into firm 2’s reaction function to get: 
.2/525 10
2 q  

5.72 1 q q Q
.  Since Cournot ou tput is: 
5.7 3/201 NbaNQ , output rises.  
BTW, you may already be familiar with this problem as the  “Stackelberg model.”  


---


9.  True, False, and Explain:   The War/Peace game confirms the view that the 
invention of atomic weapons reduced  the risks of w ar and  human 
extinction.  
FALSE.  In the MSNE, the pro bability of playing War falls as  the (War, War) payoff gets more 
negative; and since the probability that (War, War) happens is that [P(War)]2, the risk of war goes 
down.  However, the probability of hum an extinction still probably goes up – nukes make war less 
likely, but much more devastating if it does happen.  


---


1.  People occasionally  argue that Western consumers are virtually “satiated” – 
before long, they will have everything they want.  Assume this claim is correct, 
and that labor productivity continues to improve.  Describe the general 
equilibrium consequences for output, employmen t, wages, and real interest 
rates.  Carefully explain your reasoning.  
What happens:  
Output: Output continues to rise slightly  as labor productivity keeps going up, approaching but 
never reaching the satiation level.  If output hit satiation, people would  stop working; but otherwise 
the tendency of greater productivity to raise output remains.  
Employment and wages: Increasing labor productivity raises labor demand, and as workers 
approach satiation, their labor supply curve starts to bend backwards.  The result: Wages go up, 
but employment declines as satiated high -wage workers switch from labor to leisure.  
Real Interest Rates:  As the intertemporal GE consumption model at the end of the Week 2 notes 
explains, positive time preference (β<1) and growing income (g>0) guarantee a positive real 
interest rate.  Since the question says, “Labor productivity continues  to improve,” there is no 
reason to say that real interest rates rise; all we can say is that they remain positive.  
Note:  The que stion says “ virtually  satiated,” not “completely satiated”; furthermore, nothing in the 
question suggests that consumers would remain satiated if there were a drastic fall in output.  It is 
incorrect, then, to claim that output and employment would fall to  zero.  Even if this were so, 
though, wages would still go up, because in GE workers earn their marginal product.   
Furthermore, no matter what happens to output, there’s no reason to think that real interest rates 
would fall.  If labor productivity is ri sing, workers who feel almost satiated today should expect to 
feel even more  satiated next year, so interest rates would  still be positive!  


---


2.  People (including economists) often think that monopolies are productively 
inefficient.  Why, on reflection,  would this be  strange?  What additional 
assumptions do you need to make the “inefficient monopolies” story internally 
consistent?  
It would be strange for monopolies to be productively inefficient because regardless of how little  
competition a firm faces , higher costs imply lower profits.  Even a monopoly totally protected by 
the government should still want to minimize costs ; otherwise it’s just leaving money on the table .  
(Many students mentioned potential competition, but that misses this much more fun damental 
point).  
Two good stories about productively inefficient monopoly:  
a. Firms have a range of levels of productive efficiency, and the government decides to legally 
protect a firm that is NOT the most efficient.  This could be because the firm best  at lobbying the 
government for help is not the best at actually producing the product.  
b. The firm is a monopoly with regulated profits.  This gives it an incentive to eliminate the 
“excess” profits by letting costs rise, rather than cutting prices.  Rem ember the “gold -plating 
effect”?  


---


3.  If Landsburg’s “People Wanted,” ( Fair Play ) is correct, does  Kaldor -Hicks 
efficiency require the long -run maximization  of population?  Carefully explain 
your answer, staying as close as possible to Landsburg’s descrip tive claims 
about the economic consequences of population growth.  
Kaldor -Hicks efficiency does NOT require population maximization.  Landsburg points to 
important positive externalities of child creation.  However,  positive externalities of X do not imply  
the efficiency of maximizing X!  (By analogy, t he negative externalities of pollution do not imply the 
efficiency of a total ban).   
In the absence of natalist subsidies , Landsburg thinks that every child is m ore than worth its social 
cost  (except, he no tes, for criminals, welfare recipients, etc.)   In his view : 
Benefit to Society > Benefit to the Family  Cost to the Family  Cost to Society  
As you pile on the subsidies, though, the marginal cost  to families of caring for more children go 
up.  Eventu ally you reach the point where the cost  to the family of creating another person exceed 
the benefit to society .  T here’s no reason to think this point is equivalent to  “long -run maximum 
population.”   
You could also argue that eventually population has ne gative externalities – not “resource 
depletion” (as Landsburg explains, that’s doesn’t count ), but on e.g. air pollution, congestion, or 
other uncharged impositions upon your fellow  man.  
The conclusion that K -H efficiency does not imply population maximiz ation  is clearly true if you 
don’t count unconceived people’s “willingness to pay to be conceived. ”  Even if you did, though, K-
H still might not imply population maximization.  Consider: If you already felt completely exhausted 
taking care of  9 kids, the 10th kid might have to pay you more than his discounted lifetime earnings 
to induce  you to have him, so the cost of his conception exceeds the benefit.  


---


1.  True, False, and Explain:   Landsburg’s Indifference Principle undermines 
the standard efficiency rationale for taxing negative externalities.  
FALSE.  The Indifference Principle implies that taxes on e.g. air pollutio n raise rents, leaving 
tenants no better off.  However, the owners of fixed resources are  better off by an amount equal 
to the increase in rent!  In other words, the Indifference Principle has implications for who  benefits 
from taxes on negative externalit ies, not whether  these taxes have benefits.   


---


2.  Two types of agents consume guns (g) and butter (b).   The Type A agents 
have U=.5 ln g + .5 ln b, and initially own 10 units of guns and 10 units of butter.   
The Type B agents have U=.3 ln g + .7 ln b, a nd initially own nothing .  10% of the 
agents are Type A; the other 90% are Type B.  
True, False, and Explain:  The equilibrium price of guns will equal the 
equilibrium price of butter.  
Using the formula from the notes:  
10*7.*90 10*5.*100*3.*90 10*5.*10
bg
pp
.   
But there ’s no need to use the formula.  Since the Type B agents have nothing to sell, they’re 
irrelevant to the market.  And since the Type A agents have equal endowments of both goods and 
value both goods equally, the price ratio has to be 1:1.  (To get full cred it, you had to note these 
facts).  


---


3. True, False, and Explain:   In an U ltimatum game, a 50/50 split is the only 
SGPPSNE ; in a Dictator game, a 100/0 split is the only SGPPSNE.  
FALSE.  In an Ultimatum game, a 100 -ε/ε split is the only SGPPSNE; as long a s the giver offers 
more than 0, the receiver has an incentive to accept, so the giver offers as little as possible.  
(There are an infinite number of PSNE, but only one is SGP).  In the Dictator game, a 100/0 split 
is the only SGPPSNE, because there’s no r eason for the giver to share anything.  


---


4.  Landsburg says that the “obvious” explanation for why popcorn costs more at 
movies is wrong.  
True, False, and Explain:  The problem with “obvious” explanation, 
according to Landsburg, is that even the simplest m onopoly problem has 
multiple NE.  
FALSE.  The “obvious” explanation, according to Landsburg, is monopoly.  But under normal 
assumptions, a monopolist would want to charge a high ticket price, then sell everything else  
(popcorn, bathroom privileges, etc.) a t MC.  


---


5.  Suppose you have the following Hawk/Dove game.  Players do not discount 
the future.  In the one shot game, the two players flip a coin to decide who plays 
Hawk and who plays Dove.  
  Player 2  Player 
1  Hawk  Dove  
Hawk  -100, -100  5,1  
Dove  1,5  4,4  
True, False, and Explain:   If they  play this game twice , the players can  both 
on average earn more per turn than they would in the one -shot game . 
TRUE.  The players could agree to play Dove, Dove on turn 1.  Then, if either played Hawk in turn 
1, t he other  player would play Hawk in turn 2.  If both cooperate (or both defect) in turn 1, they 
would flip a coin to decide who plays Hawk and who plays Dove  in turn 2 .  The result: Players get 
[4+(.5*5+.5*1) ]/2=3.5 per turn  instead of 2*(.5*5+.5*1) /2=3 per  turn . 


---


6.  Suppose the government gives one car manufacturer a monopoly privilege.  
The lobbying process leads to  full rent dissipation.  Each firm has the same 
constant marginal cost of production, and demand is linear.  
True, False, and Explain:   Dead weight costs fall when demand falls or firms’ 
costs increase.  
TRUE.  Under the se assumptions, deadweight costs equal the usual Harberger triangle plus the 
Tullock rectangle – and output equals half the competitive level.  (There’s no productive 
inefficien cy because firms have the same costs, and the shift involves an increase in firms’  costs).  
If demand falls, both the triangle and rectangle shrink.  The same happens if costs rise.  


---


1.  Consider a Cournot model w ith two firms.  P=10 -Q, and Total  Cost =K for 
each firm .  In equilibrium, all firms that produce must be profitable, and all firms 
that can profitably produce do so.  Graph m arket price as a function of K.  
Explain your reasoning.  
Key fact to remember: In the Cournot model, each firm’s revenue is given by: 
22
)1 (Nba
c .  
So if two firms remain in the market, each earns 100/9 – K, and if only  one firm remains, it ea rns 
25-K. 
From this we can immediately deduce that if K>25, zero firms will remain in the market, and th e 
effective price of the good will be  infinite (since it’s no longer available at any price).  
If K ≤100/9, similarly, both firms stay in the market, and we get the Cournot duopoly result: q=10/3, 
Q=20/3, P=10/3.  
What if 100/9>K>25?  Then there’s only one firm, and it charges the monopoly price – unless it 
foresees that this will provoke entry. The mono poly price is 5, and the monopoly quantity is 5 as 
well.  Will charging the monopoly price ever provoke entry?  No.  If the incumbent firm produces 5, 
an entrant would maximize:  
K qqe e e   ) 5 10(
, which reaches a maximum at q e=2.5, which is only pro fitable for 
K≤25/4 , which is less than 100/9.  
Bottom line: For low K, there are two firms and the Cournot duopoly result.  For medium K, there 
is one firm and the monopoly result.  For high K, there are no firms at all.  


---


2.  In the real world, why do n’t reputational incentives eliminate all fraud?   
Some of the obvious reasons: In the real world, time preference, number of turns, and utility 
functions all vary widely – and none of them are knowable with certainty.  So in the real world, it is 
often h ard to tell whether or not reputational incentives will work – and people often decide it’s 
better to just take their chances.  Another key problem: In the real world, honest mistakes happen, 
so trigger strategies just aren’t practical.  But even setting a ll of these problems aside, there’s a 
more fundamental reason why fraud will never disappear completely: As the rate of fraud falls, so 
does the optimal level of effort to prevent  fraud.  But as anti -fraud effort falls, the incentive for 
fraud increases.  Think about this as a game where sellers can be Honest or Dishonest, and 
buyers can either be Trusting or Cautious.  In the MSNE, 100% Honesty will never be an 
equilibrium, because if 100% of sellers were Honest, 100% of buyers would be Trusting, which 
mea ns that Dishonesty pays.  


---


3. “Free market economists typically express confidence in the ability of markets to produce 
public goods... At the same time, free market economists tend to be pessimistic about the stability 
of cartels in an unregulated market.   If markets successfully produce local public goods, however, 
why are stable cartels not more prevalent?” (Cowen and Sutter 1999)  
Explain Cowen and Sutter’s  argument using basic game theory.  Does it make 
sense in the real world?  Why or why not?  
Their argument is that producing public goods and maintaining cartels are both Prisoners’ 
Dilemmas.  (In fact, you could say that “maintaining the cartel” is a public good from the point of 
view of the participating firms).  While is in the collective interest o f mem bers to cooperate, it is in 
their individual interests to defect.  
The argument makes some  sense in the real world.  Private production of public goods and 
stable, voluntary cartels are both rare.  H owever, there are some important differences.  Many 
people get a “warm glow” from contributing to public goods production – showing a little altruism 
makes them feel like better people.  It’s a lot harder for cartels to appeal to members’ altruism.  
Unions  are a good exception – and it’s interesting to note that unions often enroll a few percent of 
the workforce even without government help.  Another point worth mentioning: The short -run 
gains from undercutting a cartel are much larger than the short -run ga ins of refusing to contribute 
to a public good.  The firm that cheats on a cartel can steal the whole market; the donor who 
cheats on a voluntary public good just saves his donation.  


---


1.  Two types of agents live for two periods.   In each period, they receive an 
endowment of perishable  consumption goods – storage over time is not possible.  
Type A agents have U=ln c 1 + ß ln c 2; Type B agents have U= ln c1 + ρ ln c 2.  
Both types of agents are equally numerous and have endowments of 1 in each 
period.  
True, False, and Explain:  The equilibrium interest rate r equals 2/(ß+ρ) . 
FALSE.  (1+r) equals the price ratio of period 1 consumption to period 2 consumpt ion.  So just 
normalize the utility functions to be:  
2 1 ln1ln11c c U
 
 and 
2 1 ln1ln11c c U
   
Then apply the 2 -good GE formula from lecture:  


 

22
1*11*11*111*11
21
pp
.  Since this is equal to (1+r), r=


22 -1,  
which does not e qual 2/( ß+ρ).  


---


2.  Consider the following normal form:  
 Left  Right  
Left  1,1  0,0  
Right  0,0  2,2  
True, False, and Explain:  If two players play this game sequentially , there are 
three NE but only  one SGPNE.  
FALSE.  Played sequentially, there are only TWO NE (L,L ) and (R,R).  The MSNE from the 
simultaneous version of the game does not exist, because if player 1 randomizes, player 2 gets to 
see whatever he played, and will therefore copy whatever he did with certainty.  Out of the two NE, 
only (R,R) is SGP.  You ca n show this with backwards induction: since player 1 knows that player 
2 will match him in the second turn, he always wants to play R.  


---

An I ncumbent an d an E ntrant infinitely repeat the following game.
 Enter  Don’t Enter
Predate  -10, -10 10,0
Don’t Predate  2,2  10,0
Consider the candidate equilibrium where the Incumbent always plays Don’t
Predate, and the Entrant plays Enter until the Incumbent plays Predate once .
After the Incumbent plays Predate,  the Entrant never plays Enter again.

3. True, False, and Explain:   This is not a NE unless the Incumbent’s  
discount factor is less  than .6.  
FALSE (but see below).  Playing the candidate equilibrium is Nash if:  
 


1 010 10 2
tt
tt 
.  This simplifies to: 

  1101012
, so 6. .  Since deviating has a short -run cost  and a long -run benefit ,
low discount rates are required to sustain the equilibrium.  
If you answered TRUE and said the above, I gave you full credit.  Technicall y, though, since the 
question says “less than .6” rather than “less than or equal to  .6,” the correct answer is FALSE.  


4.  Suppose that every turn, there is a p>0 that the entire industry disappears 
due to exogenous technological innovation.  
True, False , and Explain:  Predation may still be sustainable . 
TRUE.  You could interpret β as a continuation probability (1 -p) rather than a discount factor and 
just use the math for Question 3.  Or you just revise the inequality, flip the sign, and solve.  
Predatio n is sustainable as long as:  
 

   
0 1) 1(2 ) 1(10 10
tt t
tt tp p  
, implying:  


6. ) 1(p
. 


---


5.  True, False, and Explain:   Bertrand competition between identical firms 
with fixed costs yields a second -best efficient outcome.  
TRUE.  The first -best outcome  is when one firm produces at MC, avoiding any allocative 
inefficiency from P>MC (the Harberger triangle).  But in Bertrand competition with fixed costs, 
competition leads one  firm to drop out, and the other to set P=AC – a standard second -best result.  
At lower prices, firms would lose money and exit.  Bertrand competition will NOT lead to wasteful 
duplication of fixed costs; if it did, either firm could profit by slightly cutting its price and stealing all 
its competitors’ customers.  


---


6.  Consider the f ollowing one -shot game : 
 Attack  Submit  Defend  
Attack  -10, -10 5,-3 -20, -5 
Submit  -3,5 0,0  0,-1 
Defend  -5,-20 -1,0  -1,-1 
True, False, and Explain:   There is a MSNE, but no PSNE.  
FALSE.  Defend is strictly dominated by Submit for both players, so this g ame simplifies to a 
standard Hawk/Dove game with the four upper -left cells.  In such games, there are two PSNE – 
(Attack, Submit) and (Submit, Attack) in this case, plus a MSNE.  


---


1.  “People may be unable to articulate, for example, that ‘I would be willing to pay $200 per 
month in additional rent to live in a safer neighborhood. ’ They might even nonsensically assert that 
‘You can’t put a price on safety. ’ But in acting, they implicitly make such trade -offs.”  (Caplan, 
“Probability, Common Sense, and Realism”)  
What objection to probability theory is Caplan trying to answer?  Does he 
succeed?  
Caplan is answering the objection that probabili ty theory is unrealistic  because normal people 
rarely explicitly calculate probabilities.  He argues that probability  is no more unrealistic than the 
standard assumption that people have a willingness to pay.  Normal people rarely explicitly state 
their wi llingness to pay, but their behavior reveals that they still have  a willingness to pay .  
Similarly, normal people rarely explicitly state their probabilities, but their behavior shows that they 
have  probabilities.  As Caplan writes, “ In short, just as dema nd theory does not commit us to the 
view that the typical person explicitly ponders, ‘How much Gouda cheese would I buy if the price 
were a penny per pound? probability theory does not commit us to the view that the typical person 
explicitly ponders, ‘What  is the probability that I have an evil twin? ’” 


---


2.  Modify the Hawk/Dove game to explain why  in the real world  – unlike Thomas 
Hobbes ’ Leviathan  – two shipwrecked people are unlike ly to try to murder each 
other.  Carefully explain why your model is a good  description of the choices and 
payoffs that human beings  would actually  face in this situation.  
The simplest way to modify the Hawk/Dove game is to change the payoffs.  In the real world, 
(Dove, Dove) is usually more profitable for both parties than (Haw k, Dove) or (Dove,  Hawk).  
Unilateral aggression could easily lead to the breakdown of trust and cooperation, and require 
frequent, costly monitoring.  And d epending on how “dovish” Dove is, unilateral aggression might 
even result in some costly injuries f or the aggressor as well as the victim.  As a result, Dove 
becomes a strictly dominant strategy.  
You could simply keep the usual  Hawk/Dove payoffs and model the situation as a repeated game, 
but then you’d have to explain why repeat ed play seems likely to  lead to cooperation rather than a 
struggle for dominance.   Focal points, perhaps?  


---


3. With full rent dissipation, roughly what would U.S. rent -seeking as a 
percentage of GDP be?  Is this a reasonable estimate of actual U.S. rent -
seeking as a percentage of  GDP?  If not, what is the best explanation for the 
discrepancy?  
With full rent dissipation, you’d expect U.S. rent -seeking would equal government spending a s a 
percent of GDP, roughly 40%.  This is an unrealistically high estimate; nothing like 40% of GDP is 
spent on lobbying, however broadly defined.  The best explanation for the discrepancy is that 
most government spending is NOT up for grabs.  Politicians largely have to satisfy voters to keep 
their jobs, and voters want  money for the elderly, defense, etc., not whoever lobbies the most.  
You could also observe that even with full rent dissipation, 40% is an overstatement unless 
lobbyists are allowed to simply keep their money without offering any costly goods and service s in 
exchange.   45 


---


1.  Let “CK”=”the results of the Card -Krueger minimum wage study.”  Suppose 
the p(econometrics is reliable)=.8, p(CK|econometrics is reliable)=.3, and 
p(~CK|econometrics is reliable) =.7.  
True, False, and Expla in: P(econometrics is reliable|CK)>70%.  
FALSE.  Using Bayes’ Rule:  


2.*) |~ ( 8.*3.8.*3.) (~ *) |~ ( ) ( *) | () ( *) | () | (
reliable CKPreliable P reliable CKP reliableP reliable CKPreliableP reliable CKPCK reliableP

We do not know P(CK|~reliable).  But 

7.2.*) |~ ( 24.24. reliable CKP   
only if P(CK|~reliable)<.514 . 


---

Bryan, Tyler, a nd John play a game with three possible strategies: Comics,
Chess, and Opera.  Their payoffs are:
 Bryan  Tyler  John
Everyone Plays Comics  10 1 2
Everyone Plays Chess  1 5 5
Everyone Plays Opera  4 4 4
All Other Cases  0 0 0

2. True, False, and E xplain:   This game has one PSNE if the players play 
sequentially, but three PSNE if the players play simultaneously.  
FALSE.  For the simultaneous game, (Comics, Comics, Comics), (Chess, Chess, Chess), and 
(Opera, Opera, Opera) are all PSNE equilibria.  Bu t so is every situation where each players plays 
a different  strategy: e.g. (Comics, Chess, Opera).  This gives everyone zero payoffs, but no 
individual can increase his payoff by switching.  For the sequential game , there is only one 
subgame perfect  PSNE,  where the first mover picks the strategy that he most prefers everyone to 
play – Comics for Bryan, Chess for Tyler or John.  But every PSNE in the simultaneous game 
remains a PSNE in the sequential game.  


3.  A MSNE also exists.   
True, False, and Explai n: In this MSNE, Tyler is indifferent when:  
P(Bryan plays Comics)*P(John plays Comics)=P(Bryan plays Chess)*P(John plays Chess)=  
P(Bryan plays Opera)*P(John plays Opera)  
FALSE.  This would only be true if all the payoffs for Tyler were equal, which they a re not.  Tyler is 
actually indifferent when:  
1*P(Bryan plays Comics)*P(John plays Comics)= 5*P(Bryan plays Chess)*P(John plays Chess)=  
4*P(Bryan plays Opera)*P(John plays Opera)  


---


4. Consider a simple contestable monopoly model where an incumbent faces an 
equally productively efficient potential entrant.  Both have constant marginal 
costs and zero fixed costs of production.  Both firms know that there is a 
probability p that – if the incumbent remains in business – the government will 
prosecute the incumbent  for antitrust violations.  If this occurs, the incumbent 
loses a fixed cost K.  The entrant never faces antitrust prosecution.  
True, False, and Explain:   Equilibrium quantity is decreasing in both p and K.  
TRUE.  pK is effectively a fixed cost.  Since o nly the incumbent faces this cost, the entrant will 
inevitably drive him from the market.  The en trant chooses the highest price  consistent with 
driving the incumbent from the market, an epsilon below the point where the incumbent’s AC 
curve intersects the  demand curve.  The higher p and K, the higher the incumbent’s AC, and the 
higher the price the entrant can safety charge.  


---


5.  True, False, and Explain:   With zero costs of production, Kreps (A Course 
in Microeconomic Theory ) shows that consumer s are better off in a 
Stackelberg equilibrium than a Cournot equilibrium.  
TRUE.  Kreps shows that under Cournot, total output equals 2(A -k)/3, while under Stackelberg, 
total output equals 3(A -k)/4.  With zero costs of production, k=0, so Cournot output eq uals 2A/3, 
while Stackelberg output equals 3A/4.     47 


---


6.  Consider the following one -shot game : 
 Attack  Submit  
Attack  -1, -1000  100,1  
Submit  1,100  50,50  
True, False, and Explain:   There are two PSNE and one MSNE, but only 
(Attack, Submit) is focal.  
TRUE .  This is just the Hawk -Dove game, so (Attack, Submit) and (Submit, Attack) are the two 
PSNE, and there is also a MSNE.  But given the fact that (Attack, Attack) is extremely  bad for 
player 2, (Attack, Submit) is a strong focal point: Both players will lo ok at it and think “Player 2 
won’t want to risk attacking.”  


---


1. Are any  of the main assumptions of general equilibrium theory true in t he real 
world?  Carefully explain your answer.  
The assumptio ns that there are I consumers, K commodities, non -negative consumption, and 
endowments are all trivially true; even an endowment vector of all zeros is still an endowment.  
But none of the other assumptions are empirically true:  
a. Utility is not increasing in all commodities, because some people actually dislike some goods 
and/or reach satiation points . 
b. The market price vector is not continuous, because the penny is the smallest unit.  
c. Given a price vector, people are sometimes indifferent between different consumption bundles 
(e.g. blue shirts vs. green shirts), so U i(p) does not have a unique solution for everyone.  
d. There are some goods (e.g. air) where people satiate at price=0, so t otal demand does not 
always exceed total endowment for a low enough price.  
e. There are lumpy goods and discrete reactions, so the total demand function is not continuous 
in p k. 


---


2. Why does popcorn cost more at movies?  You should either (a) offer an 
ans wer Landsburg fails to consider in The Armchair Economist , or (b) argue that 
Landsburg prematurely rejects the right answer.  
I think Landsburg prematurely rejects the price discrimination story.  Yes, there are many theaters, 
but they are hardly perfect s ubstitutes for each other.  Theaters are at best monopolistically 
competitive.  Every theater has a least a mild geographic monopoly; people won’t want to drive an 
extra 15 minutes to cut the cost of popcorn by a $1.  Why price discriminate on popcorn, but  not 
the restrooms?  Probably because of fairness norms: Theater goers would be very resentful if 
they had to pay extra to use the restroom , leading to less repeat business.   48 


---


3. Compare the maximum deadweight costs of a government grant of monopoly 
to the deadweight costs of outright prohibition of a product.  How would your 
answer change for a product with negative externalities?  Use graphs to clarify 
your answer.  
The worst -case scenario for a government grant of monopoly is when (a) the government gives  
the grant to a productively inefficient firm, and (b) there is full rent dissipation during the struggle 
to get the grant.  The only social benefit is the triangle of consumer’s surplus under the demand 
curve and above the monopoly price.  
The worst -case scenario for Prohibition is even worse: If the ban is strictly enforced, all the 
surplus in the market is destroyed.  
With negative externalities, however, a grant of monopoly or outright prohibition might actually be 
the most efficient policy.  It depends  on the severity of the externalities: You have to compare 
socially optimal output to output under perfect competition, monopoly, and prohibition.  The larger 
the externality, the more likely monopoly (or even prohibition) will be welfare -enhancing.   For s mall 
externalities, however, it may be more efficient to have overproduction due to competition than 
underproduction due to monopoly.  


---


1.  True, False, and Explain:  As population increases, finding real -world 
Pareto improvements becomes more difficult.   
TRUE .  A change is only a Pareto improvement if absolutely no one  is better off.  As population 
grows, you increase the chance of hurting at least one person, especially since you increase the 
chance of the existence of  a person with misanthropic or otherwise “weird” preferences.  
Furthermore, as population increases, the cost of identifying and compensating 100% of all losers 
goes up.  


---


2. Suppose all agents have lexicographic preferences for either  X or Y.  At least 
one agent has lexicographic preferences for X over Y, and at least one agent 
has lexicographic preferences for Y over X.   All agents start with X>0 and Y>0.  
True, False, and Explain:   A unique general equilibrium exist s. 
TRUE.  As long as 0<(p X/pY)<∞, everyone with a lexicographic preference for X  will want to sell 
ALL  his Y, and everyone with a lexicographic  preference for Y will want to sell ALL  his X.  But to 
clear the market, the market value of all the X on the market must equal the market value of all 
the Y on the market.  This happens when p X*(total  X endowments of Y -preferrers)=p Y*(total  Y 
endowments of X -preferrers); in other words, when  
pX/pY=(total Y endowments of X -preferrers)/(total X endowments of Y -preferrers), the unique 
general equilibrium.  For example, if the X -preferrers start with a total of 200 Y, and the Y -
preferrers start with a total of 100 X, the unique GE is p X/pY=200/100=2.  


---


3. Consider the following variant on the Ultimatum Game:  
  Player 2  Player 
1  Accept  Reject  
t (10 -t),t 0, Z 
Z=0 if t≥5, but Z=1 if t<5.  
True,  False, and Explain:  There are an infinite number of PSNE, but only one 
SGPNE.  
TRUE.  This is just like the Ultimatum Game in the notes, except that the unique SGPNE is now 
for Player 1 to offer 1 (I also accepted 1.01 and 1+ ε), because Player 2 strictly prefers to Reject 
offers less than 1.  As i n the Ultimatum Game in the notes, there are an infinite number of PSNE, 
because IF Player 1 expects Player 2 to Reject any offer less than X, Player 1’s optimal response 
is to offer X.  In this variant, X can be any number from 1 -10. 


---


4. “But once you’re in the theater, the owner has a lot of monopolies.” (Landsburg, The Armchair 
Economist ) 
True, False, and Explain:   Landsburg’s point is that when monopolies sell  a 
product with multiple features, they tend to red uce quality on all margins - 
to charge a monopoly price for each and every product feature.   
FALSE.  Precisely the opposite is true.  Landsburg’s point is that monopolists normally want to 
charge a competitive  price on each and every product feature, the n charge a monopoly price for 
the PACKAGE.  Otherwise, theater owners would want to charge high prices for the bathrooms 
and every other amenity in the theater.  Landsburg’s conclusion is that monopoly by itself cannot 
explain high popcorn pricing.  A bett er explanation is price discrimination: If willingness to pay for 
popcorn positively correlates with willingness to pay for admission, but willingness to pay for 
bathrooms does not  correlates with willingness to pay for admission , then charging more than M C 
for popcorn makes sense.  


---


5.  Consider an infinitely repeated Bertrand game with N equally productively 
efficient firms  with constant MC and 0 fixed cost .  The firms want to collude.  
Their system: each period,  the cartel  randomly  pick s one firm (1/N cha nce per 
firm) to charge the monopoly price.  All the other firms charge the monopoly price 
+ $0.01.   The firms enforce this agreement with trigger strategies.  
True, False, and Explain:   Since all firms expect a 1/Nth share of the 
monopoly, this equilibriu m is sustainable as long as 
NN 1 . 
FALSE.  In any period, a firm that is NOT supposed to charge the monopoly price earns 0 if it 
sticks to the plan, but earns 
m  if it deviates  by charging $.01 less than the monopoly price .  The 
expected value of future profits for subsequent periods are 


1tmt
N , because each firm has a 
1-in-N chance of getting to charge the monopoly price and reaping the monopoly profits  in each 
period .  To sustain collusion, then, we need:  
m
tmt
N
1
.  This simplifies to: 
111
N , implying 
1NN .   
Collusion is harder to sustain in this scenario than when colluding firms evenly divide the 
monopoly profits every period.  


---


6.  True, False, and Explain:   Kreps argues that in the "noisy" real world, 
trigger strategies are not a practical way to sustain collusion.  Instead, 
colluding firms would only punish if prices were significantly below the 
agreed level.  
FALSE.  Kreps specifically states t hat "you cannot go too far in lessening the severity of 
punishment, making it of shorter duration, say, or only triggering punishment when prices fall very 
far.  This would encourage each side to chisel somewhat..." (p.526)  Intuition: If no small 
deviatio ns get punished, then everyone will always engage in a small deviation.   


---


1. Caplan (1999, 2001) defends the unrestricted use of subject ive probability 
theory in economics.  What is the best  objection to his position ?  State your case 
as forcefully as possible.   
There were several good answers to this question.  One was that most people assign discrete 
probability categories (certain, hi ghly likely, somewhat likely, 50/50, somewhat unlikely, highly 
unlikely, impossible) rather  than 0 -1 numbers, and that these categories predict their behavior 
better than a continuous model.  Another was that most people don’t know Bayes’ Rule, and 
therefo re frequently violate subjective probability theory on a very deep level.  


---


2. Suppose artificial intelligence researchers produce and patent a perfect 
substitute for human labor at zero MC.  Use general equilibrium theory to predict 
the overall economic e ffects on human  welfare before AND after the Artificial 
Intelligence software patent expires.  
While the patent lasts, the patent -holder will produce a monopoly quantity of AIs.  As a result, the 
effective labor supply increases, and wages for human beings  fall – but not to 0  because the 
patent -holder keeps P>MC .  The overall effect on human welfare, however, is still positive!  Since 
the AIs produce more stuff, and only humans get to consume, GDP per human goes up.  How is 
this possible if wages fall?  Sim ple: Earnings for NON -labor assets (land, capital, patents, etc.) 
must go up.  Humans who only  own labor are worse off, but anyone who owns a home, stocks, 
etc. experiences offsetting gains.  
When the patent expires, this effect becomes even more extreme.  With 0 fixed costs, wages fall 
to MC= 0, but total output – and GDP per human – skyrocket s.  Human owner s of land,  capital,  
and other non -labor assets  capture 100% of all output.  Humans who only have labor to sell, 
however, will starve without tax -funded redistribution or charity.  


---


3. Suppose you play a 5 -turn Centipede Game with (a) a random American, and 
(b) a random Ph.D. Micro student at GMU .  How would you personally play in 
each of these cases?  What percentage of the theoretical maximum payoff 
woul d you receive in each case?  Explain your answer.  
If I played a random American, I would definitely NOT expect him to do backwards induction.  I 
would however expect the random American to cheat on his last turn, so I would cheat one before 
that.   (If I liked the person, or if I were playing a child, I would probably just cooperate the whole 
way through... depending on the sum at stake).  
If I played a random Ph.D. Micro student at GMU, my strategy would heavily depend on 
anonymity.  If the student and I knew or expected to discover each others’ identities, then I would 
cooperate the whole way through... unless there was a lot of money at stake.  If we were 
anonymous, however, I would expect my opponent to cheat on the round right before my last turn , 
so I would cheat one round before that .  With a 5 -turn game, that basically means I would cheat at 
the first opportunity – but if the game were longer, I would definitely try cooperating until the last 
five turns or so.   53 


---


1.  Suppose the government imposes a tax on air pollution.  
True, False, and Explain:  While this tax doesn’t have to be a Kaldor -Hicks 
improvement, it  remains  theoretically p ossible  for it to be a Pareto 
improvement.   
TRU E.  The tax doesn’t have  to be a Kaldor -Hicks improvement; imposing a very high tax on 
something with a mild negative externality could easily make total social surplus lower.  (Picture a 
$1000/day tax for skipping a shower).  Nevertheless , a tax on air po llution can, as a matter of pure 
theory, be a Pareto improvement.  Each individual could conceivably value the improved air 
quality more than the tax.  
[Many students said FALSE, on the grounds that if a change is not a Kaldor -Hicks improvement, it 
cannot be a Pareto improvement.  But the question said  that the change might  not be a Kaldor -
Hicks improvement.  This merely implies that the change might not be a Pareto improvement, 
which of course is perfectly compatible with the theoretical possibility  that t he change is a Pareto 
improvement.]  


---


2. Suppose that two players play this PD game, followed by this Coordination 
game.  
 Defect  Don't    L R 
Defect  3,3  4,0   L 5,5  0,0  
Don't  0,4  2,2   R 0,0  5,5  
True, False, and Explain:  If ß=.9, the only SGPNE are (Defe ct, Defect), (L,L) 
and (Defect, Defect), (R, R).  
[I accepted either of the following responses.]  
[Response #1: The literal answer. ]   
FALSE.  The first game isn’t really a PD, because the socially optimal result (Defect, Defect) is 
strictly dominant.  B oth (Defect, Defect), (L,L) and (Defect,  Defect), (R,R) are equilibria  for ALL 
values of β.  But there is a third  equilibrium: (Defect, Defect) followed by the mixed strategy 
equilibrium of playing L 50% of the time and R 50% of the time.  Furt hermore, this MSNE allows 
for a strange equilibrium: (Don’t, Don’t), followed by either (L,L) or (R,R ) if both players played  54 
(Don’t, Don’t) in the first round, or the MSNE if either player played Defect in the first round.  This 
is an equilibrium as long as:  
2 + 5 β ≥ 4 + 2.5β, implying a critical β=.8.  
[Response #2: The answer assuming  the first game r eally was a PD, with (Defect, Defect) payoffs 
of (2,2) and (Don’t, Don’t) payoffs of (3,3)].  
FALSE.  Both (Defect, Defect), (L,L) and (Defect, Defect), (R,R) are equilibrium for ALL values of 
β.  But there is another obvious equilibrium: (Defect, Defect) followed by the mixed strategy 
equilibrium of playing L 50% of the time and R 50% of the time.  This is an equilibrium as long as:  
3 + 5 β ≥ 4 + 2.5β, implying a critical β=.4.  


---


3. True, False, and Explain:   In an Ultimatum game, a 50/50 split is the only 
SGPPSNE; in a Dictator game, a 100/0 split is the only SGPPSNE.  
FALSE.  In experiments, 50/50 splits are common for both  games.  Theoretically, however, the 
SGPPSNE of the Ultimatum game is (100 -ε,ε), where ε is the smallest amount the giver can give.  
The giver has no reason to give more because the receiver will always accept anything more than 

0.  In the Dictator game, similarly, the SGPPSNE is (100,0) because the Dictator has no incentive 
to share even a penny.  


---


4. “Suppose that a manufacturer does hol d an unbreakable patent on a particular product.” 
(Kreps, A Course in Microeconomic Theory ) 
True, False, and Explain:   Kreps says  that firms may engage in entry 
deterrence even if they have a legal monopoly (such as a patent).   
TRUE.  Even firms with a l egal monopoly have to worry about competition by similar  products, 
giving them an incentive to reduce their prices to discourage entry.  As Kreps explains on p.304, 
“The scope of patent protection does not always extend to protection against close substitu tes for 
the patented product... Then the monopoly may act in a way to impede the entry of producers of 
these substitute goods.”  


---


5.  Suppose firms in an industry have the same cost function, including a sunk 
cost .  Product demand falls, leading to a halvin g of potential monopoly profits.  
Two firms play mixed strategies to decide whether to enter.  
True, False, and Explain:   The probability that both  firms enter and lose 
money falls by a factor of four.  
FALSE.  From the homework, we know that the probabil ity that ONE firm plays enter is 
amm
 , 
so the probability that BOTH firms do so is 
2





amm .  Halving monopoly profits reduces the 
entry probability to 
a amm
mm
2 5.5.
 .  This clearly reduces the probability of entr y, but by 
LESS than half.  (To halve the probability, the entire denominator, not just part of it, would have to 
double).  Since the probability that one firm enters falls by less than half, the probability that two 
firms enter , 
2
2




amm  , falls by LESS than a factor of four. 


---


6.  Suppose N equally efficient firms lobby the government for a monopoly 
privilege.  The firms never collude.  
True, False, and Explain:   Bertrand -style  lobbying  will lead to a larger  
Tullock rectangle than Cournot -styl e lobbying  would.  
TRUE.  Note that the question specifies Bertrand - or Cournot -style LOBBYING.  The natural 
interpretation is that with Bertrand -style lobbying, whichever firms lobbies the MOST wins the 
monopoly for sure, whereas with Cournot -style lobbyin g, your chance of winning the privilege  
depends on your lobbying as a fraction of TOTAL lobbying.  By the usual logic, Bertrand  lobbying 
leads one firm to set  its lobbying equal to the total value of the monopoly, and all rivals to give up.  
Cournot lobbyi ng, in contrast, leads all firms to lobby somewhat, but not enough to wipe out all the 
profits (i.e., to get full rent dissipation).  


---


1. Why doesn’t the First Welfare Theorem imply that market outcomes are 
Pareto efficient even in the presence of externalities?  Why does Caplan claim 
that, the First Welfare Theorem notwithstanding, real -world market outcomes are  
Pareto efficient in the pres ence of externalities?  
The no -externalities assumption is implicit in the assumption that Utility Ui(x) solely  depends on all 
K commodities  in YOUR consumption bundle .  This means that no consumers’ consumption 
affects any OTHER consumer’s utility .  With externalities, this assumption is false, so the FWT 
need not hold.  
Caplan claims that real -world outcomes are Pareto efficient because (a) any change is almost 
certain to make SOMEONE worse off, and (b) there is no feasible way to compensate 100% of 
the l osers for any realistic change.  As a result, there is no actual way to make one person better 
off without  making someone else worse off.  As a result, the world is Pareto efficient with or 
without externalities.  


---


2. Suppose you had to play a 100 -turn Hawk/Dove  game with one other student 
in this class.  Before the game starts, you are allowed to send your partner a 
one -paragraph essay on the theme, “You should cooperate with me because...”  
What would your essay say  if you wanted to maximize your payoff ?  Be as 
persuasive as possible.  
Here’s what I propose we do: We play Dove for turns 1 -99.  If either of us plays Hawk, we revert 
to the MSNE for the rest of the game.  On the last turn, we flip a coin: Heads I play Hawk and you 
play Dove, Tails I play Dov e and you play Hawk.  
You’re  probably a fair and honorable person.  If so, I think you’ll agree that my propo sal is both fair 
and honorable, and happily play along.  
But on the off -chance that you’re not a fair and honorable person, you should still  adhere  to my 
proposal.  This isn’t a PD game , so playing Hawk can easily backfire for you even on the turn you 
play it.  More importantly, my plan has credible punishments.  Once we expect the MSNE, the 
MSNE is going to happen.  You heard the same lecture I did.   Finally, my proposal elegantly 
handles the end -game problem.  If we’ve cooperated for turns 1 -99, the coin flip maintains 
cooperation on turn 100.  And you won’t want to betray me on turn 99, because then on turn 100 
you’ll get the MSNE payoff i nstead of a 50% chance of the (Hawk, Dove) payoff and a 50% of the 
(Dove, Hawk) payoff.  
In short, decency and self -interest both point in the same direction.  Let’s play!  


---


3. Landsburg (“Why Prices Are Good: Smith versus Darwin”)  states that, “In 
biology there is no equivalent of the Invisible Hand.”  Would Landsburg expect 
there to be an Invisible Hand for culture ?  Explain what you think Landsburg 
would say, then argue that he’s wrong.   (Hint:  Remember that cultural practices 
are often coordination games ).  
Landsburg would almost definitely NOT expect the Invisible Hand to apply.  As he explains in The 
Armchair Economist , markets achieve a desirable SOCIAL outcome – efficiency – by channeling 
competition through PRICES.  Competition alone gets you the bl oodbath that is natural selection.  
Coordination, similarly, can lock -in all sorts of inefficient outcomes.  
You could argue, however, that cultures compete with each other, mimicking  the usual market 
mechanism.  People who aren’t happy with Amish culture,  for example, are free to switch to non -
Amish culture.  New entry is possible, too – so if the current menu of cultural choices is 
unsatisfactory, you can start your own culture.  Cultures, like firms, must pass the market test.  


---


1.  True, False, and Explain:   In the real world, taxes on goods with negative 
externalities are always the least in efficient way for governments to raise a 
given amount of revenue.  
FALSE.  Taxes on negative externalities have one clear advantage over lump -sum taxes: Lump -
sum taxes don’t hurt efficiency, but taxes on negative externalities CAN actually increase  
efficiency by discouraging socially harmful behavior.  But this beneficial side effect of taxes on 
negative externalities reverses as soon as the tax starts to push market quantity below the 
intersection of supply and Social Benefits.  So if revenue the government wants is  large or the 
negative externality is  minor, taxes on negative externalities might be less efficient than, say, 
lump -sum taxation.  


---

Agents live for two periods.  They are endowed with 1 unit of a consumption good in period 1 and
1 unit in period 2.  The period 1 good spoils if not consumed in period 1.  There are two types of
agents:
Type A:  50% of the agents have U=ln c 2.
Type B:  The other 50% have U=ln c 1 + ln c 2


2.  True, False, and Explain:  The general equilibr ium interest rate will be less 
than 3 %. 
TRUE.  Normalizing the utility function for the Type B’s, then applying the standard two -good GE 
result, yields: 
 .  This implies an interest rate of -67%, which is 
definitely less than 3%.  

3. True, False, and Explain:  If the two types of agents do not interact (i.e., 
there is one island for all of the A's and a different island for all of the B's), 
the interest rat e will be negative  for A’s but zero for  B’s. 
TRUE.  On the island of the A’s, the interest rate is 
 , or -100%.  
On the island of the B’s, the interest rate is: 
 , or 0%. Intuitively, the A’s place 
no value on period -1 consumption, so it’s free; and the B’s place equal weight on period -1 and 
period -2 consumption, and have equal amounts of both goods, so their prices are equal in 
equilibrium.  


---


4. “In biology, there is no equivalent of the Invisible Hand .” (Landsburg , The Armchair Economist ) 
True, False, and Explain:   Landsburg’s discussion implies  that in  game 
theory , there is an equivalent of the Invisible Hand.  
FALSE.  Landsburg identifies the Invisible Hand with the First Welfare Theorem.  He explains that 
according to this theorem, rationality and indivi dual utility maximization are insufficient to ensure 
efficiency.  You also n eed competitive prices.  Furthermore, g ame theory is specifically designed 
to analyze situations  where the perfectly competitive model does not apply.  Indeed, Landsburg’s 
uses bot h biological and game theory -type examples (such as educational signaling) to expose 
inefficient equilibria.   


---


5.  Suppose two players play the following normal form N times.  N is finite and 
known by both players.  
 Left  Right  
Left  5,1  0,0  
Right  0,0  1,5  
True, False, and Explain:  Alternating back and fort h between (L,L) and (R,R) 
is a SGPPSNE equilibrium for all  N and all β >0. 
TRUE.  Even though this is a finite game, there is no incentive to deviate in the last turn, because 
deviation reduces your pay ment (of  1 or 5) to 0.  Since there is no incentive to deviate in the last 
turn, the game never “unravels,” and playing the equilibrium strategies is fully credible.  The 
discount rate is a red herring – even if both players attach  ZERO weight to future ou tcomes, 
playing the equilibrium is selfishly optimal.   
Note: A few students said FALSE  because this is also an equilibrium for β=0.   But if something is 
true for β≥0, it is automatically true for β>0, too.  


---


6.  Suppose Cournot firms have TC=2 (i.e., fixed cost of 2 with MC=0).  The 
demand curve is P=1 0-Q.  
True, False, and Explain:   With free entry, the equilibrium number of firms is 
5, with a deadweight cost of 8.  
FALSE.  From the notes, the equilibrium number o f firms is given by the integer immediately 
below:  


07.6 110
KN
, so N=6, not 5.  Since one firm could produce the entire output at the same 
cost as more firms, this implies a deadweight cost of 2 per additional firm, for a total of 10.   59 
Note: A fe w students correctly observed that there would be additional deadweight loss caused by 
equilibrium prices exceeding MC= 0.  Although I gave full credit for saying that the deadweight cost 
is 10, I also gave full credit for saying it was 10 + the allocative inefficiency of P>MC.  


---


1. “Mises is correct to point out that beliefs about the efficacy of action are implicit in action. But 
he at best misspeaks when he characterizes this necessary fea ture of action as knowledge of 
‘causality.’  Instead, the necessary belief component of action is weaker; we don’t need to know —
or even believe we know —any exceptionless causal laws. We merely require b eliefs about 
conditional probabilities.” (Caplan, “Probability, Common Sense, and Realism”)  
Use Caplan’s analysis of the connection between beliefs and actions to explain 
why you showed up for this evening’s exam.  
[I’m now pretending I’m a student.]   Acc ording to Mises, I showed up at the exam because I 
believe that showing up will cause  me to succeed in the program.  Caplan’s point is that Mises 
overstates.  I could easily attend even though I realize that I might  get in a car accident en route, 
or enter  the classroom and discover that the exam’s been cancelled.  I might attend even though I 
believe I’m likely to fail the exam, just as Caplan submits articles to the AER expecting rejection.  
Being here only shows that , in Caplan’s words,  I think being her e leads to a “better distribution of 
outcomes  than any alternative plan.”   Nothing more – and nothing less.  


---


2. “Schelling points explain why countries rarely fight wars, but fail to explain why 
countries often fight w ars over seemingly minor events. ”  Dis cuss, providing at 
least two real -world examples.  
One of the most common way to avoid the War, War equilibrium of the Hawk/Dove game is 
territoriality: Fight on your own territory, Run away on other territory.  But how is this “territory” 
defined?  Schell ing points provide an obvious explanation: Once two nations recognize each 
other’s national borders, each can avoid war by carefully keeping its military on its side of the 
border.  This helps maintain peace, but also shows that the preceding quotation is wrong.  Using 
national borders to reach the peaceful equilibrium creates the possibility of war over a minor 
territorial transgression (or alleged  transgression) : Once national borders become a Schelling 
point, one country’s decision to grab one square mil e of another country could provoke a massive 
response from the country that claims that square mile.  Two real -world examples: The Falkland 
Island crisis, where the United Kingdom fought against Argentina for seizing some sparsely -
inhabited islands in the south Pacific; and the current Crimean crisis, which began when Russia 
unexpectedly occupied and annexed ethnically Russian territory in the Ukraine.   


---


3. Suppose a society is in a very low -trust equilibrium: People don’t trust others 
because others aren’t trustworthy, and no one bothers to be trustworthy because 
no one will trust them.  If you personally wanted to break out  of this low -trust 
equilibrium – to become a widely trusted “honest broker” – what would you do?  
Carefully describe your strategy, step -by-step.  
My steps: (1)  Make some highly visible investments with large SUNK costs to show that I plan to 
be in business  for a long time.  (2) Create a tight-knit team of employees I know well personally, 
starting with friends and family.  (3) Give NEW  customers my products for free – and make sure I  60 
maintain quality.  (4) Gradually increase prices for older customers – providing large discounts for 
customers  who refer their friends and family members.  
If this doesn’t work, I’d seek  a “franchise” or other certification  from a reputable outsider, such as 
a multi -national corporation.   61 


---


1. Suppose all the assumptions of the First Welfare Theorem are true.  
True, False, and Explain:   Markets are Pareto and  Kaldor -Hicks efficient.  
TRUE.  The First Wel fare Theorem assumes no externalities, perfect information, and an 
exogenous price vector, and proves markets are Pareto efficient.  Given these assumptions, 
moreover, people sell ANYTHING they possess that ANYONE else values more highly  than they 
do, so m arkets maximize total surplus and are therefore K -H efficient . 
Most students  answered FALSE, citing the notes on the fact that Pareto efficiency does not imply 
K-H efficiency.  This is true in the real world, but the assumptions of the First Welfare Theor em 
are so unrealistic that both Pareto and K -H efficiency follow ! 


---


2. Suppose 4 5% of all agents in an economy have U=ln x + ln y,  and the other 
55% have U=.75  ln x + .25 ln y.   All agents start with one unit of x and two  units 
of y.    
True, False, and Explain:   In general equilibrium, exactly 5 5% of the agents 
consume more y than x.  
FALSE.  100% of agents consume more y than x.  To see this, first calculate the equilibrium price 
vector:  
This implies all agents have income of 1*3.52+2*1=5.52.  Type 1 agents spend 50% of this 
income on x, 50% on y, so they consume 5.52*.5/3.52=.784 x and 5.52*.5/1= 2.76 y, so y>x for 
them.  Type 2 agents spend 75% of their income on x, 25% on y, so they consume 5.52*.75/ 3.52=1.18 x and 5.52*.25/1=1.38 y, so y>x for them too.   62


---


3. Suppose that two players play the following three games in order : 
Coordination game, Prisoners' Dilemma , Ultimatum game . 
True, False, and Explain:  Standard game theory predicts that this game will  
completely  "unravel."  
TRUE.  “Unraveling” means players play each stage of the game as if it were not repeated.  The 
last stage – the Ultimatum game – has only one SGPNE, where Player 1 offers $.01 and keeps 
the rest for himself, and Player 2 accepts.  A s a result, standard game theory says players cannot 
use punishments to avoid the standard (Defect, Defect) outcome in the PD stage.  This in turn 
implies that players treat the first stage – the Coordination game – as if it were a one -shot game.   
Hence, c omplete unraveling.  


---


4. “But once you’re in the theater, the owner has a lot of monopolies. He is the only supplier of 
rest rooms, for example. Why doesn’t he charge you a monopoly price to use them?  (Landsburg , 
The Armchair Economist ) 
True, False, and Explain:   Landsburg concludes that customer diversity, not 
supplier monopoly, explains why popcorn costs more at movies.  
FALSE.  Landsburg concludes you need BOTH diversity AND some degree of monopoly (i.e., 
imperfect competition) : “Price discrimination c an only work when the seller has a monopoly of the 
appropriate kind.”   Monopoly without diversity leads to high ticket prices and MC pricin g for 
popcorn and other extras. Diversity without monopoly lead s to MC pricing for  everything.  


---


5.  Suppose two playe rs play the following normal form N times.  N is finite and 
known by both players.  
 Left  Right  
Left  5,1  0,0  
Right  0,0  1,5  
True, False, and Explain:  Alternating back and forth between (L,L) and (R,R) 
is an equilibrium as long as N is even  and β<1. 
FALSE.  Alternating back and forth is ALWAYS an equilibrium.  Defecting reduces your payoff 
from 5 or 1 to 0, so there is no temptation to “cheat” regardless of number of turns or discount 
rate.  


---


6.  Consider a Cournot model with two firms.  P=20 -Q, and MC =0.  
True, False, and Explain:   If one firm moves first, the unique SGPNE has a 
higher Q than it does with simultaneous play.  
TRUE.  With simultaneous play, the Cournot notes tell us market  output is 2/3*20=13.3.  With 
sequential play, player 2 sets q2=(20 -q1)/2, so player 1 maximizes Pq1=( 20-q1-(20 -q1)/2)q1.  
Differentiating implies 10 -q1=0, so q1=10, and q2=(20 -10)/2=5.  So q1+q2=15<13.3.   63 


---


1. Construct a “second -best” efficiency defense of ONE existing policy you 
consider highly inefficient  in a “first -best” sense .  Be as convincing as possible.  
Under current U.S. law, extremely rare, highly unpopular religions like Satanism are legal.  This 
seems highly inefficient in a first -best sense: the total willingness of religious people to pay to ban 
Satanism probably vastly exceeds the totally willingne ss of Satanists to pay to keep their religion 
legal.  However, politically drawing the line between religions like Satanism and moderately 
unpopular religions like Scientology is extremely contentious, and risks banning religions that DO 
pass the cost -bene fit test because their followers love them and they only mildly annoy the 
majority.  These costs and risks make across -the-board religious toleration a second -best 
optimum: While we have to tolerate a few inefficient religions, we avoid religious conflict and “false 
positives.”  


---


2. “[I]t seems that the basic textbook commentary on bilateral monopoly and bargaining had it 
right.” (Kreps, A Course in Microeconomic Theory )  Carefully explain (a) what Kreps is 
claiming here, and (b) why he claims it.  Does a MS NE view of bargaining lead to 
a different conclusion?  
Kreps is claiming that, according to standard textbook treatments, “bargaining outcomes depend 
on individual’s expectations as to what the outcomes should be”; furthermore, such expectations 
can be “ma nipulated.”  He claims this because experiments show precisely this: Playing 
bargaining games with computers that demand 20% of the surplus subsequently leads human 
beings to bargain harder with other humans than playing bargaining games with computers tha t 
demand 50% of the surplus.  The MSNE view leads to a somewhat different conclusion: While 
expectations do matter, some expectations are not stable .  In particular, if people expect too 
much, lowering your expectations leads to higher payoffs – and if peo ple expect too little, raising 
expectations leads to higher payoffs.  


---


3. What is the most  empirically relevant model our class has studied so far?  The 
least  empirically relevant model?  Justify both answers.  
The reputation model is the most empirically r elevant.  Reputation makes the business world go 
round, especially in the internet age of ubiquitous product reviews and ratings.  Businesses can 
almost always raise their SHORT -RUN profits by cutting corners today, but refrain from doing so 
because this d estroys their LONG -RUN profits.  
The ultimatum game model is the least empirically relevant.  It clearly predicts something that 
essentially NEVER occurs: offering people in disadvantageous bargaining positions an amount 
vanishingly close to zero.  Instead , human beings in such situations gravitate toward even splits.  


---


1. Suppose a million new immigrants enter the U.S., driving down the wages of 
low -skilled Americans by $1/hour.  
True, False, and Explain:  According to Landsburg ( Fair Play ), this change 
usually increases Kaldor -Hicks effic ien cy, because the positive 
externalities of  population growth hugely  outweigh the negati ve externality 
of falling wages for natives.  
FALSE.  Landsburg says that falling wages are not  a negative externality at all; instead, they’re a 
TRANSFER to capitalis ts.  As long as there is any demand elasticity, moreover, total surplus 
expands at the lower wage, so Kaldor -Hicks efficiency automatically increases.  Landsburg 
discuses the positive externalities of popula tion growth elsewhere, but they’re  not relevant  here.  


---


2.  Two types of agents consume guns (g) and butter (b).  The Type A agents 
have U=.7 ln g + .3 ln b, and initially own 1 unit of guns and 1 unit of butter.  The 
Type B agents have U=.3 ln g + .7 ln b, and initially own .5 units of guns and .5 
units of butter.  50% of the agents are Type A; the other 50% are Type B.  
True, False, and Explain:  In GE, t he price of guns will not equal the price of 
butter.  
TRUE.  In GE, PriceG/PriceB=(.5*.7*1+.5*.3*.5)/(.5*.3*1+.5*.7*.5)=.425/.325=1.31>0.  


---


3.  Consider t he following 2 -player game:  
 Up Down  
Left  0,0  0,0  
Right  0,0  0,0  
True, False, and Explain:   This game has 4 PSNE but no MSNE.  
FALSE.  The game has 4 PSNE, but also an infinite number of MSNE.  Since all payoffs are zero, 
EVERY combination of probabilit ies leaves everyone indifferent, so they’re all MSNEs.  


---


4. Suppose two players play the following normal form N times.  N is finite and 
known by both players.  
 Left  Right  
Left  5,0  0,0  
Right  0,0  0,5  
True, False, and Explain:  Alternating back and f orth between (L,L) and (R,R) 
is always an equilibrium as long as N is even . 
FALSE.  Alternating back and forth is always an equilibrium for ALL N.  There is no incentive to 
cheat in the last turn, since defection automatically yields a payoff of 0.  This is particularly clear 
because (L,L) and (R,R) are both equilibria off the stage game, and repeatedly playing stage 
game equilibria is always an equilibrium.  


---


5.  Suppose each firm in an industry has TC=
2
iq ; i.e., zero fixed costs with  
increasing  marginal costs.  In dustry demand is given by P=1/Q, where Q=

iiq . 
True, False, and Explain:   Bertrand competition will allow an infinite number 
of firms to survive in this market, implying no productive or allocative 
inefficiency . 
TRUE.  All firms have the same cost structure of  TC=
2
iq , so MC=
iq2  and AC =
iq . Due to this 
symmetric cost structure, Bertrand equilibrium implies that P=MC=minimum AC=0.  W hen does 
P=0?  Since P=1 /Q, this only occurs  when total output is infinite, requiring an infinite number of 
firms, each producing an infinitesimal quantity of output.  There is no allocative inefficiency, since 
P=MC, and no productive inefficiency, because all output is produced at the minimum AC of 0.  


---


6.  True, False, and Explain:   The War/Peace game confirms the view that the 
invention of atomic weapons reduced  the risks of war and  human 
extinction.   
FALSE.  The PSNE of the War/Peace game remains (Peace, War) and (War, Peace) no matter 
how bad the (War, War) payoffs become .  But for the MSNE, the frequency of playing War falls as 
the (War, War) payoffs fall, and the frequency of the (War, War) result falls quadratically.  
However, the risk of actual war only declines because at omic weapons make actual war so 
terrible IF it occurs!  With more primitive weapons, it is unclear if human extinction was even a 
possible outcome of war.  Now, it may be.  


---


1.  People (including economists) often think that monopolies are productively 
inefficient.  Why, on reflection, would this be strange?  What additional 
assumptions do you need to make the “inefficient monopolies” stor y internally 
consistent?  
Productively ineffici ent monopoly is strange because – for ALL market structures – higher costs 
imply lower profits.  Even if a firm’s monopoly is guaranteed by the government, why not maximize 
profits by minimizing costs?  The tw o simplest ways to make this story internally consistent: (1) 
The monopolist could have lobbied to legally exclude more productively efficient competitors from 
the industry.  (2) The monopolist’s profits might be capped by the government, giving the 
monopo list an incentive to stealthily take its profits in the form of higher costs (the “ gold -plating  
effect”).  


---


2. Suppose artificial intelligence researchers competitively  produce  a zero MC 
perfect substitute for ALL human labor  (but not other inputs) .  Use ge neral 
equilibrium theory to predict the effects on output, wages, profit, and overall 
human  welfare . 
This innovation effectively makes one input – labor – free.  Wages therefore fall to 0 – why pay 
humans a positive wage when an AI will do an equally good  job for free?   Since infinite labor is 
now available for no cost, output soars.  Profits, however, remain zero in equilibrium; with 
competition, all the benefits get passed on to the remaining scarce resources of capital and land.  
Since all production i s consumed by humans, overall human welfare rise s, though workers who 
own very little capital and land  will be worse off.  


---


3. Use an insight from Kreps we did NOT discuss in class to analyze something 
economically interesting in the real world .  Clearly ex plain how a specific 
statement from Kreps helps explain specific individual or firm behavior.   
On p,198, Kreps discusses experiment al tests of Walrasian equilibrium.  (He doesn’t mention 
Vernon Smith by name, but Smith was a key figure here).  Result: “e xcept for a few special cases, 
those experiments that have been run are consistent with the notion of Walrasian equilibrium.”  
What’s striking is that sharply  deviating from many  extreme assumptions of supply -and -demand 
doesn’t seem to matter much for mark et outcomes.  So even though the Walrasian model seems 
to poorly describe the real world , the model still correctly predicts market outcomes; subjects act 
“as if” they’re perfect competitors even when they’re not.  This suggests that industries 
economists usually describe as “oligopolistic” may actually be just as “competitive” as atomistic 
industries.  And when I look around at the world, this seems plausible: As a rule, number of firms 
seems like a poor predictor of how well firms treat consumers.  


---

1. All agents in an economy have U=ln x + ln y. 25% have 1 unit of x and 0 units of y. 75% have 0 units of x and 1 unit of y.
True, False, and Explain: 
True.
a_i=0.5, b_i=0.5
25% of agents have y_1=0, x_1=1
75% of agents have y_2=1, x_2=0
      P_x/P_y =(· a_i ??y_i^ ?_ ?_ )/(· b_i ?x_i^ ?_ )
=(0.25)(0.5)(0)+(0.75)(0.5)(1)Ö(0.25)(0.5)(1)+(0.75)(0.5)(0) 
=0.375Ö0.125
=3


---


2. True, False, and Explain: In a pure coordination game, repeated play strictly increases the number of NE.
Left
Right
Left
(3,3)
(0,0)
Right
(0,0)
(5,5)
False. There's still going to be the same regardless -- two PSNE & one MSNE. No matter how many times you repeat the game, you're still going to have the same outcomes.  


---


3. "The economically correct argument is the most politically incorrect argument imaginable." (Landsburg, The Armchair Economist)
True, False, and Explain: Landsburg is explaining that laws restricting women's use of cosmetic surgery make women in general worse off.
False. *Pg. 220-222
Women are not necessarily made worse off by laws restricting women's use of cosmetic surgery--specifically breast implants. Landsburg says that what matters may not be overall breast size, but relative breast size, so a ban on breast implants may not make women worse off in the dating market necessarily. If regulations were such that only one woman could get breast implants, she would be better off in the dating market, and all other women slightly disadvantaged, but not terribly. Instead, a ban on breast implants would make society overall worse off. Because men and the casual observer derive benefits from women getting breast implants, a ban on breast implant would reduce the overall benefits to society. 
P. 221: Cost-benefit analysis: 
- Men get benefits from women getting breast implants
- The casual observer gets benefits from women getting breast implants
- Women[1][2]
4[3]. A group of N oligopolists producing identical products plays a finite number of turns. Two of the players are then randomly selected to play a Hawk-Dove game ONCE.
True, False, and Explain: With rational, selfish players, some degree of collusion may be sustainable under Cournot competition, but NOT Bertrand competition.
True. Cournot case can have tacit collusion even in a one shot game, but in Bertrand case you either have explicit collusion or the perfectly competitive outcome. Working backwards, the outcome of Hawk-Dove isn't going to affect the outcome.


---


5. True, False, and Explain: One piece of empirical evidence against expected utility theory is that people gamble and play lotteries.
False. EU theory answers the question "how do people choose between gambles?". It says that people will choose the gamble with the highest expected utility. Ultimately, EU max boils down to tastes for risk. Those who take gambles/bets that have a negative expected VALUE[4] might have risk-loving preferences. Although most people seem to be risk averse there may be the following behavioral explanations for thisÉ *fill in blank here. 
Overall, the fact that people gamble and play lotteries is not evidence against expected utility theory. 


---


6. In a "market for lemons," the true value of cars to sellers is uniformly distributed on the interval [0,100]. Buyers value cars at 25% more than sellers. Now suppose that buyers in this market do NOT have rational expectations, but sellers do. To be specific, buyers believe the quality of the average car available for sale is as high as the quality of the average car not available for sale.
True, False, and Explain: This market with asymmetric information and irrational expectations is as efficient as a comparable market with symmetric information and rational expectations.
See 2009 final
False. In theory, irrationality could increase or decrease market efficiency; in practice, experiments show that irrationality makes the "market for lemons" less efficient. 
This market with asymmetric information and irrational expectations is not as efficient as market with symmetric information and rational expectations, but it is more efficient than a market with asymmetric info and rational expectations (this market "unravels").
True. We argue that both markets will clear. The first one, where irrationality exists, will clear but with a transfer to sellers. The second market, where there is symmetric imperfect information, will clear fairly easily.[5]


---


7. After several decades, the government finally eliminates sugar subsidies in 2005. The sugar industry is thrown into a severe crisis and many plantations go bankrupt. 
True, False, and Explain: This is strong evidence that sugar executives did not have rational expectations about government sugar policy.
False. *week 8 RE definition from notes  -  essentially, while you expect people to reasonably estimate the outcomes of certain events, doesn't mean these estimates are perfect. 
RE means that people's subjective probability = the objective probability. But it does not rule out error or suggest that information or cognition is free. So, while someone with RE may be expected to reasonably estimate the outcome of future events, it does not preclude error. The experts may not have known that the subsidies were going to end. 


---


8.In experiments on the endowment effect, some people are given mugs and asked to sell them back, while others are merely given the opportunity to buy a mug. The Coase Theorem predicts that mugs will sell for the same price in both treatments.
True, False, and Explain: Thaler admits that transactions costs make it impossible to give a clear experimental prediction about mug prices.
False. Pg. 65  -  "Since transactions costs have been shown to be insignificant in the induced value markets, and income effects are trivial, a clear prediction is available; when the market clears, the objects will be owned by those subjects who value them most." This is the prediction, but evidence shows that there are fewer trades than predicted. *re-word this.


---


9. In a "psychologist/engineer" problem, the base rate is 70% engineers, 30% lawyers. Fred's P(having a pocket protector| a person is an engineer)=.5, and P(a person is an engineer|having a pocket protector)=.8. If the base rate is changed to 30% engineers, 70% lawyers, Fred's P(a person is an engineer|having a pocket protector) falls to .3.
True, False, and Explain: Fred does NOT suffer from representativeness bias.
True. *Week 11 notes. Fred adjusts for base rates. 
Fred does not suffer from representativeness bias because his P(a person is an engineer|having a pocket protector) adjust for a change in the base rate. 
Bayes' Rule: P(A|B)=(P(B|A)P(A))/(P(B|A)P(A)+P(B|~A)P(~A))
E-30% L-70%
P(A|B)=(0.5(0.3))/((0.5)(0.3)+0.5(0.7))=0.15/0.5=0.3
Fred's P(a person is an engineer|having a pocket protector)=0.3, thus Fred does not suffer from representativeness bias.


---


10. More educated workers tend to enjoy their work more and are less likely to be unemployed. 
True, False, and Explain: BOTH of these factors bias standard estimates of the return to education downwards.
False. Standard estimates of the return to education only concern wages. Omitting utility of work biases the estimate upward -- the true estimate of education and income should be lower[6][7]. More educated workers are less likely to be unemployed, which means they're more likely to earn more income over their lifetime. 


---


11. True, False, and Explain: The "liquidity constraints" and "debt aversion" explanations for observed departures from consumption smoothing are empirically indistinguishable.
False. You can vary the amount of collateral and see how much people actually borrow -- econ grad student vs. tenure econ professor. Can more objectively tell if someone is liquidity constrained or not and compare. *Week 13 notes
If liquidity constraints were the only issue, then we would see individuals with higher expected future incomes maxing out their credit (or approaching it), but we don't (or at least not very often). Additionally, we would see more retirees taking advantage of reverse mortgages; "debt aversion" cannot explain their hesitancy to avail themselves of this option since they wouldn't incur any debt by doing so. Thus, there are instances where we can distinguish between liquidity constraints and debt aversion.


---


12. Wittman argues that "concentrated benefits, diffuse costs" problems could be overcome with an omnibus repeal bill.
True, False, and Explain: According to Wittman, theorists such as Fiorina and Noll and Shepsle and Weingast rule out such an omnibus repeal by assuming that elections are not competitive. 
*Week 14 notes
From page 1410 in Wittman: "A number of authors have attempted to argue against the possibility that such an omnibus bill will be enacted, but all their arguments rely heavily on some asymmetry in voter behavior. For example, Fiorina and Noll (1978) assume that the voters are aware of the benefits, but not the costs, of incumbent facilitation of constituents' needs." The issue brought up by Fiorina and Noll is assymetric information, not uncompetitive elections.
Part 2: Short Answer


---


1.Governments sometimes give away services, such as health care, without charge. Assuming there is no rationing, use a supply-and-demand diagram to show the deadweight costs of this policy relative to the competitive equilibrium. Explain your diagram, and discuss the implications for moral hazard in insurance.
No rationing and no price constitutes universal healthcare. Moral hazard in insurance increases because people abstain from buying health care and act riskier because they don't face any costs to receiving health care. 
I think this supports how we drew the DWL for this question
https://msu.edu/course/ec/201/brown/pim/pdffiles98/crop_sub.pdf


---


2. Suppose your EU=w.3, and insurance is sold at 10% more than the actuarially fair rate. Your uninsured income is $100,000 with p=.5, and $50,000 with
p=.5. Using this information, do the following: (a) Calculate your coefficient of absolute risk aversion(CARA). (b) Solve for your optimal quantity of insurance, i.
(a)CARA=?-U?^"/U^' 
U=w^0.3
U^'=0.3w^(-0.7)
U^"=-0.3*0.7w^(-1.7)
CARA=(0.3*0.7w^(-1.7))/(0.3w^(-0.7) )=0.7w^(-1)
	This indicates that the agent is risk averse.
(b): #'s are too difficult to solve problem without calculator
	?Max?_i  0.5?(100,000-0.5*1.1i)?^0.3+0.5?(50,000+1-0.5*1.1i)?^0.3[8]
-.55*.3*.5(100,000-.55i)-0.7 + .45*.3*.5(50,000+.45i)-0.7
.0825(100,000-.55i)-.7 = .0675(50,000+.45i)-.7
(11/9)(100,000-.55i)-.7 = (50,000+.45i)-.7
.751((100,000-.55i)= 50,000+.45i
75,100-.41305i=50,000+.45i
25,100 = .86305i
i = 29,082.90
[9]


---


3. What is the one thing you learned in this class that has the highest PRIVATE value for you? What is the one thing you learned in this class that would have the highest SOCIAL benefit if it were widely understood? In other words, what is the most useful lesson you learned for your own behavior, and what is the most useful lesson society could learn for policy? Explain your answers.


---


4. Caplan argues that systematically biased beliefs about economics lead to inefficient policies. Part of the motivation for his survey of intelligence research is his view that public opinion has systematically biased views on this topic as well. In a democracy, what consequences of these biases might Caplan predict for education policy? How would Wittman respond? Who is right?
Caplan may argue that the public may systematically have negatively biased views about intelligence research. This may have consequences for education policy - people may support more funding for education than is necessary, given that may overestimate the benefits that come from education, when some of the benefits are actually driven by intelligence regardless of education. This may well result in deadweight loss - if the signaling model is true or even partially true, it would be efficient for the state to tax education instead. Wittman would argue that, while this may be true in the short run, in the long run it would tend towards efficiency. In the short run we may inefficiently subsidize education, but this will come out in the wash.[10] I believe the evidence supports Caplan's point. Voters do hold systematically biased beliefs, and political systems give them no good reasons to update them, thus leaving us with potentially inefficient policies.
2003 FINAL EXAM


---


1. According to Caplan (SEJ 1999), "[I]f there is a small probability that one is delusional, the perception of a zero-probability event would rationally provoke one to doubt one's own perception rather than believe that the impossible has occurred."
True, False, and Explain: Caplan's conclusion can be logically deduced from Bayes' Rule if delusional people have a strictly positive probability of thinking they observe 0-probability events, non-delusional people have a 0 probability of thinking they observe 0-probability events, and P(you're sane)>P(you're insane)>0.
Refer to the impossible event as D. Your prior probability is P(D)=0. After thinking you saw the impossible event, your conditional probability that the impossible has occurred is P(D|B)=(P(B|D)P(D))/P(B)=0. So you do not Bayesian update in favor of the impossible having occurred. 
By contrast, consider the situation where B is perceiving the impossible event, and A  is being insane. In this case, P(B|~A)=0,  so P(A|B)=(P(B|A)P(A))/((P(B|A)P(A))=1, so you will Bayesian update to become CERTAIN that you are insane! QED
True. *Pg. 831 footnote #17  -  "If one literally assigned a probability of zero (or failed to assign a positive probability) to an event that actually happens, one would be yet more surprised. But, continuity aside, why would a rational agent assign a zero probability to a conceivable event? Moreover, if there is a small probability that one is delusional, the perception of a zero-probability event would rationally provoke one to doubt one's own perception rather than believe that the impossible has occurred."


---


2. Suppose that two players play this PD game 100 times in a row:
Player 2
Player 1
Coop
Defect
Coop
2,2
0,3
Defect
3,0
1,1
Afterwards, they simultaneously play an Ultimatum game where Player 1 splits a total payoff of 1 between himself and Player 2. 
True, False, and Explain: Cooperation in this game will "unravel" due to backwards induction.
False.  True. PD game 100x in a row would unravel. Now, if they simultaneously play ultimatum game at the end cooperation will still unravel. The subgame equilibrium of the Ultimatum game will not change the outcome of PD game, because there is no way to punish a defector. The Ultimatum game only has one NE, so there's no way to enforce cooperation in the preceding PD game. 
We agree with your reasoning, but this should be True, right? It will unravel. 
See similar question #3 Midterm 2016:
 Suppose that two players play the following three games in order: Coordination game, Prisoners' Dilemma, Ultimatum game.
True, False, and Explain: Standard game theory predicts that this game will completely "unravel."
TRUE.  "Unraveling" means players play each stage of the game as if it were not repeated.  The last stage  -  the Ultimatum game  -  has only one SGPNE, where Player 1 offers $.01 and keeps the rest for himself, and Player 2 accepts.  As a result, standard game theory says players cannot use punishments to avoid the standard (Defect, Defect) outcome in the PD stage.  This in turn implies that players treat the first stage  -  the Coordination game  -  as if it were a one-shot game.  Hence, complete unraveling.


---

There is an industry with a fixed cost and constant MC. 2 firms simultaneously decide whether to enter the industry. Firms set prices, not quantities.

3. True, False, and Explain: If the fixed costs are NOT sunk, there are two PSNE. If the fixed costs ARE sunk, there is a MSNE but no PSNE.
False. Simultaneous decision to incur sunk costs has 2 PSNE. *Week 5 notes, section 5i -- note that fixed costs which are NOT sunk = they're avoidable. Fixed costs that  are sunk = they're not avoidable. 


4.True, False, and Explain: The outcome of the game is more efficient if costs are sunk.
 True. That's the only game where you get enter, enter and price falls to MC.[11][12] The outcome enter, enter doesn't occur when costs are NOT sunk. 
Under monopoly, total surplus is (Pm+ CSmon) with probability 1. -  So when is contestability welfare-dominated by simple monopoly? -  When the expected surplus under contestability is less than (Pm + CSmon):
 - (-2a + CSmax) + 2 (Pm+ CSmon) <  - (Pm+ CSmon)
Thus, suppose that Pm=a. -  Then contestability is welfare-dominated if:
.25* (-2a + CSmax) + .25* (a + CSmon) < (a + CSmon)
which reduces to:
a > CSmax  - - -  3*CSmon
i.e., monopoly welfare dominates if the fixed costs exceeds the consumer surplus under competition minus three times the consumer surplus under monopoly.


---


5. Suppose your EU=w.9, and insurance is sold at 1% more than the actuarially fair rate. Without insurance, your wealth is $10,000 with p=.5 and $0 with p=.5. 
True, False, and Explain: You will fully insure.
False. The insurance coverage the person gets is less than their wealth in the "good state."
Note: actuarially fair x=1, in this case x=1.01
Question is asking: do you want to insure with 50% probability you get nothing?
i= 9,012 
?Max?_i  0.5?(10,000-0.5*1.01i)?^0.9+0.5?(0+i-0.5*1.01i)?^0.9


---


6. Suppose that everyone overestimates their personal probability of death by 50%.
True, False, and Explain: There will be propitious selection[13] in the market for life insurance.
False? Because the question says EVERYONE overestimates. 		
*Longevity expectations may play a role in determining health insurance choices, though the net effect of higher longevity expectations on investment in health is theoretically ambiguous. Those who expect to live longer may want to spend more now on their health since such investment will pay dividends over a longer horizon. Thus, they would demand more insurance. However, the marginal value of additional current health investment may be lower when a long life already seems likely.  
"The theory of propitious selection suggests that there are risk-avoiding personalities who both take physical precautions and buy financial security (insurance). Conversely, there are risk seekers who tend to do neither. Survey evidence is presented that is consistent with the theory. Individuals who obtain motor vehicle liability coverage are less likely than others to drink-and-drive, and are more likely to engage in health-beneficial (risk-avoiding) behaviors. Propitious selection may be a general phenomenon promoting favorable selection in many real world insurance markets." https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF00057881 


---


7. "Most things in life don't turn out as well as you thought they would. While psychologists, poets, and philosophers have often remarked on this phenomenon, few have recognized that it is a necessary consequence of informed, rational decision making." (Landsburg, The Armchair Economist)
True, False, and Explain: If by "rational," Landsburg means "rational expectations," his last statement is incorrect.
*Chap. 18, first paragraph on pg. 224 (My pagination has it on page 174)
False. The fact that most things in life don't turn out as well as you thought they would is still consistent with rational expectations. Rational expectations does not mean that you will be correct all the time--instead, your judgments are unbiased. Your mean error will be zero, but there is variance about this mean due to differing levels of information held by individuals. This "problem" is compounded when selecting things that you like--one is likely to select the objects that they think are among the best, which are also the most likely to disappoint (your errors will tend to be overestimates rather than underestimates.) 


---


8.True, False, and Explain: Caplan (Stigler-Becker vs. Myers-Briggs) claims that empirical personality research strongly contradicts the standard economic assumption of stable preferences.
False. Preferences are, empirically, quite stable. However, they are far from identical and have proven predictive power for economically interesting variables. The empirical challenge for future research is to jointly estimate the impact of preferences and constraints to obtain unbiased measures of their relative importance. 
Caplan does not dispute the stability of preferences. He critiques the homogeneity of preferences between agents. S&B assert that preferences are homogeneous, therefore consumer choice is explained solely by issues that are to be found in the budget constraints. However, evidence suggests, strongly, that agents with the same endowments may make different choices because of preference differences (heterogeneity) even though they same agents do not change their choices over time (stability). 
"On a more applied level, the overall findings in personality psychology suggest that Stigler and Becker's view of preferences is half-right and half-wrong. Empirically, there is fairly strong support for the view that preferences are stable; personality changes are rare, especially after the age of 30 (McCrae and Costa, 1990). However, the view that preferences are identical is very difficult to empirically defend. Rather, personalities differ widely along a handful of basic dimensions (Piedmont, 1998; Costa and McCrae, 1995; Johnson, 1997). In fact, much "pathological" behavior that non-economists cite as evidence against the economic approach is easy to reinterpret as standard behavior by actors from extreme tails of the personality distribution (Costa and Widiger, 1994; Costa and McCrae, 1992)." (pg. 2 of article, pg. 392 of journal)[14]


---


9. A critic of behavioral economics runs the following experiment. Half of the subjects guess the populations of twenty countries. The remaining subjects try to list as many people as they can from each of the twenty countries. The true populations of these countries are known to the experimenter.
True, False, and Explain: This data can be used to test for availability bias.
False? A better test for availability bias would have the subjects guess the populations of 
countries they are most knowledgeable about. The participant should have a high correlation between their knowledge of the country and the value of the estimated population.[15]
This test asks about number of people who can be named, but a key thing for the availability heuristic is ease and fluency of recall. If people can name lots of people but find it very difficult, availability bias might make them less likely to see the population as large, rather than more. Number of names and ease of naming must be correlated for this to be an effective test.
Scott: I think that another important aspect is that you need to have the group who were asked to name as many people from a country as they could be the ones who estimate the population. Alex and I are disagreeing if this "priming" effect is an example of the availability heuristic. I think there is evidence of this on page 132 of Thinking Fast and Slow. We should talk about this as a group tomorrow.


---


10. More educated workers tend to enjoy their work more. 
True, False, and Explain: This tends to bias standard estimates of the return to education downwards.
True?
If we measure returns to education in terms of wages, we will miss differences in compensation in terms of working conditions.  An estimate of the difference in compensation received by trash collectors vs. college professors will underestimate the difference, due to compensating differentials. 


---


11. True, False, and Explain: A standard neoclassical agent with diminishing marginal utility of wealth and access to perfect capital markets will always have a constant level of consumption.
A standard neoclassical agent will smooth consumption and conform to the permanent income hypothesis. One objection that might be raised is that sometimes an individual will receive windfall or unexpected gains, altering their permanent income. But assuming the individual has rational expectations, the deviations in income from their expectations will not be systematically biased upward or downward[16].  
False. Under those assumptions, we can expect the agent to have a constant level of consumption. However, we cannot expect the agent to ALWAYS have a constant level of consumption. The agent will have a constant level of consumption plus or minus a random term. The agent will update expectations for permanent income in each period. In the limit, we can expect these changes in expectation to be equally distributed around zero, but we cannot expect this in each period.


---


12. True, False, and Explain: Caplan ("Rational Irrationality and the Microfoundations of Political Failure") argues that asymmetric information leads rational voters to vote for policies that encourage rent-seeking.
False. Caplan cites Breton & Winsrobe (1982) who argues that when asymmetric info gets worse, public demand for action goes down, not up. 
Think of a market for lemons; the problem with asymmetric information is that it deters exchange, not that it incentivizes it. 
Caplan grants Wittman's argument that given competition among  political actors (such as competitive elections), rational expectations by voters, and political institutions that reduce transaction costs will lead to political "markets" being efficient. Where he differs from Wittman is that instead of concluding democracy is efficient, Caplan argues that voters do not have rational expectations. 
Analytical questions:


---


1. For an infinitely-repeated 3-firm oligopoly game, determine the critical value of b for Bertrand collusion enforced by punishments of just ONE turn of Nash reversion.
So we've got the form of this one down, but we are unsure on the mathematics--I think we should probably ask Abby Devereaux on Monday since she is so much better with the math than we are. Basically, you are comparing splitting the profits among three firms forever with a case where you alternate between capturing the monopoly profits and taking a profit of zero when the nash reversion is deployed. The infinite sums get a little weird, but once we figure that out, we can solve these problems fairly easily. 
Am I understanding this correctly?: We want to find the critical beta for 1/N ·_(t=0)^° ???^t??^ ??_m?³??_m?+0+1/N ·_(t=2)^° ???^t??^ ??_m?, where the righthand side of the inequality represents cheating in period 0, having no profit in period 1, and then reverting back to collusion in period 2


---


2.) Suppose you are a fully rational individual living in a closed society like North Korea where all news is tightly monitored by the government. Explain in detail how you would go about forming rational beliefs under these conditions. What are the main conclusions you would draw?
As Wittman argues (pg. 1401), "biased sources of information need not lead to biases in belief." Individuals will discount information from sources that they know to be biased. This applies even in a totalitarian society. As Wittman puts it in a footnote, also on pg. 1401:
"Even when the ruling class has a virtual domestic monopoly on the instruments of information, as is the case in the Soviet Union, we observe people discounting the information contained in their papers and trusting foreign sources (e.g., when the Chernobyl nuclear accident occurred, citizens of the Soviet Union turned to foreign sources for their information)." 
In other words, to form rational beliefs in North Korea, I would heavily discount information and arguments presented in the media, doing very little to update my beliefs on the basis of the information North Korean media outlets produced. If possible and not too risky/personally costly, I would seek foreign sources of news. If not, I would take positions that I held on the basis of my expectation prior to seeing media accounts. Assuming I have rational expectations, my errors will be randomly distributed. State media, on the other hand, displays systematic bias, and therefore would tend to have its errors distributed in one direction. In a system with North Korean state media as my only information source, a rational individual would have low epistemic confidence in one's opinions and would expect to have high variance in one's opinion's distance from the truth. 
The main conclusions I would draw would be that: My mean opinion would still be correct, but my variance would be higher than that of an individual with access to reliable sources of information, and therefore any given opinion I hold would be more likely to be further from the truth. I would also conclude that I should not update my priors based on information I receive from the North Korean media, as updating based on that information would introduce systematic error. I would therefore retain the same opinions I started with, but would do so with low confidence. 


---


3. -  What would prevent Beckerian optimal punishment from driving efficiency wages down to the market-clearing level? -  Discuss at least TWO mechanisms.
Key takeaways: liquidity constraints, and imperfect enforcement. Thank you based Kroencke.
- High enforcement costs and legal inability to create the corresponding high punishments
- Bonds would be one way out in the existing legal regime which prevents punitive contracts, however the particulars would likely get bogged down in court. 
http://www.nber.org/papers/w2356.pdf
These are my notes from meeting with Caplan: "Certainty and severity are the mechanisms. We want PD to get really high. To keep them from operating as they should there needs to be caps on these: either preventing punishments from getting harsher or the certainty of catching people."


---


4. How does the endowment effect influence democratic politics? Discuss in general terms, and give the most plausible example you can. How might a paternalistic economist take advantage of the electorate's endowment effect? A self-interested demagogue?
Because of the endowment effect, people place more value on objects simply because they view those objects as theirs. Public goods, government services, or entitlement programs that individuals view as belonging to them will be more difficult to get rid of. A self-interested demagogue  
- Some regulation/ regulatory agencies could be seen as an individual's mechanism for ensuring, food safety for able
- Public Parks
- City/ state provided libraries
      Paternalistic economist: We can imagine a paternalistic economist believes that people should read more, and as such, he supports a law promoting the building of new libraries. The economist wants to make sure his policy "sticks", so he would want to make sure that this new library is viewed as part of a person's endowment. Once it is viewed as part of their endowment, it is less likely the library will be defunded or taken away, thus increasing the chances of the economist's policy being successful. 
      "If we take away people's library, they won't have access to learning resources. Because people need to read more 
      (1) more people should read, (2) if there's no library, kids will be getting into trouble rather than reading, (3) poor people need access to the internet and computer that they wouldn't have otherwise
      Self-interested demagogue: Goal: get elected/ re-elected
      "They're going to take away your library, I'll make sure that doesn't happen."
      If we take away the library, we're taking away children's access to learning programs, community development 


---


1. Suppose you have a betting market for the 2004 presidential election. The price of "Bush wins" shares sell for twice as much as "Bush does not win" shares.
True, False, and Explain: As long as Arrow-Debreu assumptions and expected utility theory hold, this shows that the marginal trader believes that Bush will win with p=2/3.


---


2. Suppose that two players play the following three games in order: Ultimatum game, Coordination game, Prisoners' Dilemma.
True, False, and Explain: Standard game theory predicts that this game will completely "unravel."
True. "Unraveling" means players play each stage of the game as if it were not repeated. In the last stage, the PD game, the outcome will be defect, defect no matter what. 


---


3. Suppose you have a 2-player version of the voluntary donation game from the notes, with one difference: Each agent cares somewhat about the other, so player one maximizes U1=c1D+.7*c2D, and player two maximizes U2=c2D+.7*c1D. 
True, False, and Explain: In symmetric Nash equilibrium, c1=c2>4/7.
U1=c1D+.7c2D
=(c1+.7c2)D
=(c1+.7c2)(1-c1+1-c2)
=(c1+.7c2)(2-c1-c2)
?U1/?c1=(2-c1-c2)-(c1+.7c2)=0
2c1=2-.3c2
c1=1-.15c2=1-.15(1-.15c1) because c2 is symmetric with c1
c1=1-.15-.0225c1
1.0225c1=.85
c1 = .831, which is greater than 4/7[17]


---


4. Economists often argue that the public overestimates the president's ability to influence the economy.
True, False, and Explain: Caplan ("Systematically Biased Beliefs About Economics") confirms the existence of this bias.
False. The mean perception of the public is equal to that of economist. 


---


5. Critics of the RE assumption often complain that it leads economists to underestimate the chance of market failure. It is not surprising, they maintain, that markets work well if everyone is "hyper-rational." 
True, False, and Explain: The critics are correct given symmetric information, but the opposite might be true under asymmetric information.
 False? Caplan seems to think economists overestimate the existence of market failure in situations of symmetric imperfect information (see Week 8, VII). However, "if information is not only imperfect but also assymmetric, inefficient outcomes may be the consequence." (Week 9, I, A.)


---


6. True, False, and Explain: Thaler (The Winner's Curse) ignores Milton Friedman's contention that economic theories can have unrealistic assumptions as long as they make accurate predictions.
(p.4) Thaler does not ignore Friedman's claim, but he critiques it using evidence that the theories do not necessarily predict well, assumptions aside. 


---


7. Suppose your U=w.6. You are searching for a job and face the following decision tree:
Step 1: You can either take a sure thing (w=$50,000 with p=1) or keep searching (w=$100,000 with p=.6; w=$0 with p=.4).
Step 2: If you selected the second option, you are allowed to buy an "unemployment insurance" policy. It costs $10,000 and pays $25,000 if you are unemployed.
Step 3: You find out if you got a job. If you did not, you collect the insurance payout. Either way, you have to pay the premium.
True, False, and Explain: You will take the sure thing.
 False. E(U) of sure thing: ($50k).6=659.75
E(U) of second option with insurance: .6(100k-10k).6+.4(25k-10k).4=691.39
E(U) of second option without insurance: .6(100k).6=600


---


8. The U.S. stock market did not noticeably rise right after Saddam Hussein was captured.
True, False, and Explain: The only explanation, according to the Efficient Markets Hypothesis, is that Saddam's capture had no important effect on the overall U.S. economy.
False. If investors had rational expectations about Saddam's capture (and assuming such an event could affect the stock market), prices may have already adjusted before the capture.


---


9. Rationally ignorant voters could punish dishonest politicians by increasing the punishment for hard-to-detect offenses.
True, False, and Explain: One reason that fully rational voters might fail to use this strategy is a coordination problem.
True. See page 325 of "Rational Irrantionality and MicrofoundationsÉ". "Why then would a majority of rational voters oppose economic reforms with negative costs and positive benefits? Resolving this puzzle without abandoning voter rationality is challenging but not impossible. Theorists raise several possibilities. Voters might simply be risk-averse. Voters and reformers could be playing a complicated game of asymmetric information and signaling (e.g., Alesina and Drazen, 1991). Different voting blocs might suffer from coordination problems (e.g., Lab‡n and Sturzenegger, 1994). Fernandez and Rodrik (1991) show that even with risk-neutral voters, uncertainty about the identity of the gainers and losers could be a sufficient explanation." (emphasis added)
2005 FINAL EXAM


---


1. True, False, and Explain: "Buy one, get one free" deals are normally Kaldor-Hicks inefficient.
Aren't voluntary trades a Kaldor-Hicks improvement? Is the idea that since we aren't buying an infinitely continuous amount, we aren't optimizing?  


---


2. Suppose that two players play this PD game, followed by this Coordination game.
Defect
Don't
L
R
Defect
3,3
4,0
L
5,5
0,0
Don't
0,4
2,2
R
0,0
5,5
True, False, and Explain: If §=.9, the only SGPNE are (Defect, Defect), (L,L) and (Defect, Defect), (R, R).b
  SGPE requires Nash play in every subgame. 
Provisional answer: True, the first game is not a PD because there is no benefit to Don't-ing. Thus, there is no need for punishment. (Defect, Defect), (L,L) and (Defect, Defect), (R,R) will be the SGPNE for any beta.


---


3. Suppose firms in an industry have the same cost function, including a sunk cost. Product demand rises, leading to a doubling of potential monopoly profits. Two firms play mixed strategies to decide whether to enter.
 f
True, False, and Explain: The probability that both firms enter and lose money quadruples.
 False? Assume sunk costs incurred if entry. *Week 5 notes, V
False. For the non-double profits case (see homework #4 Question 4), The MSNE is to Enter with probability ?m/(?m+a). For the double profits case, let ?=probability that firm 1 enters. Then, -a?+2?m(1-?)=0?+0(1-?).
2?m-2?m?=a?
2?m=a?+2?m?
2?m=(a+2?m)?
?=2?m/(a+2?m), which is not ?m/(?m+a)quadrupled.


---


4. An agent faces two choices: (1) A utility of 10 for sure; (2) A utility of 1 with 50% probability and a utility of 20 with 50% probability.
True, False, and Explain: If the agent prefers (1) to (2), then in terms of Expected Utility Theory, he is risk-averse.
False. Expected Utility theory states that individuals will maximize their expected utility. By expressing the choices in terms of utility, risk-preferences are already accounted for.


---

There are two kinds of workers, good and bad.  Both types are equally numerous.  Good workers are worth $100k to me; bad workers are worth $25k to me.  It costs good workers $25k to complete school, but $50k for bad workers to do so.  I can tell if a worker finished school, but cannot observe their quality directly.  Workers earn 75% of their value to me if they choose to be self-employed.


5. True, False, and Explain: I will not hire any workers, so asymmetric information entails no deadweight cost.
False. Although I may not hire any good workers (since they can make $75,000 on their own and would have to be paid at least $100k to work for me if I can only identify them by their having a degree), it's still worth it to hire bad workers. They can make $18,750 on their own, but they are worth $25k to me, so I can make approximately $6,250  for each bad worker. If there were not asymmetric information problems and I could identify who the good and bad workers are, then I would hire good workers and they would generate $100k of wealth instead of $75k on their own. Thus the asymmetric information entails a deadweight cost.


6. Suppose I can find out a worker's true type by paying $15k.
True, False, and Explain: I will never pay this fee, because my expected gross profit per worker is only 50%*($100k-$75k)=12.5k.
False. If I can make ~$25k per good worker and pay $15k to figure out whether she is good, I net $10k. If I find out he's a bad worker, I lose $8,750 ($6,250-$15k). Thus, the expected gross profit from paying the fee is .5($1,250)=$625.


---


7. Some economists argue that the perceived unfairness of nominal wage cuts would decline in a less inflationary environment.
True, False, and Explain: According to Rabin ("Psychology and Economics"), there is no experimental evidence that perceptions of fairness respond to changes in market conditions.
 False. Rabin provides the efficiency wage experiment hypothesis that workers who receive a higher than market clearing wages respond with effort beyond even what the wages would suggest. Thus, the perception of fairness to respond to changes in market conditions; however, this was not the case when wages were random


---


8. More educated workers usually get more benefits. 
True, False, and Explain:  This tends to bias standard estimates of the return to education downwards.
True. If the "benefits" are excluded from the dependent variable (e.g. monetary income) the beta of education would be downward biased. 


---


9. True, False, and Explain: Caplan ("Rational Irrationality and the Microfoundations of Political Failure") admits that "knife-edge stupidity" does not exist.
False. Capland does admit that knife-edge stupidity does exist. He criticizes Wittman for ridiculing knife-edge stupidity as an explanation and not recognizing the similarities between "pork as usual politicsÉ" *Page 6-7
2006 EXAM


---


1. Suppose 35% of all agents in an economy have U=ln x + ln y, and the other 65% have U=.5 ln x + ln y.  All agents start with one unit of x and three units of y.  
True, False, and Explain: In general equilibrium, exactly 65% of the agents consume more y than x.
 False. Everyone consumes more y.


---


2. Suppose that two players play the following game. 
Left
Right
Left
0,0
4,2
Right
x,4
0,0
For Type A players, x=6; for Type B players, x=1. Players know both their own type and their opponent's type.
True, False, and Explain: If Player 1 is Type A, there is no MSNE. If Player 1 is Type B, there is a MSNE, but since it is not focal, in practice we would not expect it to happen.


---


3. True, False, and Explain: Cournot competition with free entry, zero fixed costs, and constant marginal costs leads to a perfectly efficient outcome.
 True? 


---


4. Suppose demanders of insurance are risk-averse, but suppliers of insurance are risk-neutral.
True, False, and Explain: As long as they have rational expectations, demanders will buy some insurance.[18]


---

There are two kinds of workers, good and bad.  Both types are equally numerous.  Good workers are worth $100k to me; bad workers are worth $25k to me.  It costs both kinds of workers $5k to finish school. I can tell if a worker finished school, but cannot observe their quality directly.  Workers earn 40% of their value to me if they choose to be self-employed. Finally, assume that if a worker fails to go to school, I automatically conclude that he is bad.


5. True, False, and Explain: Everyone goes to school and earns the same wage.
 False? *Week 9 notes, IV A
False. We can offer bad workers $40k to induce them to not get a degree, and pay those with a degree $45k to only attract good workers. In this situation, our profit per good worker is $55k and loss per bad worker is $15k. If we were to offer degree holders $45k and pay anything less than $40 to non-degree holders, then everyone would get a degree and we would lose $20k per bad worker. Therefore, it is in our interest to offer non-degree holders $40k to reduce our losses from bad workers.



6. Suppose workers earn 80% of their value to me if they are self-employed.
True, False, and Explain: Only bad workers will go to school, and will earn a net wage (wages minus schooling costs) of $20k.
False? *Week 9 notes We would be best off just offering a wage of $20k to all workers. If we try to create a differential wage for educated workers then we will lose more money on the bad workers than we gain from the good workers.


---


7. "[L]oss aversion says that the value function abruptly changes slope at the reference level, so that people dislike even small-scale risk."
"While people are likely to be risk averse over gains, they are often risk-loving over losses." (both quotes from Rabin, "Psychology and Economics")
True, False, and Explain: These two statements are inconsistent.
 False. 
 Ok. Why tho?[19] Because QED. Spaghetti!


---


8. Suppose that education causes a temporary increase in intelligence, but the effect "fades-out" after a year. 
True, False, and Explain:  Controlling for intelligence, the estimated effect of education is downwardly biased.
Scott would answer that this is true. Education drives some of the increase in IQ. When estimating how much you are now earning, some of this will be attributed to IQ and some will be attributed to education. But, if the increase is only because you were educated, this is underestimating the effect education has on earnings, because some of the effect is being picked up by IQ. Scott may be wrong.
 *pg. 645 intelligence paper. Rate of return to education estimates that fail to control for intelligence are likely to be biased upwards. 


---


9. Caplan argues that irrationality has psychological benefits for many if not most people.
True, False, and Explain: Economic theory cannot say whether the private psychological benefits of irrationality exceed its social costs.
Nathan would say: True. However,  while economic theory cannot offer us a definitive answer, economic theory coupled with empirical evidence of the institutional specifics can give us good hints. Under institutions where the social costs of irrationality are largely internalized, such as the market, we would expect the psychological benefits of irrationality that persists to exceed the social costs. However, in democratic systems people do not internalize the costs of their irrationality. Political outcomes are not directly changed by an individual's vote, meaning there is zero cost to a voter indulging in irrationality. Yet the total social costs can be tremendous. Since the social costs are not internalized, we have good reasons to believe that the private psychological benefits of irrationality are exceeded by their social costs. Nathan might be wrong.[20]
2007 FINAL EXAM


---


1. True, False, and Explain: Prices in betting markets are determined by agents' preferences and endowments, not objective probabilities. However, if some people have more accurate beliefs than others, then over time, prices become more and more likely to reflect objective probabilities.
True. The people in the know will make it rain by buying underpriced bets until the odds reflect the objective probability.
True. Prices are largely driven by subjective probabilities, but there are significant incentives to update your subjective probabilities and reveal your information to the market for arbitrage. Thus, prices will move closer and closer to objective probabilities. (Alex's direct quote: why not?)


---


2. Suppose that two players play the following game twice. 
Left
Right
Left
1,5
0,0
Right
0,0
5,1
True, False, and Explain: What Kreps calls "cheap talk" cannot improve the efficiency of this game if both players engage in backwards induction.
False. *pg. 388 & 403. Cheap talk is communicating by one or both sides that is costless but which nonetheless might be useful in coordinating actions. There are two NE (1,5; 5,1). If the two players engage in backwards induction, cheap talk can improve the efficiency of the game. There is no benefit from defecting in a coordination game. 


---


3. Suppose you have a 2-player version of the voluntary donation game from the notes, with one difference: Each agent dislikes the other, so player one maximizes U1=c1D-.2*c2D, and player two maximizes U2=c2D-.2*c1D. 
True, False, and Explain: In symmetric Nash equilibrium, c1=c2<2/3.


---


4. Suppose your U=w.5. You are searching for a job and face the following decision tree:
Step 1: You can either take a sure thing (w=$50,000 with p=1) or keep searching (w=$100,000 with p=.6; w=$0 with p=.4).
Step 2: If you selected the second option, you are allowed to buy an "unemployment insurance" policy. It costs $10,000 and pays $20,000 if you are unemployed.
Step 3: You find out if you got a job. If you did not, you collect the insurance payout. Either way, you have to pay the premium.
True, False, and Explain: You will keep searching and decline to buy insurance.
False. You will take the sure thing (EU = 223.6). Taking insurance (EU = 220), searching without insurance (EU = 189.74).


---


5. Consider a risk-neutral farmer with the cost function TC=q.5.  The market price is 3 with p=.5, and 0 with p=.5.  
True, False, and Explain: If the farmer has RE, he sets q=1/3. If the farmer's beliefs do not satisfy RE (he thinks the price=3 with p=.2), his profits fall by 50%.
I think this question is wrong (and that this is not trick). 
MC= .5/q^.5, E(Px)=1.5
1.5=.5/q^.5
(1.5)q^.5=.5
.5/1.5 =q^.5
? =q^.5
Therefore q* with RE should be (?)^2 
I would find q* without RE using E(Px)= .6, i.e. (.2)(3)
.6=.5/q^.5
.6(q^.5)=.5
q^.5=.5/.6
q*=(.5/.6)^2
After that I would look at profit in both situations. 
*HW #6 -- similar question


---


6. True, False, and Explain: Landsburg argues that cosmetic surgery is socially wasteful signaling.
The answer to this is in Chapter 17 (Courtship and Collusion) in Landsburg's Armchair Economist (pages 221-222.) 
False
Landsburg specifically discusses breast implants. If the value of a breast size increase is not absolute breast size but relative breast size, then women will find themselves in an arms race in which they engage in socially wasteful spending in order to better attract partners. In this case, taxing or prohibiting the breast implants could lead to efficiency improvements, just like taxing education could if education's private returns come in the form of signaling rather than improving human capital.  However, Landsburg notes that it is likely not entirely this, because there are benefits to onlookers, possible benefits to women unrelated to attracting men by increasing their relative position, and so on[21].  Also, what Landsburg is discussing is an instance of a socially wasteful positional good, but not necessarily signaling. Signaling involves doing something costly that indicates what type you are in an instance of asymmetric information. Breast implants are not indicating what type you are, but instead are positioning you as having larger breasts than your competitors in the mating market, thereby appealing to the preferences of men who prefer women with "the largest breasts in the room" (Landsburg's phrase).


---


7. Thaler (The Winner's Curse) presents evidence that people violate basic economic assumptions.
True, False, and Explain: Thaler nevertheless embraces basic economic assumptions as "normative"; he believes that people should act like standard economic agents. 
False: Thaler believes that there are some cases where NOT acting like a standard economic agent is beneficial--for example, when deciding to cooperate in certain situations. Economic assumptions are "normative" in that they describe how homo economicus should act, but not prescriptive in telling how people actually act.


---


8. Consider an efficiency wage model.
True, False, and Explain:  As the average worker becomes less selfish, the unemployment rate falls. As the average worker becomes more myopic, the unemployment rate rises. 
True. The efficiency wage model states that workers may be paid a higher wage to increase the threat of firing and lead to less shirking. A less selfish employee will not need to be "threatened" to work as hard as possible for the company--lower wages can be paid, thus lowering the unemployment rate. A myopic employee will need to be paid this efficiency wage, leading to higher unemployment as jobs become more scarce relative to those seeking them and increasing the threat of a firing.
I interpret "myopic" to mean that people that currently hold jobs don't think about the time they may be unemployed in the future and how their behavior today (getting paid efficiency wages) may affect their employment prospects down the line.


---


9. True, False, and Explain: If the efficient markets hypothesis is correct, then the marginal private cost of irrational investing can easily be zero.
True. Under the efficient markets hypothesis, asset prices changes should be completely unpredictable--asset prices should follow a random walk. If this is true, then there is no payoff to rational investing--if you indulge your own irrational preferences, you are likely to do as well as anyone else. A more viable strategy would be to purchase index funds and hedge against variance. 
 2008 FINAL EXAM


---


1. Consider the general equilibrium intertemporal model.
True, False, and Explain: A fall in interest rates definitely indicates that expected income growth has declined.
False. This could mean an increase in beta: you have a lower time preference. It is not necessarily due to expected interest rate growth.


---


2. True, False, and Explain: In The Armchair Economist, Landsburg defends the market as a Darwinian mechanism that weeds out inefficiency.
False. Landsburg says that the analogy of markets being like Darwinian evolution fails because the Darwinian mechanism doesn't ensure efficient outcomes - male birds of paradise have ridiculously long tails (lemme smash) that hinder them and it would benefit all of them to agree to not have long tails, so Darwinian evolution leads to an inefficient outcome. It is necessary to have prices so that competition can lead to efficient outcomes.[22]


---


3. Consider a simple game-theoretic model of bargaining.
True, False, and Explain: With fully rational agents, one MSNE and no PSNE exist. With imperfectly rational agents (or at least some uncertainty about whether other players are fully rational), there is one MSNE and two PSNE.
False. There are two PSNE (1,5; 5,1) and one MSNE (0.5,0.5) with fully rational agents. *Week 6 Notes, V
Nathan--would you know how to address this part of the question: " With imperfectly rational agents (or at least some uncertainty about whether other players are fully rational), there is one MSNE and two PSNE."?
It seems pretty clear that the answer is that you don't need to introduce any imperfections in rationality to get one MSNE and two PSNE. There are already two PSNE even with standard assumptions of rationality.


---


4. Suppose a woman has EU=w.5 + X. If the woman has a baby boy, X= -10; if she has a baby girl, X=5; if she has no child, X=0. Normally, she is equally likely to have a boy or a girl. But if she pays a price P, she can determine her childs gender with certainty. Suppose further that w initially equals $400, and the P is the only cost associated with having children.
True, False, and Explain: The woman will remain childless if P>87.5.
False. The price of abortion indifference is $175. She will choose to have a child at any price <$175. [23]
Without abortion:
EU=(400)^.5+.5(-10)_+ .5(5)=17.5
Childless:
EU=(400)^.5=20
With abortion:
EU=(400-p)^.5+5
If p=174, then EU=20. Therefore, at any p<175 you will choose to have a child.


---


5. True, False, and Explain: Asymmetric information problems do not require irrationality, but irrationality makes asymmetric information problems more severe.
False. It could be the case that irrationality may make asymmetric information problems LESS severe. If I buy car insurance, and instead drive more safely instead of taking on more risks, I am making things better for other people in the insurance market--I am not behaving in the way a rational person in a situation of moral hazard would and not fully externalizing costs onto others.


---


6. Caplan (What Makes People Think Like Economists?) shows that more educated people are more pro-market.
True, False, and Explain: The reason why people mistakenly believe that education leads to anti-market views is probably that, in the general population, education and left-wing ideology are highly correlated.
I think this is true?
It may be. I know he said certain fields are likely anti-market is because of selection bias. Sociologists likely study sociology in part because they are anti-market. You need to compare educated people to the general population, but it may be that certain more visible fields are more anti-market because of seleciton bias, leading to an overestimate?


---


7. Standard estimates of the return to education ignore intelligence and assume that all education is productive.
True, False, and Explain: For both of these issues, switching to more realistic assumptions reduces the private and social return to education.
True?


---


8. True, False, and Explain: There is no change in current U.S. policy that would do much to mitigate moral hazard problems. 
False. Policy changes that allowed for more punitive punishments in contracts could reduce moral hazard. Allowing companies to charge different premiums for riskier insurance clients could also help. Finally, the government could stop subsidizing certain kinds of behavior, such as bad driving by buying insurance for poor drivers  or education for students.


---


9. Suppose Caplan is right that voters buy large quantities of irrational political beliefs.
True, False, and Explain: This hardly shows that political markets are inefficient. Instead, it shows that we have mismeasured their primary output; the main product of political markets is psychological well-being rather than wealth-maximizing policy.
False? Saying that markets are or are not efficient is a very specific claim. By appealing to Kaldor-Hicks efficiency, we are arguing that they maximize the total social value of resources. Markets that do not do this may be many things, but we cannot say they are efficient. This is Scott's answer--and Scott thinks it is bad.   Nathan adds: We could note that voter's psychological well-being can factor into efficiency if voters place a dollar-value on that psychological well-being. However, because the fact that your vote will not decide an election means voters can indulge their irrationality up to their bliss point with a price of zero, there is no reason to think that the psychological benefits of the irrationality to them exceed the social costs. This is a classic externality problem, in which the social costs are positive but the private costs to the decision-maker are zero.
2009 FINAL EXAM


---


1. True, False, and Explain: In a general equilibrium framework, fiscal stimulus can't work, because the funding for the stimulus package has to come from somewhere.
 False.
 [24]The 2009 Caplan exam that Kaitlyn shared answered "False" and received six points. The reason she gave was the 2nd Welfare Theorem. I can't really discern her argument exactly.


---


2. Suppose there are an infinite number of equally efficient potential producers.
True, False, and Explain: With constant MC and zero fixed costs, there are an infinite number of PSNE and an infinite number of MSNE.
  True. Any number of firms greater than one can enter the market and regardless of the number, every firm will remain indifferent to entering or exiting, i.e. unilaterally changing their decision, because at P=MC, profits will be zero.


---


3. Landsburg (People Wanted) argues that there are positive externalities of population growth.
True, False, and Explain: Search theory suggests that Landsburg actually understates the case for higher population.
 We know this is true based on the fact that the exam taker answered "False" and received one point. However, I'm not sure what search theory adds to what Landburg says. It would have to be something about there being a suboptimal amount of lovechildren (MB>MC) who search for new discoveries. But this seems to be exactly what Landsburg's argument is: we need more kids because there will then be more geniuses who will make more discoveries and we are below the point where MB=MC because the social benefits of having children are much greater than the private benefits.


---


4. Consider a simple asymmetric information model: The true value of a company to sellers is uniformly distributed along [0,100], and the value to buyers is 50% more than to sellers.
True, False, and Explain: In theory, irrationality could increase or decrease market efficiency; in practice, however, experiments show that irrationality makes this market for lemons less efficient.
True. If the buys are irrational and value the car at greater than 100% of the value to the seller, then the market would clear at the price of 100É. sellers may be over or under estimating the value 


---


5. True, False, and Explain: Moral hazard models predict that the people with the most insurance will take the most risks, but adverse selection models predict the opposite.
False. Moral hazard models do predict that, ceteris paribus, those with more insurance will take more risks, but adverse selection does not predict the opposite. Rather, it predicts that people who are "less risky" than average will find insurance to be a bad deal and choose to forgo it, leaving only riskier individuals remaining in the pool. Therefore, igiven the market doesn't completely unravel, only risky people will hold insurance.


---


6. More educated workers normally have lower unemployment rates than less educated workers.
True, False, and Explain: The efficiency wage model can explain this pattern.
 False. 
True, the efficiency wage can explain the pattern. It is not too heroic an assumption to imagine that monitoring costs of white-collar salaried workers are lower than those of monitoring blue collar workers who are paid by the hour.  More educated workers are more likely to be paid based on their observable output rather than less observable input. In this situation there is no reason to pay an efficiency wage, which is paid to overcome high monitoring costs. When efficiency wages are paid by all firms results in effective wage floor leaving some workers unemployed(so that firms can give credible threats to employees caught shirking). In this situation, the presence of efficiency wages in the less educated labor market and the lack of efficiency wages in the more educated labor market explains the pattern of unemployment rates.


---


7. True, False, and Explain: In signaling models, selfish agents might voluntarily supply public goods.
True[25]. 
Selfish agents who care about their social status might contribute to public goods because of what their contribution signals, namely trustworthiness or loyalty to the community. Despite the public goods themselves, benefitting society not just the selfish agent, the signalling value can be captured by the agent. 


---


8. True, False, and Explain:  According to Caplan's rational irrationality model, political betting markets are especially likely to make biased predictions. 
 False. Caplan's model argues the exact opposite.


---


9. In most countries, the median voter favors protectionism.
True, False, and Explain: One Wittmanian explanation is that the benefits of free trade are unevenly distributed; free trade raises Americans average income, but the median American voter is still worse off.
True? 
2010 FINAL EXAM


---


1. True, False, and Explain: In the real world, lump-sum taxes are always the first-best efficient way for governments to raise a given amount of revenue.
 False? 
What Caplan said: Taxing negative externalities are the first-best efficient way of taxation.
Fairness norms + hard to determine what people's potential productivity is are what makes lump-sum taxes difficult to implement in the real world.


---


2. Suppose you have two potential producers in a contestable industry with SUNK costs.  TC=10+Q.  If only one firm enters, it sets a monopoly price given the demand curve Q=10-2P.  If two firms enter, they compete price down to MC.
True, False, and Explain: In the MSNE, each firm's probability of entry is .2.
 False. Both firms will never want to enter the industry because in both outcomes where output occurs, (monopoly & competitives), the firms will lose profits consistently unless demand increases or costs decrease. In such a carse, (out,out) is socially optimal because the use of inputs would be better served somewhere else. 


---


3. True, False, and Explain: Kreps uses the Ellsberg Paradox to illustrate the effects of asymmetric information on consumer choice.
 False. *pg.117


---


4. Suppose everyone is risk-preferring.
True, False, and Explain: Insurance markets can still exist.
True. It is possible. However, agents must have different endowments, or their preferences for risk must vary (as long as they are all ?>1). In such instances insurance is possible. A risk preferring arsonist in a community of arsonists might like to take the risk of insuring that people's houses don't burn down. In reality though since risk preferring agents generally fail to insure themselves the conclusion is dubious. 


---


5. Consider two professors. John earns $55,000 paid in monthly installments. Joan earns a base salary of $45,000 paid over twelve months, and a guaranteed extra $10,000 paid during the summer months. (Thaler, The Winner's Curse)
True, False, and Explain: Thaler explains that the mental accounting prediction is that Joan will outspend John during the summer, but John will outspend Joan throughout the rest of the year.
False[26]. Thaler holds that the mental accounting model indicates that Joan's spending will always be lower than John's. This conclusion comes from separating the monthly pay and lump-sum pay into two accounts: the income-flow account and the asset account. Empirical estimates show that the income-flow's MPC is higher than the assert accounts MPS. Therefore, since the level Joan consumes will always be lower than jown, so will her other spending, i.i. saves most of lump-sum payments. 


---


6. True, False, and Explain: Caplan (Rational Irrationality and the Microfoundations of Political Failure) argues that irrationality leads (a) voters to give bureaucrats weak financial incentives for hard work, AND (b) bureaucrats to work hard despite their weak financial incentives to do so.
True. 
 2011 FINAL EXAM


---


1. In a world with no externalities, suppose the government imposes a lump sum tax and uses it to fund an hourly work subsidy.
True, False, and Explain: The deadweight cost of this tax-and-subsidy policy is zero.


---


2. Suppose two people repeatedly play the Dictator game. Player 1 gets to be the Dictator in odd-numbered turns; Player 2 gets to be the Dictator in even-numbered turns. ?²1 for both players. After each turn, the game ends with 99% probability.
True, False, and Explain: An equilibrium where the Dictator always offers even splits (50/50) may be sustainable if the stakes increase over time.
True if the stakes raise by a high enough amount. Caplan says a really good answer would show the inequality.


---


3. Consider a simple auction.
True, False, and Explain: As long as actors have RE, the Winner's Curse will not cause the market to unravel.


---


4. The average person considers himself better than average by a variety of measures. But vulnerability to such biases is still far from universal. Robins and John (1997) surprisingly report that only about 35 percent of the subjects show a clear self-enhancement bias whereas about 50 percent are relatively accurate and about 15 percent actually show self-diminishment bias (p. 669). (Caplan, Stigler-Becker vs. Myers-Briggs)
True, False, and Explain: By itself, this result suggests that self-enhancement bias will affect market outcomes, but not democratic outcomes.


---


5. Suppose foregone earnings are the sole cost of education, and people live forever. Without school, workers earn $10,000 per year; every year of school completed boosts earnings by 10%. 
True, False, and Explain: Without externalities, the social rate of return to education is 10%.
False. The question says nothing about the nature of the relationship between school year completion and the increase in earnings. If the value of education is at least partially as a signal, an extremely low bar,  the social rate of return will be lower rate of return. The larger amount of earnings explained by the signal of education rather than human capital gains, the lower the social rate of return. In the real world, an accurate accounting of costs and benefits often leads to estimates of a negative rate of social return for education. 


---


6. True, False, and Explain: Wittman admits that in a federal system, restraining government spending is a public good.
2012 FINAL EXAM


---


1. True, False, and Explain:  A lump-sum tax is theoretically the most efficient way to raise a given amount of government revenue, but it is impractical in the real world.
This is a Landsburg question, I believe.
True. Taxation is theft. A lump-sum tax (or head tax) incurs no deadweight costs relative to  other methods of taxation because individuals cannot avoid the tax and will therefore not expend resources to do so (page 74, Why Taxes are bad, Armchair economist.)
.
It is impractical in the real world because of widespread equity concerns (it is more obviously regressive). 


---


2. Consider a two-period world.  Agents have U=.  In period one, everyone has a chance to buy or sell insurance for consumption in period 2.  In period 2, each person receives an endowment of 0 with p=.5 and 4 with p=.5 (each person makes an independent draw from the probability distribution).  There are no transactions costs.
True, False, and Explain:  In general equilibrium, the price of insurance is actuarially fair.[27]
What Caplan said: False, because the sellers of insurance are risk-averse. Normally we have risk-averse people buying from risk-neutral firms. Because everyone is identical the price of insurance has to get so high that everyone would self-insure.


---


3.  Consider a risk-neutral farmer with the cost function TC=q2.  The market price is 10 with p=.7, and 1 with p=.3.   
True, False, and Explain:  If the farmer has RE, his profit-maximizing level of output is 4.
 *HW #6 -- similar question
MC=2q
E(Px)=.7(10)+.3(1)=7.3
2q=7.3
False, q* is not 4[28]


---


4.  True, False, and Explain:  Efficiency wages cease to encourage work effort if all employers pay efficiency wages. 
False. Employees will still have the incentive to work hard, as finding a new job if you are fired becomes more difficult. The higher wage across the entire industry means that finding a job will be more difficult, as your marginal productivity must now be higher to secure a job when the wage is above the market clearing level. The higher wage will also induce more people to enter the labor market, creating a larger surplus of labor, making finding a job more competitive.


---


5.  Suppose the Russian government suddenly decides to privatize its oil fields.
True, False, and Explain:  If Russian voters suffer from debt aversion, we should expect their government's spending to increase. 
True, with caveats. Privatization in Russia has normally failed because the government sells industries to special interests, instead of those who will pay the most. If you assume they sell the industries to those who are willing to pay the most, and the future stream of payments from the industries are capitalized into the selling price, then we could expect this to occur. The Russian government, with this new revenue, can increase its spending without taking on more debt, and therefore without  angering debt-averse Russian voters who might otherwise prevent spending increases (assuming the government is responsive to voters, a la Wittman.)
Caplan seemed to think this was an adequate answer.


---


6.  "If politicians create an agency, give it the incentives that it has, and retain
the power to abolish it or change its incentives at any time, in what sense are politicians not to blame for everything the agency does?" (Caplan, "Rational Irrationality and the Microfoundations of Political Failure")
True, False, and Explain: Caplan is arguing that politicians are being irrational when create independent agencies.
The quote in the question is on page 17. 
See also: "Politicians rationally respond to the incentives they actually face, not the incentives they would face if the electorate were rational. Since their pay does not increase if they make public enterprises run efficiently, politicians exert little effort to monitor bureaucrats or give them incentives to innovate."


---


1. "Behavioral economics actually makes me more optimistic about the efficiency of the economy." Name the two strongest empirical findings the optimist could cite. Then make his case for him.


---


2. Build on Kahneman's chapter on "Answering an Easier Question" (Thinking, Fast and Slow) to explain a large belief gap between economists and the public on two questions from the Survey of Americans and Economists on the Economy.


---


3. All things considered, what is your best estimate of the true private return to education for the marginal 18 year old American? The true social return? Use empirics from class to ground your answer.
2013 FINAL EXAM


---


1. Two players are deciding whether to contribute to a public good.  The public good is discrete: it is produced at the optimal level so long as one person contributes.  If the public good is produced, everyone gets a benefit of 3 if they didn't contribute, and 2 if they did.  If no one contributes, everyone gets 0.  
True, False, and Explain:  This is a Prisoners' Dilemma, not a Hawk-Dove game.
False. Like in a Hawk-Dove Game, there are two PSNE, both of which require that one person contributes while the other doesn't. Like in the hawk-dove games we saw in class, two PSNEs exist--both of which require one player chooses peace and the other player chooses war. Unlike the Hawk-Dove games we saw in class where peace, peace is a first best outcome, the contribute, contribute is not a first-best solution in the public goods provision game. This is not a prisoner's dilemma--a prisoner's dilemma has one PSNE, which is the first-best outcome. 
Hawk-Dove Game
War
Peace
War
-10,-10
5, 1
Peace
1, 5
4, 4
Public Goods Decision
Contribute
Don't
Contribute
2,2
2,3
Don't
3,2
0,0
*2007 Midterm -- similar question
Caplan said, The key feature of the Hawk-Dove game is that you if someone is doing something you want to do the opposite. So this IS a Hawk-Dove game.


---


2. Suppose the demand curve for a contestable monopoly crosses the AC curve at three points.
True, False, and Explain:  There is a unique equilibrium.
 *Similar question 2005 Midterm
True[29].  Under contestable monopoly, P=AC, but only the higher quantity/lower price intersection is an equilibrium. At the higher intersection, even a monopolist that DID NOT face potential competition would want to cut price somewhat to earn additional profits. If you do face potential competition, you would have to cut your price all the way down to the lowest intersection of demand and AC to prevent entry.


---


3.  Suppose insurance companies are perfectly competitive and know true accident probabilities.  All of their potential customers are risk-neutral, but have a subjective P(getting in an accident) equal to the square root of the objective P(getting in an accident).  
True, False, and Explain: All potential customers will definitely buy insurance.
If ?P_s=P_0^(1/2)?_, then customers will systematically overestimate their risk of getting into an accident. 
If Po = 0, then the customer will not buy insurance, and if Po=1 then the insurance company will not sell the customer insurance.
If, however, for all customers who face  0<Po<1 will buy insurance. In the situation that this is true for all customers, only then will all potential customers will definitely buy insurance. Because we cannot assume this to be the case, the answer is False. 
sqrt(P)>P. This means that all customers will overestimate their probability of getting into an accident. 
For some reason, the notes I had typed when meeting with Caplan were: "Perfectly competitive doesn't imply actuarily fair. Actuarily fair doesn't occur in the real world because it implies zero transaction costs." This leads me to believe that the answer is no, not all potential customers will buy insurance.


---


4.  "Economic theory predicts that you are not enjoying this book as much as you thought you would." (Landsburg, The Armchair Economist)
True, False, and Explain:  As Landsburg shows, neoclassical economics is not only consistent with, but implies, violation of the rational expectations assumption.
False. The theory of a winner's curse relies on an assumption of rational expectations. Landsburg is describing a winner's curse here--your mean expectation regarding the quality of the book may be correct, but there is still a variance about the mean. One can be disappointed and have rational expectations: it is just the case that when you select a book you deem to be the best, there is more room for you to be disappointed. Rational expectations does not preclude imperfect information, rather it precludes systematic bias (your errors must be randomly distributed and average out to the mean.) 


---


5.  Suppose the entire return to education stems from signaling.  The signal, however, is noisy; some good workers don't have degrees, and some bad workers do. 
True, False, and Explain:  The measured return to education will fall to zero if you fully control for ALL of the traits that education signals.
?Returns?_i=??_0+?_1 ?education?_i+?_2 X_i^'+?_i?_
Signaling theory says that "people only want what the effort proves you already had in the first place." This means that if the entire return to education (higher earnings) stems from signaling, then those higher earnings derive entirely from the perceived underlying traits (ability, conscientiousness, etc) that education signals. If education perfectly signaled those traits, then controlling for ALL of those traits would cause ?_1to fall to 0. However, because the signal is noisy, some ?_1=? remains.
False.[30] Asymmetric information exists b/n employee and employer, so the employer must rely on the degree as a signal of "good worker traits". After controlling for ALL the traits that education signals,  the fact that some bad workers have degrees, means that the return to education is still positive. The fact that there is a return to education implies that employers do not have perfect information about the traits that education signals. Education is a noisy signal, though, some people without the underlying traits which are valued manage to get degrees. [31][32]The fact that education is a signal means that it has better than even odds to signal the underlying traits. 


---


6. Voters rational ignorance creates a moral hazard problem for politicians.
True, False, and Explain: As usual, there is a simple way to mitigate this moral hazard problem.
True. Voter rational ignorance means that voters don't obtain the information necessary to hold politicians accountable for their actions--i.e. voters face high monitoring costs. Thus politicians will not always act according to the interests of their constituents. This moral hazard problem could be overcome using contractual punishments, wherein voters and politicians would contract such that politicians voted into office would face high punishments if it is found that they acted against the interests of their constituents. This would provide a stronger incentive for politicians to act according to their constituents' interests rather than their own. 


---


1.) In the modern U.S., what is the most efficient way for the federal government to spend an extra billion dollars?  What is the maximally utilitarian way for the federal government to spend this sum?  (In both cases, assume that tax cuts are not an option).  Use everything you've learned to craft a thoughtful answer, and be specific
All situations are Pareto efficient because it is never possible to compensate the inevitable losers from a change due to transactions costs; I will therefore focus on Kaldor-Hicks efficiency, the maximization of the dollar value of social resources.
The government could maximize Kaldor-Hicks efficiency by having individuals bid for how they would like the money to be spent. By doing this, the government can ensure that the billion dollars will go towards the most highly valued use. (but if people can bid up to 1 billion dollars for a project, why won't they undertake the project themselves without the government?)
The goal under a utilitarian system is to maximize the total "happiness" or pleasure in a society. Usually, one thinks that this can be done by redistributing the billion dollars to those who are the poorest and have a higher marginal utility per dollar they receive. However, "utility monsters" may well exist, so the  government may maximize utility by spending it all on a project that one individual gains nearly infinite utility from, rather [33][34][35][36]than being concerned about everyone else. 
Two general observations:


---


1. When you claim that X is most efficient way for the federal government to spend an extra billion dollars, you should point to a large externality you propose to fix - and argue that the supply response will be substantial.  Answers of the form "Distribute the money equally to everyone" are weak, because all lump-sum transfers are neutral with respect to Kaldor-Hicks efficiency.  


---


2. When you claim that X is the maximally utilitarian way for the federal government to spend an extra billion dollars, you should start with Kaldor-Hicks efficiency, then adjust for marginal utility of wealth.  The conventional adjustment is to put higher weight on the poor, but there are equally strong cases for putting higher weight on the appreciative (people who savor better experiences) and the materialistic (people who place unusually high value on the stuff that money can buy).  The true utilitarian will want to make each and every one of these adjustments.
By these standards, stand-out answers include:
Daniel Kuehn:
I agree with RPLong on a simple shape-of-utility curves basis that redistribution is the obvious first-cut winner (and do it progressively). Anything else needs to overcome normal consumer theory with an interesting externality or multiplier story.
I think investments in neglected R&D of any sort would be a strong contender. A billion goes a long way in a prize fund too.
Fabio Rojas:
Assumption #1: Economic growth happens when people innovate.
Assumption #2: Innovation is proportional to population size.
Policy prescription: Use the $1B to subsidize child bearing, such as lowering out of pocket costs for delivery, paying for child care, etc.
Why it's better than other policies: No other policy is simple to implement. Also, when it come to innovation, it has a better chance of working than having the state pick projects to subsidize.
Kaldor-Hicks criteria: Since the size of the economy will grow, we can use the additional tax revenue to compensate childless people without raising taxes.
Criticism: Maybe the elasticity of children and money (and the implied growth) isn't enough to offset the $1bn.
I'd say Fab understates the case, because Kaldor-Hicks would count additional people's willingness-to-pay to be born, and utilitarianism would count additional people's utility of existing.
Martin:
Pay Kim-Jong Un and his key (read: most influential) supporters to leave North Korea and never come back and send them to some undisclosed location (I am sure China would be willing to receive them).
Alternatively, pay-off any third world dictator and his key supporters to leave the country and never come back. 
But is a $1B payoff really sufficient to accomplish this?  And wouldn't the dictators reasonably fear a post-abdication clawback?
AMW proposes immigration subsidies.  But unless you relax immigration laws at the same time, would these subsidies really accomplish anything?  The same goes for Bob Murphy's righteous suggestion.
Ryan Murphy:
Endow a fund that spends 5% of the endowment per year on prizes for solving specific scientific problems.
A very good start, but you should specify "specific scientific problems" with especially large externalities (for maximum efficiency) and especially large effects on the poor, appreciative, and materialistic (for maximum utility).
There are several enticing proposals to spend the money improving public opinion on e.g. immigration.  But how much difference would $1B of open borders propaganda really make on policy?
Thomas May makes a good case:
Sending medicine and vaccinations to the third world is probably the way to provide the greatest happiness to the greatest number for the lowest cost. The domestic welfare state by and large isn't because people in the US tend to have a lot of money by world standards anyway, and development aid (as opposed to relief of extreme hardship) isn't either because it doesn't seem to do much of anything.


---


2.) Some people argue that nominal wage rigidity is individually rational because many people (especially home-owners) have large nominally-denominated debt.  Is this a sound argument?  Why or why not?
The theory of nominal wage rigidity deals with how the labor market responds to changes, or lack there of, in wages. People prefer to have rigid nominal wages because of fairness concerns, and concerns that if wages fall worker morale and productivity will also fall. It does not deal with nominally-denominated debt. The only concern related to debt is that if nominal wages are rigid during a recession, then there is an increased risk of unemployment for the average worker[37][38][39], and if he is unemployed he cannot pay back his debt.
This argument may hold if we are discussing downward wage rigidity. A fall in nominal wages would result in the price level falling, so as to keep the real wage constant. If a person's mortgage contract is in nominally-denominated debt, their debt burden will actually be now be higher in real terms. However, we may expect individuals to support nominal wage increases, which will increase the price level, so as to inflate their debt away. As the price level rises, and each dollar can command fewer goods, their real debt burden falls. In this case, the argument above would not be sound, as home-owners may support nominal wage increases.


---


3.) Paul Krugman recently accused anti-Keynesians of being "knaves and fools."  What would Kahneman say about this accusation?  Use Thinking, Fast and Slow  to craft a thoughtful reply.
The halo effect may play a role here, with Krugman reaching the conclusion that people are "knaves and fools" because they hold an opinion on economic science that he believes is mistaken. The halo effect occurs when people develop a unified view of a person or entity to create a coherent narrative. So one negative thing about someone (such as a mistaken opinion on economics) will support a broader narrative of them as a fool or a knave. 
Krugman may also be suffering from an availability bias--it could be that Krugman can easily name many anti-Keynesians who have acted in what he perceives to be a foolish or knavish manner, and this bias causes him to evaluate anti-Keynesians as knaves or fools. It is true that experts are less likely to to be affected by ease of retrieval, but those who are powerful (which Krugman most certainly is in the intellectual landscape) are MORE likely to do this.
Also confirmation bias. Krugman is more likely to seek out information that confirms his pre-existing beliefs, preventing him from updating properly. 
2014 FINAL EXAM


---


1. Some economists worry that economies will become increasingly unequal if the real interest rate r exceeds the rate of economic growth g.
True, False, and Explain:  In an intertemporal general equilibrium consumption model, the real interest rate r cannot exceed the rate of economic growth g.
Week 2 notes, Section VIII, F: "interest rates in general equilibrium must rise high enough that people are content consumering their current endowment and no more. This happens when (1+r) = (1+g)/?. 
If beta = 1, then r must equal g. 
False, If beta <1, then r>g. See proof: 
Proof, given that ?<1.
(1+r)=(1+g)/?
?=(1+g)/(1+r)
1>?=(1+g)/(1+r)
1>(1+g)/(1+r)
1+r>1+g
r>g


---


2. True, False, and Explain:  In a Coordination game  -  like a Prisoners' Dilemma  -  agents do not need communication to reach a PSNE.
Prisoners' Dilemma
Cooperate
Defect
Cooperate
5, 5
0, 10
Defect
10,0
3, 3
Coordination Game
Left
Right
Left
3,3 
0,0
Right
0,0
5, 5 
False, while you do not need communication to reach a PSNE in a Coordination game, it is not like a PD game. Specifically, a PD has only one PSNE while a Coordination game has two. In a coordination game, two players can coordinate using focal points like culture and location. However, communication increases the likelihood  that the players will reach a PSNE, and one with the higher valued payoff. In a PD game, there is only one PSNE: defect, defect. Communication is not necessary for players to reach this outcome; instead, it may move players away from it.


---


3.  An agent faces two choices: (1) A utility of 10 for sure; (2) A utility of 0 with 50% probability and a utility of 20 with 50% probability.
True, False, and Explain: If the agent is indifferent between (1) and (2), then in terms of Expected Utility Theory, he must be risk-neutral.
False. Expected Utility Theory concerns utility derived from wealth and other consumer goods, and says that an agent will seek to maximize that utility. The question gives the output of the utility function, so the level of risk-aversion is already accounted for. Thus, no matter what the agent's level of risk-aversion is, he/ she is indifferent between (1) and (2). 


---


4.  "No one really has preferences for fair or vindictive behavior. When people act Ôfairly' or Ôvindictively,' they're just signaling."  
True, False, and Explain:  This claim is not theoretically consistent with the signaling model.
False. Signaling theory says that people will incur non-productive cost in order to send a signal that gives them an advantage in the market by indicating what "type" they are over those who will not and/or cannot incur the costs necessary to send that signal.  Acting fairly or vindictively requires that someone incur costs that do not directly lead to benefit, assuming people do not have preferences for fair or vindictive behavior. When someone acts fairly or vindictively, they hope to gain from that behavior in future interactions--if you think I am of the "fair" type, you will be more likely to deal with me, and if I am of the "vindictive" type, you will be less likely to cross me. While the signaling model does not imply that people are signaling when they act fairly or vindictively, it is compatible with the signaling model for these behaviors to be entirely signaling.


---


5.  "The initial attempt to believe is an automatic operation of System 1, which involves the construction of the best possible interpretation of the situation." (Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow) (p. 81)
True, False, and Explain:  This model of belief formation implies that lies are persuasive because people are usually telling the truth. 
False. Here is the quote with context (pg. 81):
"Gilbert proposed that understanding a statement must begin with an attempt to believe it: you must first know what the idea would mean if it were true. Only then can you decide whether or not to unbelieve it. The initial attempt to believe is an automatic operation of System 1, which involves a construction of the best possible interpretation of the situation. Even a nonsensical statement, Gilbert argues, will evoke initial belief."
False, this model doesn't rely on an assumption that people are usually truthful; rather, it relies on testing the implications of the statement in order to determine its validity. Kahneman says that System 1 accepts the statement as true so that System 2 can evaluate how its implications match reality.


---


6. Senior #1 and Senior #2 are both undergraduates in their final year of college.  Senior #1 knows he has a 90% chance of successfully graduating this year.  Senior #2 knows he has a 90% chance of failing out.  Both students satisfy the Permanent Income Hypothesis.
True, False, and Explain: Both students will increase their consumption if they successfully graduate, but Senior #1 will increase his post-graduation consumption by a smaller fraction than Senior #2.
True. After graduation (or when the chance of graduating increases  from their prior expectation to 100%), both students will increase their expected permanent income. Senior #1 will have a smaller change in expected permanent income than Senior #2. Since both satisfy the Permanent Income Hypothesis, they will have smoothed consumption according to their expected permanent income. Since Senior #1 has a smaller change in expected income, his consumption will change by a smaller fraction than Senior #2
Part 2: 


---


1.) In the real world, what would happen if a restaurant adopted Landsburg's system for splitting checks? (The Armchair Economist)
Landsburg (p. 31-32) says that everyone should pay the whole bill. If a restaurant were to implement this system, then the restaurant would start pay customers to come in (whether through bribes, coupons, etc), up to the point where the excess profits they would earn are being exhausted. Ultimately, people would still end bearing the full costs of what they purchased, as they are no longer able to free ride and push the costs onto other diners when the bill is split.
However, in the real world, if a restaurant, say restaurant A, were to implement this system, it would likely go out of business. Assuming that no other restaurant implements Landsburg's system, fewer people would go to restaurant A because they can free ride on the rest of the dinner party at restaurant B, where they split the check evenly between the group. Additionally, some people may prefer to split checks rather than deal with a new convoluted system. In the real world with the advent of computers, splitting checks has become much easier, so the assumption in Landsburg's story that the check cannot be split is unlikely to hold.


---


2.) Use the signaling model of education to explain the sheepskin effect. Precisely specify why, in the real world, discrete educational achievement is so much more informative to employers than continuous educational achievement.
The sheepskin effect describes the fact that the vast majority of the returns to education are achieved upon completing the final year and graduating. This is consistent with the signaling model, which says that education is mostly about showing that you can make it through school and incur costs that others cannot, revealing to potential employers what "type" you are. 
In the real world, discrete educational achievement is more important than continuous educational achievement because schools do not impart many skills to you--the human capital effects of education are quite small. We can see this happening in the real world--if skills really mattered, I could theoretically move to New Jersey, attend classes at Princeton (the greatest university the world has ever known) without matriculating, and gain the skills from those courses to increase my salary. However, employers don't care if you've attended the courses, only if you have obtained the degree. Discrete educational achievement is more informative because it sends the signal (the diploma) that you can bear the full costs of your schooling, providing employers with more information about your "type" and enhancing your employment prospects.


---


3.)[40] The nominal wage rigidity model blames unemployment on nominal wages' failure to swiftly fall to market-clearing levels.  Can this model also explain the fact that high-ability workers are less likely to lose their jobs during recessions?  If not, how can you modify the nominal rigidity model to explain why recessions hit low-ability workers harder?
???
2015 FINAL EXAM


---


1. Agents are endowed with 2 units of good 1 and 1 unit of good 2.  There are two types of agents:
Type A:  One-third of the agents have U=ln c1 + 2 ln c2.  
Type B:  The other two-thirds have U=ln c1 + ln c2
True, False, and Explain: The price of good 2 will be at least 50% higher than the price of good 1.
This is a plug-and-chug general equilibrium. Make sure you have an example in your notes, but this one is pretty rote.


---


2. Suppose all firms in an industry have the same cost function TC=a+bq.
True, False, and Explain:  Contestable monopoly and Bertrand competition both lead to "first-best" efficient outcomes if a=0, and "second-best" efficient outcomes if a>0.
*a = fixed costs* 
 *2007 Midterm -- similar question
True. If there are zero fixed costs (a=0)  and the most efficient firm faces an equally efficient competitor, both yield the first-best efficient outcome of P=MC. If there are fixed costs(a>0) and the most efficient firm faces an equally efficient competitor, both yield the second-best efficient outcome of P=AC. If the most efficient firm does not face an equally efficient competitor, then price can exceed both MC and AC. In this case, however, the firms are equally efficient because they have the same cost function, so this will not pose a problem.


---


3.  Suppose your EU=w.5, and insurance is sold at 50% more than the actuarially fair rate.  Your uninsured income is $10,000 with p=.5, and $0 with p=5.  
True, False, and Explain: Your optimal quantity of insurance>$1000.
True, you want to to buy $3,333.33 worth of insurance. 
price of insurance = (probability of receiving insurance)*(rate of insurance)
	rate of insurance = X
	price of insurance = P(insurance)*X*i
Maxi 0.5(10,000 - 0.75i)0.5 + 0.5(0 + i - 0.75i)0.5
Maxi 0.5(10,000 - 0.75i)0.5 + 0.5(0.25i)0.5
d/di=(0.5)(0.5)(-0.75)?(10,000-0.75i)?^(-0.5)+(0.5)(0.5)(0.25)?(0.25i)?^(-0.5)=0
	(0.5)(0.5)(0.25)?(0.25i)?^(-0.5)=(0.5)(0.5)(0.75)?(10,000-0.75i)?^(-0.5)
	?(0.25i)?^(-0.5)=3?(10,000-0.75i)?^(-0.5)
	0.25i=1/9(10,000-0.75i)
	1/4 i=10,000/9-1/12 i
	1/3 i=10,000/9
	i^*=10,000/3Å$3,333.33>$1,000


---


4.  True, False, and Explain:  Results from Caplan ("Systematically Biased Beliefs About Economics") suggest that the general public is no more sympathetic to the signaling model of education than Ph.D. economists.
False. We can see that economists think that inadequate education and job training is more of a problem than the public, but the difference is very slight (.05.) If anything, the evidence suggests that the public are a little more sympathetic to the signaling model - if you cleave to the pure signaling model, you believe there is TOO MUCH spending on education, not an inadequate amount. However, there is no way to tell if this is why the public is slightly more skeptical about education being inadequate, and may be unlikely since the average person does not know much about social science.


---


5.  True, False, and Explain:  Paying efficiency wages is a Prisoners' Dilemma, because it's impossible for all employers to pay "above-market" wages. 
False, it is not impossible for all employers to pay Ôabove-market' wages. Above-market in this case does not mean above what your competitors are paying; it means above the market clearing wage. In fact, employers want to raise wages above the Ôabove-market' wage in order to encourage workers to shirk less and make the threat of being fired more serious, given that the pool of unemployed workers will now be larger and the higher wages make it more difficult for them to procure employment. If all employers pay the efficiency wage it will create a permanent labor surplus which will further increase the costs for a worker if he/she is fired. (draw graph?)


---


6. Financial analysts often appeal to "herd behavior" to explain price movements in financial markets: Investors want to buy stocks that have been increasing in price, and sell stocks that have been decreasing in price.
True, False, and Explain: According to Thaler (The Winner's Curse), herd behavior is not, on average, a profitable strategy for individual investors.
*(See Chapter 12) p. 157: "Our own research on this topic (De Bondt and Thaler, 1985, 1987) was motivated by the hypothesis that the contrarian strategies are successful because of systematic investor overreaction. There is substantial evidence in the psychology literature that individuals tend to overweight recent data in making forecasts and judgments"
False, Thaler doesn't discuss herd behavior in Winner's Curse. Instead, his research finds that systematic investor overreaction leads to mean reversion in the stock market. It is possible that this overreaction is not because of herd behavior--instead, individuals are over-reacting based on information from previous periods independently. Thus, the profitable strategy is to buy those stocks that have been doing poorly and sell those that have been doing well.
The Q&A with Caplan revealed that this statement is true - herd behavior is not a profitable strategy on average. Rather, one can make money as a contrarian investor, taking into account mean reversion.
Part 2: Short Answer


---


1. Suppose a pirate robs ten people and puts all of their money inside a treasure chest.  When the police recover the chest (and before the pirate can spend a penny), they ask each of the ten victims to state how much money he lost.  To discourage lying, the police announce that if the total losses claimed by the victims exceeds the total amount of money in the chest, none of the victims will get any money back.  Using everything you've learned, what would actually happen in this scenario?  Justify your answer.
In this case, the game theoretic prediction would be for everyone to declare the exact amount of money they lost, therefore ensuring that the total amounts claimed would equal the amount in the chest. In this game, there are multiple PSNE - people can claim any amount, so long as the totals add up to the amount in the chest. However, everyone claiming their exact amount will likely act as a focal point, as each individual will expect the others to claim their exact amounts so as to maximize their take, and thus you will as well. In reality, I may expect the amount to be lower. Kahneman introduces the cost of loss aversion - that people weight losses of an amount higher than the gains - so I would expect individuals to claim slightly less than they had lost so as to ensure they do not go home empty handed.


---


2. Both the human capital and signaling models of education suggest that online education will expand more quickly if Ôearly-adopters' of online education are relatively strong students."  Do you agree?  Carefully explain your reasoning.
To answer this question, we would need to know more about the structure of the online education. For the human capital model, it depends on if the online education resources allow students to work together. The presence of other strong students may serve to help you build better human capital, as you have the opportunity to form study groups or learn from other talented students. If the structure does not allow you to interact with smarter students but instead has you working alone, we should not expect the early adopters being strong students to have any effects. For the signaling model, the online education must be "costly" enough to serve as an effective signal - there must be some barriers to completing. If this is the case, then talented students would increase the adoption of online education - their presences would increase the strength of the signal (talented students come from this program.) If this is true, we would expect others to rapidly adopt the model so as to signal to employers they are higher ability, and thus deserving of higher wages.


---


1. In a world with no externalities, suppose the government imposes a lump sum tax and uses it to fund an hourly work subsidy. 
True, False, and Explain:  The deadweight cost of this tax-and-subsidy policy is zero.
False. It is true that the DWL of a lump sum tax is zero. However, assuming the market starts out in equilibrium, a subsidy carries a DWL because it distorts the allocation of resources.  There would be a loss in both consumer and producer surplus.  Supply Shifts out beyond the natural equilibrium level because you are trying to increase the labor supply. 
Caplan seemed to like this answer. He said that this would cause labor to be allocated to lower valued uses. And a lump sum tax to pay for wage subsidies to deal with efficiency wage unemployment doesn't make sense because you'd be taxing the unemployed and then subsidizing them to do a lower-valued job.


---


2. Suppose a market has free entry, positive fixed costs, and constant marginal costs.
True, False, and Explain:  Cournot competition leads to a first-best efficient outcome.
Week 5 notes: VIII. J: "If you add a fixed costs for each firm, it can also be proven that Cournot competition with free entry is not even second-best. Imposing a zero-profit condition implies an inefficiently large number of firms."
HW 4: #7 and #8 deal with outcomes under Cournot competition


---


3.  True, False, and Explain: In the real world, risk misperceptions unambiguously reduce the demand for insurance.
False. As Kahneman documents, people tend to either overestimate the risk of low-probability events or treat them as if they have a zero probability. This overestimation could lead individuals to over-insure. Moreover, individuals who are more risk-averse are more likely to buy insurance, but they are also less likely to engage in risky behaviors that make such insurance a good investment for the buyer. Risk-misperceptions may therefore increase demand for insurance rather than just decreasing it. [41]


---


4. "As in the judgment of whether a work of art is genuine or a fake, you will usually do better by focusing on its provenance than by looking at the piece itself." (Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow)
True, False, and Explain:  Kahneman is arguing that elite credentials are the best predictor of expert accuracy.
False. On page 243, Kahneman says this and follows it with "If the environment is sufficiently regular and if the judge has had a chance to learn its regularities, the associative machinery will recognize situations and generate quick and accurate predictions and decisions. You can trust someone's intuitions if these conditions are met."
Kahneman is not arguing that elite credentials are the best predictor of expert accuracy. Instead, experts are likely to have accurate intuition if they have experience in an environment with strong regularities that they have built experience with.  For example, firefighters have experience in environments with regularities that they develop intuitions and memories about. Political scientists do not have similar experiences or regularities with regards to elections.


---


5. Suppose workers are paid nominally rigid efficiency wages. 
True, False, and Explain:  Employee shirking will be procyclical  -  i.e., higher during good economic times, lower during bad economic times.
UPGRADE THIS ANSWER AFTER WE HAVE LEARNED THIS IN CLASS
This appears to be true.  Wage rigidity implies that it will be less costly to fire a given worker and hire a new worker than to lower a worker's wage if that worker's productivity falls. This is likely to be particularly true in a recession when there are more unemployed workers seeking jobs. Moreover, during a recession a worker who is fired for shirking will find it more difficult to find a job, because fewer firms will be hiring. The fired worker will also be unable to compete on price, because this will signal a lower quality worker to employers assuming the nominally rigid efficiency wages result from asymmetric information. All of this suggests that during recessions the expected cost to an employee of shirking is higher than during good economic times. Employee shirking will therefore be procyclical.


---


6. True, False, and Explain:  Median Voter equilibria are automatically Kaldor-Hicks efficient because they give voters what they most prefer.
UPGRADE THIS ANSWER AFTER WE LEARN THIS IN CLASS
False. Wittman is wrong; Caplan is right. 


---


1.  "Moral hazard is at least second-best efficient because there's really nothing government can do to fix it."  Using everything you've learned, critically analyze this statement.
- Second-best efficient: moral hazard is second best efficient when the marginal costs of eliminating it exceed the benefits of doing so
    - so, moral hazard is second-best efficient in the Kaldor-Hick sense
- Statement is not necessarily true: 
- punitive contracts: "if the less-informed can pay to observe the more-informed , then they can enforce good behavior at a lwo cost with random monitoring and threats of severe punishment." 
    - government doesn't allow for these contracts meaning that they eliminate the tools businesses have to eliminate moral hazard
           - insurance
           - monitoring people on the job: how much time at work do they actually spend working
- Jersey drivers
    - government actually subsidizes   bad drivers, increasing the moral hazard
It is not evident that "moral hazard is at least second-best efficient because there's really nothing government can do to fix it." Government regulations may exacerbate moral hazard - for example, by limiting the punishment companies can levy on individuals who break contracts, companies are deprived of a tool to make the costs of moral hazard higher and thus reduce it. In addition, government subsidies - such as those for risky drivers in New Jersey - can make matters worse by creating moral hazard problems for risky drivers. Government can also do some things like increase the penalties for insurance fraud. Moral hazard is second best efficient whenever the marginal costs of monitoring are higher than the marginal benefits of doing so. In this case, accepting some moral hazard maximizes efficiency in the Kaldor-Hicks sense.  [42]


---


2. How will you revise your long-term financial plans in light of the evidence from behavioral finance?  Methodically explain your answer.
- save more
- take income over 9 months
- withholdings
Thaler--Ch 9


---


3.  Name a specific market where government could increase efficiency in theoryeven though government reduces efficiency in practice.  Use Caplan ("Systematically Biased Beliefs About Economics" and "What Makes People Think Like Economists?") to explain this perverse policy-making.  Justify both parts of your response.
- insurance
- immigration
papers: 
   - most people don't have those characteristics--education, male, income changes--that make them think like economists
   - additionally, people's tend to have beliefs about the economy like X and Y that match up with anti-market bias or anti-foreign bias


---


Q.  In a world with no externalities, suppose the government imposes a lump sum tax and uses it to fund an hourly work subsidy. 
True, False, and Explain:  The deadweight cost of this tax-and-subsidy policy is zero.
False. It is true that the DWL of a lump sum tax is zero. However, assuming the market starts out in equilibrium, a subsidy carries a DWL because it distorts the allocation of resources.  There would be a loss in both consumer and producer surplus. 
Supply Shifts out beyond the natural equilibrium level because you are trying to increase the labor supply.


---


Q. True, False, and Explain:  In the real world, lump-sum taxes are always the first-best efficient way for governments to raise a given amount of revenue.
False.  While an economic model suggests the truth of that statement, given that any other form of tax results in a Dead Weight Loss, this comment is false in the real world. The lump-sum tax model avoids DWL and allocative inefficiency, imposing no additional costs from changes in behavior. However, in the real world, Lump-sum taxes are seen as regressive.  Thus, Lump-sum taxes are also a politically impossible and are not a first-best solution


---


Q. Taking into account everything that you have learned, what is the most efficient way for government to raise a given level of revenue? Carefully explain your answer.
From an Economic Stance the Lump Sum is Good, but from a political stance this is not so.  This is because there is no DWL. However, this is not a political reality because they are considered highly regressive.  From a politicians' perspective, they raise debt, inflation to create constituent spending. Tarriffs and quotas are also in the politician's repertoire because they lack salience to the consumer as a tax.  Finally, Politicians prefer a tax on products with negative externalities. 


---


Q. Suppose there are an infinite number of equally efficient potential producers.
True, False, and Explain: With constant MC and zero fixed costs, there are an infinite number of PSNE and an infinite number of MSNE.
TRUE.  We can think of this as an Entry game, with an infinite number of firms choosing in or out.  A PSNE would be an individual firm's choice of entry.  With an infinite number of firms, there are an infinite number of PSNE combinations. Regarding MSNEs, with no profits to be made, a firm would face n-dimensional payoff matrix in which firms are indifferent between entry and absence.  With an infinite number of firms, each one having an MSNE, there would thus be an infinite number of MSNEs


---


Q. Suppose that two players play the following game twice.
Left
Right
Left
1,5
0,0
Right
0,0
5,1
True, False, and Explain: What Kreps calls "cheap talk" cannot improve the efficiency of this game if both players engage in backwards induction.
False.  It can if they are acting with imperfect information, and if they are acting simultaneously.  With this set of circumstance, you don't know what the other will do.  If we allow for the possibility that you are using induction to predict probabilities with simultaneous action, cheap talk could improve efficiency.  Cheap talk, would then change the probability of having a 0,0 outcome in the first round. 
True. If they are already engaging in backwards induction they can't improve upon their optimums by simply talking about it.  Backward induction would lead to pareto efficient optimums.  With talk, they would agree to alternating turns. This is also pareto efficient, as the aggregate payoff is the same.  That is, the idea of cheap talk allows players to ascertain better mutual benefit, so long as there aren't dominated strategies. Thus, they would simply reach the efficiency in any case.  Same number of PSNE and sub-game perfect with both extensive and normal forms.


---


Q. Suppose two people repeatedly play the Dictator game.  Player 1 gets to be the Dictator in odd-numbered turns; Player 2 gets to be the Dictator in even-numbered turns.  ?²1 for both players.  After each turn, the game ends with 99% probability.
True, False, and Explain: An equilibrium where the Dictator always offers even splits (50/50) may be sustainable if the stakes increase over time.
True. Even with a 99% Probability that the game ends after every turn, it still qualifies as an infinitely repeating game, in terms of the player strategies.  Given that the stakes are increasing in every turn, so long as a person is sufficiently risk tolerant, they may continue to offer equitable splits in the hope of reciprocity in the next turn.


---


Q.. Suppose you have two potential producers in a contestable industry with SUNK costs.  TC=10+Q.  If only one firm enters, it sets a monopoly price given the demand curve Q=10-2P.  If two firms enter, they compete price down to MC.
True, False, and Explain: In the MSNE, each firm's probability of entry is .2.


---


Q. Suppose you have a 2-player version of the voluntary donation game from the notes, with one difference: Each agent dislikes the other, so player one maximizes U1=c1D-.2*c2D, and player two maximizes U2=c2D-.2*c1D.
True, False, and Explain: In symmetric Nash equilibrium, c1=c2<2/3.
False. Everyone's utility depends on how much they consume the public good and how much is donated. Both would consume amounts equal to 2/3, as  C=N/N+1 and C=.5 for all N given the setup in the notes. This symmetric function is not depended on the utility functions.[43]
So C=2/3 and no one wants to do more than c= .5.  Meaning they will over consume and underprovide. 
BIAS AND BEHAVIOR  -  WINNER'S CURSE / ANOMOLIES


---


Q. Consider a simple auction.
True, False, and Explain:  As long as actors have RE, the Winner's Curse will not cause the market to "unravel."
True.  With or without rational expectations, this statement is valid since the winner's curse doesn't lead to the market unraveling but simply to the winner suffering a loss.  Auction markets in which the winner's curse is frequently observed continue, as other players don't experience the loss. 


---


Q.  Historians often argue that wars arise due to irrationality, not just bad luck.  What simple game theory model are historians implicitly rejecting?  How could historians use Thaler's The Winner's Curse to persuasively defend their position?  Be specific.
Historians are ignoring the Hawk-Dove Game, in which one player, by choosing combative behavior when the other player chooses peace behavior, elicits the highest possible payoff. Thus, so long as the actor assumes that the other player will act peaceably, he is acting rationally. 
Historians, however, could reasonably defend their positions by arguing that wars often turn out to be costlier than expected.  In this case, initiators are subject to the high bids, as in the case of the Winner's Curse.  As a result, though they may be accurate in believing that they will emerge victorious, they will have expended more from the fight than the spoils are worth.  [Example]


---


Q.  Historians often argue that wars arise due to irrationality, not just bad luck.  What simple game theory model are historians implicitly rejecting?  How could historians use Thaler's The Winner's Curse to persuasively defend their position?  Be specific.
Historians are ignoring the Hawk-Dove Game, in which one player, by choosing combative behavior when the other player chooses peace behavior, elicits the highest possible payoff. Thus, so long as the actor assumes that the other player will act peaceably, he is acting rationally. 
Historians, however, could reasonably defend their positions by arguing that wars often turn out to be costlier than expected.  In this case, initiators are subject to the high bids, as in the case of the Winner's Curse.  As a result, though they may be accurate in believing that they will emerge victorious, they will have expended more from the fight than the spoils are worth.  [Example]


---


Q.  "The average person considers himself better than average by a variety of measures. But vulnerability to such biases is still far from universal. Robins and John (1997) surprisingly report that Ôonly about 35 percent of the subjects show a clear self-enhancement bias whereas about 50 percent are relatively accurate and about 15 percent actually show self-diminishment bias' (p. 669)." (Caplan, "Stigler-Becker vs. Myers-Briggs")
True, False, and Explain:  By itself, this result suggests that self-enhancement bias will affect market outcomes, but not democratic outcomes.
False.  The same self-enhancement bias can just as easily lead individuals to overstate their understanding of political and economic issues as it leads them to overstate the value of their market predictions, This is also true for self-diminishment bias.


---


Q. "Consider two professors.  John earns $55,000 paid in monthly installments.  Joan earns a base salary of $45,000 paid over twelve months, and a guaranteed extra $10,000 paid during the summer months." (Thaler, The Winner's Curse)
True, False, and Explain:  Thaler explains that the "mental accounting" prediction is that Joan will outspend John during the summer, but John will outspend Joan throughout the rest of the year.
FALSE, Mental accounting predicts that individuals segregate gains and integrate loses. Thus, Joan, who suddenly  receives higher income during the summer months, will likely save the surplus treating it as an asset.  John, who earns a steady income, is more likely to adhere to a standard consumption-smottihing behavior.


---


Q.  Use Caplan's article "Stigler-Becker vs. Myers-Briggs" to argue that, in practice, behavioral anomalies matter much less in the real-world than most behavioral economists suggest.  (Hint: Self-selection)  Give TWO empirically important examples.
Preference Reversals is an anomaly most explained by 5 personal characteristics which determine, as a proxy, your preferences .  The empirical research shows that at 30+ those characteristics become invariant. Therefore we can infer that preferences are steady and Becker and Stigler are defended.  Any empirical estimation of the pay gap that does not include characteristics should be discounted because it determines preferences.  For example your characteristics determine career choice, education have an influence on the pay gap.  Without those in a regression you model cannot be casual.


---


Q. Thaler (The Winner's Curse) presents evidence that people violate basic economic assumptions.
True, False, and Explain: Thaler nevertheless embraces basic economic assumptions as "normative"; he believes that people should act like standard economic agents.
True.  People should act like standard economic agents in most cases.  I.e. cooperate according to standard economic theory. He gives two examples: set MC=P and Marginal revenue, and the other example is to avoid the winner's curse by setting opportunity costs to out-of-pocket costs.


---


Q.   Suppose foregone earnings are the sole cost of education, and people live forever.  Without school, workers earn $10,000 per year; every year of school completed boosts earnings by 10%. 
True, False, and Explain:  Without externalities, the social rate of return to education is 10%.
 False, the return to the individual is 10%.  Conversely, with every additional student, society experiences diminishing returns to education.


---


Q.  True, False, and Explain: Wittman admits that in a federal system, restraining government spending is a public good.
True.  If you have a federal spending project that is too big, than reducing the spending is a public good in the sense that the benefit is dispersed across all taxpayers.  Any individual taxpayer is incentivized to reduce their spending is lower than the total benefit of reducing the spending.


---


Q.Caplan (What Makes People Think Like Economists?) shows that more educated people are more pro-market.
True, False, and Explain: The reason why people mistakenly believe that education leads to anti-market views is probably that, in the general population, education and left-wing ideology are highly correlated.
False. Caplan's finding is that education does not predict your political beliefs. Male, age, income growth are variables, that once included and controlled for in the model, explain away the correlation between education and ideaology. Thus, the initial correlation is a result of representative bias, where much of professors are leftist.  Being a professional economist, is predictive of having a center/leftist bias politically. However, education in general is not predictive of political ideaology.


---


Q. Standard estimates of the return to education ignore intelligence and assume that all education is productive.
True, False, and Explain: For both of these issues, switching to more realistic assumptions reduces the private and social return to education.
True. Once the return to education controls for IQ, the private return to education falls significantly. Due to labor market asymmetry, employers will pay an educated individual more, but at the expense of other employees. So while there is higher private return, there is a lower, or in the case of including tuition, a negative social return to education.


---


Q.  "Contrary to e.g. Krugman, insurance isn't a Ôspecial' market where laissez-faire doesn't work.  Instead, it's a normal market where democratic politics doesn't work, because both the public and economists remain wedded to populism and paternalism."
Carefully explain why I would say this.  Name two examples I might use to support my position.  Am I right?  Why or why not?
 Caplan's position is based on the observation that insurance is a highly regulated industry in which adverse selection problems are augmented by regulations that forbid the denial of coverage for pre-existing conditions, restrict risk-adjusted premiums, and require excess of coverage via mandated benefit packages.  All of these regulations are driven by political patronage and rent-seeking at the expense of market efficiency.  I agree with the position that the insurance market is a perfect storm of democratic problems in which the public relies on superficial and flawed understanding of insurance.  Economists, such as Henry Aaron and Jonathan Gruber have appealed to that ignorance, while ignoring the costs.  Also, politicians have garnered a platform to gain votes.


---


Q.  Workers deeply resent nominal wage cuts.  Voters deeply resent inflation.  Use these two stylized facts to build a simple, depressing model of the economic and political effects of negative shocks to Aggregate Demand.  Make sure you discuss the interaction between economics and politics.
True. From Kreps: "Ellsberg uses this sort of behavior to claim that there is a real distinction to be made between situations where there is risk (objective uncertainty) and situations with uncertainty (subjective uncertainty). The story goes: people dislike the ambiguity that comes with choice under uncertainty; they dislike the possibility that they may have the odds wrong and so make a wrong choice" (p. 117).


---


Q. Suppose your U=w.5. You are searching for a job and face the following decision tree:
Step 1: You can either take a sure thing (w=$50,000 with p=1) or keep searching (w=$100,000 with p=.6; w=$0 with p=.4).
Step 2: If you selected the second option, you are allowed to buy an "unemployment insurance" policy. It costs $10,000 and pays $20,000 if you are unemployed.
Step 3: You find out if you got a job. If you did not, you collect the insurance payout. Either way, you have to pay the premium.


---


Q. Consider an efficiency wage model.
True, False, and Explain:  As the average worker becomes less selfish, the unemployment rate falls. As the average worker becomes more myopic, the unemployment rate rises.
False. The efficiency wage would make him prize his employment more, meaning that if he became more selfish he would strive to remain employed. If he became more myopic, he would work less hard to keep his job, being less cognizant of the fact that there would be some surplus of unemployment due to the efficiency wage and that once he lost his job, he would have a harder time finding another job.


---


Q. Suppose everyone is risk-preferring. True or False: Insurance Markets can still Exist
 True.  If they have asymmetric information, adverse selection, or simply imperfect info and different perceptions of the insured person's risk profile.  This is highly unlikely in the real world.  Or, if there could be an exchange between people of different degrees of risk performance, where the more risk-loving person buys risk from the less-risk  - loving


---


Q. Suppose you want to test for RE about inflation.  You can either get data on (a) actual inflation and people's inflation forecasts, or (b) experts' inflation forecasts and laymen's inflation forecasts.  State whether you would prefer to have (a) or (b), and carefully explain how your test would work.  When exactly would your test accept/reject the RE hypothesis?


---


Q. Suppose Caplan is right that voters buy large quantities of irrational political beliefs.
True, False, and Explain: This hardly shows that political markets are inefficient. Instead, it shows that we have mis-measured their primary output; the main product of political markets is psychological well-being rather than wealth-maximizing policy.
True.  People will pay for utility instead of wealth maximizing policy.  Think of buy-local.


---


Q. In a critique of The Myth of the Rational Voter, Dan Klein writes: Maybe Bryan grants Wittman's other premises so as to pump the importance of the unbiased belief premise. Why would granting Wittman's other premises pump up the importance of voter bias? Is Klein's suggestion correct? Why or why not?
Assumptions from Whitman that public choice hinges on:

1.     Extreme Stupidity
2.     Lack of Competition  -  Valid Criticism according to Caplan  -  There is plenty of competition
3.     High Transfer Costs  -  Valid Criticism according to Caplan  -  Democracy lowers transfer costs.

Granting Wittman's last two assumptions would suggest that that public choice markets are like economic markets. Thus, the only reason left for inefficiency is stupidity. No, Klein is not correct. There are a huge number of competitorsÉ And transfer costs are low. 


---


Q.Suppose a woman has EU=w.5 + X. If the woman has a baby boy, X= -10; if she has a baby girl, X=5; if she has no child, X=0. Normally, she is equally likely to have a boy or a girl. But if she pays a price P, she can determine her child's gender with certainty. Suppose further that w initially equals $400, and the P is the only cost associated with having children.
True, False, and Explain: The woman will remain childless if P>87.5.
EU with no child =20
EU with price to guarantee Girl
(400-p)^.5+5
(400-87.5)^.5+5= less than 20
Thus, she won't do it for any price greater that 87.5


---


QT.  True, False, and Explain:  In a general equilibrium framework, "fiscal stimulus" can't work, because the funding for the stimulus package has to come from somewhere.
 False. By changing initial endowments, redistributing in the right, you can make a Pareto efficient allocation self-sustaining.  The "fiscal stimulus" could qualify as such a distribution. This is formally described as the 2nd Welfare Theorem, which says that any Pareto efficient allocation can be a GE, given some initial endowments. Arrow-Debreau extend the 2nd welfare theorem to include inter-temporal exchange, implying that a debt-financed fiscal stimulus could be feasible.   


---


Q.  Landsburg ("People Wanted") argues that there are positive externalities of population growth.
True, False, and Explain:  Search theory suggests that Landsburg actually understates the case for higher population.
False.  Search Theory says people search for opportunity up to the point where the expected MB equals expected MC.  Search Theory provides no additional positive externalities for benefits from population growth that are not already captured in Landsburg's benefits.  Landsburgs accounts for greater numbers of geniuses, higher densities, ie less costs to searching. 


---


Q. True, False, and Explain: Landsburg argues that cosmetic surgery is socially wasteful signaling.
True. Because it suggests that you are carrying genes for positively adaptive traits that would not carry on to your offspring.  It is all wasteful because you aren't relatively more beautiful if everyone does it.


---


QET.  Consider a simple asymmetric information model: The "true value" of a company to sellers is uniformly distributed along [0,100], and the value to buyers is 50% more than to sellers.
True, False, and Explain:  In theory, irrationality could increase or decrease market efficiency; in practice, however, experiments show that irrationality makes this "market for lemons" less efficient.
False.  Kreps shows that with asymmetric information, and full rationality, that this market would disappear.  Irrationality therefore, could not decrease something that already disappears. Irrationality could increase market efficiency if it leads buyers to over value goods.   In practice, irrationality is shown to increase efficiency because markets are not bid down to zero in experiments.  
If the value to buyers is 100% more than it is to sellers you end up with ? of the overall market interactions achieved. This is because, the market average is still at 50% and half the distribution is sold.   In other words, value to sellers would be 25, but value to buyers would be 50, since they value it 100% more.  Since buyers would then be willing to spend the average amount, half the distribution, those lower than 50% in the seller's eyes would get sold.  


---


Q.  True, False, and Explain:  Moral hazard models predict that the people with the most insurance will take the most risks, but adverse selection models predict the opposite.
False. Moral Hazzard predicts that "once you insure a risk-adverse agent, they may want to take additional risk." Adverse Selection suggests that people who already possess certain risk factors or already engage in riskier behavior are more likely to buy insurance.  The difference is a matter of post facto behavioral changes versus prior self-selection.


---


Q.  More educated workers normally have lower unemployment rates than less educated workers.
True, False, and Explain: The efficiency wage model can explain this pattern.
False. The efficiency wage model says that people are paid more to avoid shirking.  It is only loosely connected to the level of education.   It would be better to suggest that the signaling model has far more explanatory power to describe why more educated workers are employed at higher rates.


---


Q. True, False, and Explain: Asymmetric information problems do not require irrationality, but irrationality makes asymmetric information problems more severe.
False, asymmetric information problems do not require irrationality, so that part is true.  However irrationality does not categorically make information problems more severe.  When making choice under uncertainty, we may not know how an individual will act with certainty but with the knowledge of common irrational biases and heuristics, we might better predict his behavior. In other words it depends on the direction of the bias. Lemon Example plays


---


Q. True, False, and Explain:  There is no change in current U.S. policy that would do much to mitigate moral hazard problems.
False. The US government continues to add to the moral hazard problem in housing.  That is they drive down the risk of lending with incentives which allows for more risky behavior. Too big to fail is another example.  Another are Countries that are guaranteed US protection are incentivized saber-rattling.  Flood insurance incentivizes folks to rebuild in flood-prone areas! Do seat belt laws make people more risky behind the wheel?


---


Q. Taking into account everything you have learned, sketch your best explanation for why the U.S. political system allowed the subprime crisis to happen.
Using a moral hazard argument, we can see that government policy had propped up unsustainable lending and borrowing.  On the lender side it allowed banks to take risks and lend to sub-optimal borrowers.  From the standpoint of buyers, it allowed them to take risks buying houses they couldn't quite afford.  Fannie and Freddie are willing to buy all mortgage loans outright so lenders don't have the risk.  However, once the bill comes due, in the form of default, government passes the risk onto the general public in the form of taxes (Debt, inflation).
This could also be answer in an irrational rationality answer, because the cost of understanding why the bubble is so high.   The American Dream then is a reason for irrational rationality created a basis for that systemic bias. 


---


Q. True, False, and Explain: Prices in betting markets are determined by agents' preferences and endowments, not objective probabilities. However, if some people have more accurate beliefs than others, then over time, prices become more and more likely to reflect objective probabilities.
TRUE.  Your preference for irrationality in betting markets drops because you are internalizing the costs of having irrational beliefs. So to avoid that cost, you start placing bets that are closer to actual probabilities.   The cost of irrational preference indulgence is higher. 


---


Q. True, False, and Explain: If the efficient markets hypothesis is correct, then the marginal private cost of irrational investing can easily be zero.
 True. It could happen that one's irrational investments could align with the random walk of an efficient market such that the marginal private cost of irrational investing would be zero.  If EMH holds, one could face a marginal private cost of investing of zero. 
